Translation of the Official Gazette for informational purposes only. This is not the official translation of the law. 

Republic Act No. 9155

AN ACT PROVIDING A FRAMEWORK FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF BASIC EDUCATION, ESTABLISHING AUTHORITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY, RENAMING THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, CULTURE, AND SPORTS AS THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. – This Act shall be known as the “Basic Education Act of 2001.”

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. – It is hereby declared the policy of the State to protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality basic education and to make such education accessible to all by providing free and compulsory education in the elementary level and free education in the high school level. Such education shall include systems of learning for out-of-school youth and adult learners. Basic education shall aim to equip them with the skills, knowledge, and values they need to become caring, self-reliant, productive, and patriotic citizens.

Schools shall be the heart of the formal education system. This is where children learn. Schools shall have a purpose of providing the best possible basic education for all students.

Governance of basic education shall begin at the national level. In the regions, divisions, schools, and learning centers—which shall be referred to herein as field offices—policies and principles for the governance of basic education shall be translated into programs, projects, and services that are developed, adapted, and offered to meet local needs.

The State shall encourage local initiatives for the improvement of the quality of basic education. The State shall ensure that the values, needs, and aspirations of a school community are reflected in the education program for children, out-of-school youth, and adult learners. Schools and learning centers shall be empowered to make decisions on what is best for the students they serve.

SEC. 3. Goals and Objectives. – The goals and objectives of this Act are:

(a) To provide a framework for the governance of basic education that shall define the overall direction for educational policies and standards, and establish authority, accountability, and responsibility for achieving higher learning outcomes;

(b) To define the functions and responsibilities of, and provide resources to, field offices that shall implement educational programs, projects, and services in the communities they serve;

(c) To make schools and learning centers the primary venues for teaching and learning national values and for shaping Filipino students’ love of country and pride in its rich heritage;

(d) To ensure that schools and learning centers receive the focused attention they deserve, and that educational programs, projects, and services consider the interests of all members of the community;

(e) To help schools and learning centers reflect the values of the community by allowing teachers/learning facilitators and other personnel to be more flexible in approaches to serving the needs of all students;

(f) To encourage local initiatives for improving schools and learning centers, and to provide them with mechanisms to achieve and sustain these improvements; and

(g) To establish schools and learning centers as facilities where children in school can acquire the range of core skills demanded by elementary and high school educational programs, or where out-of-school youth and adult learners are provided with alternative learning programs and can receive accreditation for at least a high school education equivalent.

Sec. 4. Definition of Terms. – For purposes of this Act, terms or phrases used herein shall mean or be understood in accordance with the following:

(a) Alternative Learning System – a parallel learning system that shall provide a viable alternative to the existing formal education instruction. It comprises both non-formal and informal sources of knowledge and skills;

(b) Basic Education – education that aims to meet basic learning needs that lay the foundation for subsequent learning. It encompasses early childhood education, elementary and high school education, as well as systems for out-of-school youth and adult learners, and involves education for those with special needs;

(c) School Cluster – a grouping of schools that are geographically proximate and consolidated to improve learning outcomes;

(d) Formal Education – the systematic and intentional process of learning with a sequenced and graded framework aligned with the general concept of elementary and secondary education levels. At the end of each level, a student requires a credential to enter or advance to the next level;

(e) Informal Education – a lifelong process of learning where a person acquires and retains knowledge, skills, attitudes, and insights from daily experiences at home, at work, in leisure, and from life itself;

(f) Integrated Schools – a school that offers a complete basic education in one school campus and has unified instructional programs;

(g) Student – any individual who seeks basic literacy skills and life skills or support services to improve his/her quality of life;

(h) Learning Center – a physical space that houses learning resources and facilities for a learning program for out-of-school youth and adults. It is a venue for face-to-face learning activities and other opportunities to learn for community building and improving the quality of life of citizens;

(i) Learning Facilitator – the key support person in learning who is responsible for monitoring/facilitating the learning process and student activities;

(j) Non-Formal Education – any organized and systematic educational activity conducted outside the framework of a formal system to provide selected types of learning to a segment of the population;

(k) Quality Education – the relevance, appropriateness, and excellence of education provided to meet the needs and aspirations of an individual and of society;

(l) School – an educational institution, private and public, that conducts educational operations to a specific age group of students or learners pursuing a specific study at a specific level, receiving instruction from teachers, usually located in a building or a group of buildings in a particular physical or cyber space; and

(m) School Head – a person who is responsible for the administrative and instructional supervision of a school or cluster of schools.

CHAPTER 1

Governance of Basic Education

Sec. 5. Principles of Shared Governance. – (a) Shared governance is a principle that recognizes that each unit in the educational bureaucracy has a specific role, function, and responsibility embedded in the office, and is therefore primarily accountable for the outcomes;

(b) A democratic consultative process shall be followed in the decision-making process at appropriate levels. Feedback mechanisms shall be established to ensure coordination and open communication of the central office with the regional, divisional, and school levels;

(c) The principles of accountability and transparency shall be observed in the performance of functions and responsibilities at all levels; and

(d) Communication channels of field offices shall be strengthened to oversee the flow of information and expand linkages with other government agencies, local government units, and non-governmental organizations to make governance effective.

Sec. 6. Administration. Henceforth, the Department of Education, Culture, and Sports shall be known as the Department of Education. It shall be empowered to ensure access, promote equity, and improve the quality of basic education. The arts, culture, and sports shall be consistent with those designated in Sections 8 and 9 hereof.

Sec. 7. Powers, Functions, and Responsibilities. – The Secretary of Education shall have overall authority and responsibility for the operations of the Department.

A. National Level

In addition to his/her powers under existing laws, the Secretary of Education shall have the power, responsibility, and accountability for the following:

(1) Formulating national educational policies;

(2) Developing a national basic education plan;

(3) Adopting national educational standards;

(4) Monitoring and evaluating national learning outcomes;

(5) Conducting national educational research and studies;

(6) Improving the employee status, professional competence, welfare, and working conditions of all Department personnel; and

(7) Improving the holistic development of students through local and national programs and/or projects.

The Secretary of Education shall be assisted by not more than four Undersecretaries and not more than four (4) Assistant Secretaries whose duties, functions, and responsibilities shall be as provided by law. There shall be at least one Undersecretary and one Assistant Secretary who shall be career executive service officers selected from the personnel of the Department.

B. Regional Level

There may be as many regional offices as deemed necessary by law. Each regional office shall have a director, an assistant director, and a staff for the dissemination and promotion of programs, planning, and administrative and fiscal services.

Consistent with national educational policies, plans and standards, the regional director shall have the power, responsibility, and accountability for the following:

(1) Interpreting a regional educational policy framework that reflects the values, needs, and expectations of the communities they serve;

(2) Developing a regional plan for basic education;

(3) Developing regional educational standards geared towards setting requirements to be at par with global standards;

(4) Monitoring, evaluating, and assessing regional learning outcomes;

(5) Conducting regional research projects and developing and managing region-wide projects that may be funded through official development assistance and/or other funding agencies;

(6) Ensuring strict adherence to the prescribed national requirements for the hiring, selection, and training of all regional and division personnel;

(7) Coordinating the budget, in collaboration with regional development councils, to support regional educational plans that consider the educational plans of divisions and districts;

(8) Ensuring the organization of divisions and districts and approving proposed staffing patterns for all personnel in the divisions and districts;

(9) Hiring, assigning, and evaluating all personnel in the regional office, except for the position of assistant director;

(10) Evaluating all superintendents and assistant superintendents of the division in the region;

(11) Planning and supervising the effective and efficient use of personnel, physical and fiscal resources of the regional office, including professional staff development;

(12) Supervising the database and management information system of the region;

(13) Approving the establishment of public and private elementary and high schools and learning centers; and

(14) Performing other functions as may be assigned by appropriate authority.

C. Divisional Level

A division shall be composed of a province or a city which shall have a schools division superintendent, at least one assistant schools division superintendent, and a staff for the dissemination of programs, planning, and administrative, fiscal, legal, personnel and other support services.

Consistent with national educational policies, plans and standards, the schools division superintendent shall have the power, responsibility, and accountability for the following:

(1) Developing and implementing a divisional plan for educational development;

(2) Planning and supervising the effective and efficient use of personnel, physical and fiscal resources of the division, including professional staff development;

(3) Hiring, assigning, and evaluating all division supervisors and district supervisors, as well as all division personnel, both teaching and non-teaching, including school heads, except for the assistant schools division superintendent;

(4) Monitoring the utilization of funds provided by the national government and local government units in schools and learning centers.

(5) Ensuring adherence to quality standards for basic education programs and for this purpose, strengthening the role of division supervisors as specialists in learning areas;

(6) Promoting awareness of and compliance with accreditation standards prescribed by the Secretary of Education by all schools and learning centers;

(7) Supervising the operations of all public and private elementary, secondary, and integrated schools, and learning centers; and

(8) Performing other functions as may be assigned by appropriate authority.

D. District Level

Upon recommendation of the schools division superintendents, the regional director may establish additional school districts within a school division. Existing school districts as of the effectivity of this Act shall be retained. A school district shall have a district supervisor and a staff for program dissemination.

The district supervisor shall be responsible for:

(1) Providing professional and instructional advice and support to school heads and teachers/learning facilitators in the district or cluster;

(2) Monitoring curricula; and

(3) Performing other functions as may be assigned by appropriate authority.

E. School Level

There shall be a school head for all public elementary and high schools or a cluster thereof. The establishment of integrated schools from existing public elementary and high schools is encouraged. 

The school head, who may be assisted by an assistant school head, shall be both the instructional leader and administrative supervisor. The school head shall form a team with the school teachers/learning facilitators for the delivery of quality educational programs, projects, and services. A staff of non-teaching personnel shall handle the school’s administrative, fiscal, and other services.

Consistent with national educational policies, plans and standards, the school head shall have the power, responsibility, and accountability for the following:

(1) Setting the school’s mission, vision, goals, and objectives;

(2) Creating a school environment conducive to teaching and learning;

(3) Implementing the school curriculum and being accountable for higher learning outcomes;

(4) Developing the school’s educational program and school improvement plan;

(5) Offering educational programs, projects and services that provide equal opportunities for all learners in the community;

(6) Introducing new and innovative modes of instruction to achieve higher learning outcomes;

(7) Supervising and coordinating all personnel, and physical and fiscal resources of the school;

(8) Recommending personnel to meet the needs of the school;

(9) Promoting staff development;

(10) Establishing school and community networks and encouraging active participation of teacher organizations, non-teaching personnel of public schools, and parent-teacher-community associations;

(11) Accepting donations, gifts, grants, and endowments for the purpose of enhancing the competence of teachers/learning facilitators, improving and expanding school facilities, and providing instructional materials and equipment. Such donations or grants shall be reported to the appropriate district supervisor and division superintendent;

(12) Performing other functions as may be assigned by appropriate authority.

The Secretary of Education shall constitute a promotion board, at appropriate levels, which shall develop and implement a system of promotion for district supervisors, school district supervisors, and school heads. The promotion of school heads shall be based on educational qualifications, merit, and performance, rather than the number of teachers/learning facilitators and students in the school.

The qualifications, salary grades, employment status and benefits of school heads shall be uniform for public elementary, secondary, and integrated schools.

No appointment to the positions of regional director, assistant regional directors, schools division superintendents, and assistant schools division superintendents shall be made unless the appointee is a career executive service officer who is better qualified for the position.

CHAPTER 2

Transfer of Cultural Agencies

Sec. 8. Cultural Agencies. — The Komisyon sa Wikang Pilipino, National Historical Institute, Record Management and Archives Office, and the National Library are now administratively attached to the National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) and no longer to the Department of Education. The school’s program for arts and culture shall remain part of the school curriculum.

CHAPTER 3

Dissolution of the Bureau of Physical Education and School Sports

Sec. 9. Dissolution of BPESS. All functions, programs, and activities of the Department of Education relating to competitive sports shall be transferred to the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC). The school program for physical education and sports shall remain part of the basic education curriculum.

Hereby dissolved is the Bureau of Physical Education and School Sports (BPESS). The personnel of the BPESS, currently in the PSC, are hereby transferred to the PSC without affecting their rank, whether in plantilla positions they occupy. All other personnel of the BPESS shall remain with the Department.

CHAPTER 4

Support and Assistance of Other Agencies

Sec. 10. The Secretary of Education and the Secretary of Budget shall jointly issue, within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, rules on the allocation, distribution, and utilization of resources provided by the national government for field offices, considering the uniqueness of conditions in delivering teaching service.

The Department of Education shall ensure that the appropriation of resources for field offices is adequate and that the allocation and release of resources for school personnel, textbooks and school supplies, and other instructional materials to said offices are direct and prompt by the Department of Budget and Management.

Sec. 11. The Secretary of Education, under the laws and regulations of the civil service, shall issue appropriate rules and regulations on personnel policies that best meet the requirements of the teaching profession and considering the uniqueness of conditions of service in the teaching service.

Sec. 12. The Commission on Audit, in issuing rules and regulations on auditing that shall govern the use of resources, as well as their liquidation, recording, and reporting, shall consider the diverse and unique characteristics of the Department’s field offices, its organizational structure, as well as the nature of school operations and learning centers.

CHAPTER 5

Final Provisions

Sec. 13. Governance in ARMM. — The Regional Secretary of Education for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) shall exercise the same governance powers over the divisions, districts, schools and learning centers in the region consistent with the Organic Act, taking into consideration the provisions of Republic Act No. 9054, entitled “An Act Strengthening and Expanding the Organic Act for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, as Amended for the Purpose of Republic Act No. 6734, entitled ‘An Act Providing for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao,’ as Amended.”

Sec. 14. Rules and Regulations. – The Secretary of Education shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the implementation of this Act within ninety (90) days from its effectivity; Provided, That, the Secretary of Education shall fully implement the principle of shared governance within two (2) years after the effectivity of this Act.

Sec. 15. Separability Clause. – If any provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other provisions hereof.

Sec. 16. Repealing Clause. – All laws, decrees, executive orders and rules and regulations inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 15. Effectivity. – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Enacted without the President’s signature on August 11, 2001, pursuant to Sec. 27(1), Article VI of the Constitution.