Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Twelfth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second day of July, two thousand two.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9187]

AN ACT DECLARING JUNE 30 OF THE YEAR AS PHILIPPINE-SPANISH FRIENDSHIP DAY, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. – It is the policy of the State to strengthen the relationship between the Philippines and countries with which it has shared history, values and traditions.

June 30 is a day when President Emilio Aguinaldo commended the besieged Spanish soldiers in the Church of Baler for their loyalty and gallantry. To mark this momentous occasion, there is a need to declare said day a national holiday to remember the act of benevolence which has paved the way in bridging better relations between Philippines and Spain.

SEC. 2. Philippine-Spanish Day. – The Thirtieth of June of each year is hereby declared as Philippine-Spanish Friendship Day to commemorate the cultural and historical ties, friendship and cooperation between the Philippines and Spain. It is hereby declared as a national special working holiday and a special non-working holiday in Aurora Province.

SEC. 3. Implementation. – The National Historical Institute (“NHI”) shall be responsible for the implementation of this Act. For this purpose, it shall formulate and issue the implementing rules and regulations necessary for the proper implementation of this Act.

SEC. 4. Inter-agency Committee. – An Inter-agency Committee (“Committee”) tasked to organize activities in commemoration of Fil-Hispano Day is hereby created, composed of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs as Chairman, the Executive Director of the National Historical Institute and the Mayor of Baler, Aurora as Co-Vice Chairmen, and an Undersecretary of the Department of Education, Undersecretary of the Department Tourism and one (1) representative each from the National Commission for Culture and the Arts and the University of the Philippines History Department, as members. The Philippine Ambassador to Spain and the Spanish Ambassador to the Philippines shall also be ex officio members of the Committee.

SEC. 5. Appropriations. – An annual budget for the celebration of the Fil-Hispano Day in the amount of Fifteen million pesos (Php15,000,000.00) shall be included in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law, thirty percent (30%) of which shall be devoted exclusively for research and development. Thereafter, the expenses for its continued implementation shall be included in the subsequent General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 6. Separability Clause. – If any section or provision of this Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. – All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, or any part thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. – This law shall take effect within fifteen (15) days from publication in the Official Gazette or two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON President of the Senate

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2131 and House Bill No. 4851, was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on March 6, 2002 and August 7, 2002, respectively.

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

Approved: FEB 05 2003

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia