Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Thirteenth Congress

Third Special Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the nineteenth day of February, two thousand seven.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9459]

AN ACT TO ESTABLISH AN OYSTER, MUSSEL, CRAB, PRAWN AND SHRIMP FARM IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF CALABANGA, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The Department of Agriculture is hereby authorized to establish an oyster, mussel, crab, prawn and shrimp farm in the Municipality of Calabanga, Province of Camarines Sur, which shall be under the supervision and control of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture or its equivalent office.

SEC 2. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources shall take such steps as may be necessary to demonstrate the scientific culture of oyster, mussels, crab, prawn and shrimp and such other marine and aquatic animals and provide the facilities of the said farm, the technology of operating and maintaining an oyster, mussel, crab, prawn and shrimp farm as a technically sound and commercially viable venture and, for this purpose, may issue such rules and regulations to effectively implement the purposes and intents of this Act.

SEC 3. The Department of Agriculture, through the oyster, mussel, crab, prawn and shrimp farm, is hereby authorized to conduct such researches and experiments as may be necessary to improve existing technology on oyster, mussel, crab, prawn and shrimp and such other marine and aquatic animals farming and to enhance and maximize income potentials of said industry.

The Department shall assist the local government to establish, in appropriate locations, their own oyster, mussel, crab, prawn and shrimp farms as pilot demonstration farms or as economic enterprises for local revenue generating purposes.

SEC 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the Department’s program the funding requirements for the establishment and operationalization of the oyster, mussel, crab, prawn and shrimp farm in the Municipality of Calabanga, Province of Camarines Sur. Thereafter, such sum as may be necessary for its continued operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) MANNY VILLAR President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 20, 2007 and February 19, 2007, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: MAY 15 2007

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia