Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Thirteenth Congress

Third Special Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the nineteenth day of February, two thousand seven.

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9431

AN ACT CREATING A BARANGAY TO BE KNOWN AS BARANGAY FORTUNE IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA, METRO MANILA

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Creation of Barangay Fortune . — Sitio Fortune in Barangay Parang, City of Marikina, Metro Manila is hereby separated from Barangay Parang and constituted into a new barangay to be known as Barangay Fortune.

The technical description of Barangay Fortune shall be as follows:

Bounded on the east and north by the centerline of the Nangka River; on the west by the centerline of Park 8 Creek; on the north by the centerline of Fortune Avenue; on the west by the centerline of F. Balagtas Street; on the southwest by the centerline of Tanguile Street; on the southwest between one depth along Monserrat Hill Street, La Milagrosa Subdivision, until it intersects the Marikina-Antipolo boundary; on the southeast by the Marikina-Antipolo boundary until it intersects the centerline of the Nangka River, covering an area of more or less 219.18 hectares.

SEC. 2. Conduct and Supervision of Plebiscite . — Pursuant to Section 10 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, the new barangay shall exist upon the majority of the votes cast by the qualified voters of Barangay Parang, City of Marikina, Metro Manila in a plebiscite to be conducted and supervised by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) in the area affected, within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 3. Barangay Officials . — The first set of officials of the said barangay shall be appointed by the city mayor of Marikina and shall hold office until such time that their successors have been duly elected and qualified.

SEC. 4. Public Infrastructure and Facilities . — All existing public infrastructure and facilities for public use existing therein at the time of the approval of this Act are hereby transferred without cost or compensation and shall be administered by the new barangay.

SEC. 5. Internal Revenue Allotment Shares . — Barangay Fortune shall be entitled to Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA) shares pursuant to Section 285 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991.

SEC. 6. Appropriations . — The amount necessary to conduct the plebiscite as provided for under this Act shall be borne by the City of Marikina, Metro Manila.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . — This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) MANNY VILLAR President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 20, 2006 and February 19, 2007, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: APR 10 2007

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia