Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Fourteenth Congress

First Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand eight.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9506]

AN ACT CREATING THE BACOLOR REHABILITATION COUNCIL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title . — This Act shall be known as the “Bacolor Rehabilitation Council Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy . — It is hereby declared the policy of the State to provide assistance to calamity stricken areas and aid in the speedy rehabilitation of such areas.

SEC. 3. Rehabilitation Council . — There is hereby created a Bacolor Rehabilitation Council which shall be composed of the following:

(a) The Regional Director of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA)-Regional Office 3, as chairperson;

(b) The Mayor of Bacolor, Pampanga, as vice chairperson;

(c) The Governor of Pampanga, as member;

(d) The President of the Association of Barangay Captains (ABC) of Bacolor, Pampanga, as member;

(e) The Regional Director of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)-Regional Office 3, as member;

(f) The Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture (DA)-Regional Office 3, as member;

(g) The Regional Director of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)-Regional Office 3, as member;

(h) The Regional Director of the Department of Education (DepEd)-Regional Office 3, as member;

(i) The Regional Director of the Department of Health (DOH)-Regional Office 3, as member;

(j) The Representative of the 3rd District of Pampanga or his authorized representative, as member;

(k) The President of the Chamber of Commerce and Industries of Pampanga, as member;

(l) A representative from a Bacolor-based non-government organization (NGO), as member; and

(m) A representative from the academe, as member.

The Council shall cease to exist after the submission of the approved rehabilitation plan to the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 4. Functions of the Bacolor Rehabilitation Council . — The Council shall have the following functions:

(a) Draft a comprehensive rehabilitation plan for the town of Bacolor which shall be submitted to the President of the Philippines for approval within six (6) months after the effectivity of this Act; and

(b) Meet regularly to evaluate the progress of the rehabilitation plan.

SEC. 5. Secretariat of the Council . — The Bacolor Rehabilitation Council shall be assisted by a secretariat which shall come from the existing staff of the Council members.

SEC. 6. Appropriations . — The amount necessary for the operation of the Bacolor Rehabilitation Council shall be charged against the funds of the Municipality of Bacolor. The funds needed for the implementation of the approved rehabilitation plan shall be included in the budgets of the implementing national government agencies in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 7. Separability Clause . — If any provision or part hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid and subsisting.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause . — Any law, presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction, administrative order, rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

SEC. 9. Effectivity Clause . — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) PROSPERO C. NOGRALES Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Sgd.) MANNY VILLAR. President of the Senate

This Act which originated was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on September 15, 2008 and September 8, 2008, respectively.

(Sgd.) EMMA LIRIO-REYES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) MARILYN B. BARUA YAP Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: SEP 28 2008

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia