Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Twelfth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second day of July, two thousand two.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9201]

AN ACT DECLARING DECEMBER 4 TO 10 AS NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK IN THE COUNTRY AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “National Human Rights Consciousness Week Act of 2002.”

SEC. 2. December 4 to 10 is hereby declared as National Human Rights Consciousness Week in the country.

SEC. 3. All government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations, shall celebrate the week through simple and appropriate ceremonies and activities to make the people aware of their basic human rights in relation to the functions and services offered by these government instrumentalities.

SEC. 4. All levels of education/learning institutions, both public and private, shall celebrate the week through simple and appropriate ceremonies and activities to propagate, particularly among the students, a human rights culture that aims at sustainable development in the country.

SEC. 5. A national committee composed of the following shall take the lead in the preparation and implementation of the guidelines on how to celebrate the week through simple and appropriate ceremonies and activities:

(1) Chairperson of the Commission on Human Rights — Chairperson;

(2) Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission — Vice Chairperson;

(3) One (1) representative from each of the following government agencies as members:

(a) Department of Education;

(b) Department of National Defense;

(c) Department of Justice;

(d) Department of Social Welfare and Development;

(e) Department of Foreign Affairs;

(f) Department of Labor and Employment;

(g) Department of the Interior and Local Government; and

(h) Philippine National Police.

(4) One (1) representative each from two (2) human rights non-government organizations as members, to be appointed by the President upon recommendation of the Commission on Human Rights.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect upon its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 4526 and Senate Bill No. 2413 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 13, 2003 and December 3, 2002, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: APR 01 2003

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia