DEPARTMENT OF

TRADE & INDUSTRY

PHILIPPINES

Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of
Republic Act (RA) No. 10620, Otherwise Known as
“An Act Providing for Toy and Game Safety Labeling, Appropriating Funds
Therefor”

regulations are hereby promulgated:

TITLE |
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Rule |
Title

Section 1. Title. These Rules shall be referred to as the Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (RA) No. 10620, otherwise known as the “Toy and
Game Safety Labeling Act of 2013”.

Rule Il
Scope and Coverage

Section 1. Scope and Coverage. These Rules shall apply to all manufacturers,
distributors, importers, exporters, wholesalers and retailers of toys or games
manufactured locally and/or internationally that are imported, exported, donated,
distributed and sold in the Philippines.

Rule Ill
Definition of Terms

Section 1. Definition of Terms. For purposes of this IRR, the following terms shall
mean or be understood as follows:

1.1. Act - refers to RA No. 10620, entitled “An Act Providing for Toy and Game
Safety Labeling, Appropriating Funds Therefor,” otherwise known as “Toy and
Game Safety Labeling Act of 2013”.

1.2. Age Grading - refers to the category used for the selection of appropriate toys

for children with respect to average abilities, interests of various age groups
and safety aspects of the toys themselves.

Page 1 of 19

1.3.

1.4.

1.5.

1.6.

1.7.

1.8.

1.9.

BOC - refers to the Bureau of Customs of the Department of Finance;

Cautionary Statement - refers to group of words conveying necessary
information or warnings that should be indicated on the label.

Children - refers to any person whose age is chronologically and/ or mentally
below fourteen (14) years of age.

DENR - refers to the Department of Environment and Natural Resources.

Descriptive Material - refers to an additional printed material that accompanies
the product which is intended to provide additional information including
instructional literature.

Display Panel - refers to the portion(s) of the surface of the immediate container,
and of any outer container or wrapping, which bears the labeling.

Distributor/ Importer/ Exporter - refers to any establishment that imports or
exports toy products for its own use or for wholesale distribution to other
establishment or outlets. If the distributor, importer, exporter sells to the general
public, it shall be considered a retailer.

Distributor/ Wholesaler - refers to any establishment that procures toy products
from a local establishment for local distribution on wholesale basis.

DOF- refers to the Department of Finance.

DOH - refers to the Department of Health.

DTI - refers to the Department of Trade and Industry.

EMB - refers to the Environment Management Bureau of the DENR.

Establishment - refers to a sole proprietorship, a partnership, a corporation, an
institution, an association, or an organization engaged in the manufacture,
importation, exportation, sale, offer for sale, distribution, donation, transfer, use,
testing, promotion, advertising, or sponsorship of toys or game products,
including the facilities and installation needed for its activities.

FDA - refers to the Food and Drug Administration of the DOH.

Household/ Urban Hazardous Substance - refers to any toy or other articles
intended for use by children which the FDA may determine to pose an electrical,
chemical, physical, or thermal hazard. For this purpose "toys and other articles
intended for use by children” shall refer to those toys and articles specified to
be for children less than fourteen (14) years of age.

Instructional Literature - refers to the information and instructions that are

provided for the safe use or assembly, or both, of a toy, whether on the
packaging or in a leaflet form that are easy to read.

Page 2 of 19

Label or Labeling - refers to the display of written, printed or graphic matter on
any toy or game product, its immediate container, tag, literature or other
suitable material affixed thereto for the purpose of giving information as to
identify components, ingredients, attributes, directions for use, specifications
and such other information as may be required by law or regulations.

LTO - refers to License to Operate issued by the FDA.

Manufacturer - refers to an establishment engaged in any and all operations
involved in the production of toys and game products. A trader shall be
categorized as a manufacturer.

Manufacturer's Marking - refers to the packaging, label, leaflet/pamphlet or
other descriptive material e.g. tags of the toy or game bearing the complete
name and address reflected in the LTO of the local company such as
manufacturer, distributor responsible for placing the product in the market and
a trademark or trade name, if any.

NRAs - refers to National Regulatory Agencies, FDA Philippines counterpart
government regulatory agencies around the world.

Package or Packaging - refers to any container or wrapping in which any
consumer product is enclosed for use in the delivery or display of that consumer
product to retail purchasers.

Post-marketing Surveillance - refers to activities involved in safety, efficacy, and
quality monitoring of toy and game products. This shall also include among
others adverse events reporting, product safety update reporting, collection and
testing of toy and game products in the market.

Principal Display Panel - refers to the part of the label that is most likely to be
displayed, presented, shown or examined under normal and customary
conditions of display for retail or sale.

PNS- refers to the Philippine National Standards for Safety of Toys and its
future amendments. The word standard shall also mean PNS.

Retailer - refers to a natural person and juridical entity engaged in the business
of selling any toy or game directly to consumers.

SKU - refers to Stock Keeping Unit.

Toy and Game - refers to an object or a number of objects clearly intended as
plaything for children as defined in these Rules, subject to the exclusions as
provided herein.

Trademark - refers to a group of words, name, title, symbol, emblem, sign,
device or any combination thereof used as an advertisement, sign, label poster
or otherwise for the purpose of enabling the public to distinguish the product of
the person who owns and uses such legally registered trademark or trade
name.

Page 3 of 19

Rule IV
Delineation of Responsibilities

Section 1. Department of Health (DOH). The DOH through the FDA shall:

1A.

1.2.

1.3.

1.4.

1.5.

1.6.

qf.

1.8.

1.9.

Develop rules and regulations, policies, guidelines and standards that cover
products, and establishments related to toys and games in coordination with
the DTI and other concerned agencies;

Issue appropriate authorizations to establishments and their toy and game
products;

Disseminate information and implement this IRR;

Institute and strengthen the post-marketing surveillance system in monitoring
toy and game products in the market as defined in the FDA Act of 2009, its IRR,
other relevant laws, and the FDA-promulgated issuances;

Conduct inspection, monitoring and surveillance of establishments, and
collection of samples, in collaboration with other concerned agencies to
determine compliance with this Act and its IRR;

Verify and perform laboratory analysis on collected/ complaint samples;

Require all manufacturers, donors, distributors, importers, exporters,
wholesalers, retailers, and encourage consumers of toys and games to report
to the FDA any incident that reasonably indicates that said product has caused
or contributed to the death, serious illness or serious injury to a consumer, a
patient or any person;

Provide the DTI with the list/information of all manufacturers, distributors,
importers, exporters, wholesalers and retailers who failed to comply with the
requirements herein;

Regularly publish every six (6) months or as necessary all misbranded or
banned hazardous substances intended to be sold, offered for sale or
distributed; and

Provide continuous updating of the technical capabilities for both DT] and FDA
staffs through the conduct or attendance to trainings, meetings, technical
working groups (TWG) with NRAs, toy industry associations/ organizations with
regard to the safety and quality of toys and game, in coordination with DTI.

Section 2. Department of Trade and Industry (DTI). The DTI shall:

2.1.

Develop rules and regulations, policies, guidelines and Philippine National
Standards that cover products, services, establishments, facilities related to
toys and games in coordination with the DOH through FDA and _ other
concerned agencies;

Page 4 of 19

2.2. Implement and disseminate the IRR and the PNS through mass media such as
but not limited to broadcast, print and internet to guide consumers,
manufacturers, distributors, retailers and various sellers;

2.3. — Institute and strengthen the post-marketing surveillance system in monitoring
products as defined in Republic Act No. 7394, otherwise known as the
“Consumer Act of the Philippines’, its IRR, other relevant laws, and the DTI-
promulgated issuances;

2.4. Assist the FDA, upon its request, in the conduct of inspection, monitoring and
surveillance of establishments;

2.5. Provide and refer consumer product reports to the FDA regarding any incident
that reasonably indicates that said product has caused or contributed to the
death, serious illness or serious injury to a consumer, a patient or any person;

2.6. | Regularly publish the list/information provided by the FDA, every six (6) months
or as necessary of all the manufacturers, importers, distributors and retailers
who failed to comply with the requirements of this Act; and

2.7. _ Provide continuous updating of the technical capabilities for both DT! and FDA
staffs through the conduct or attendance to trainings, meetings, technical
working groups (TWG) with NRAs, toy industry associations/ organizations with
regard to the safety and quality of toys and game, in coordination with FDA.

Section 3. Other Coordinating Agencies. To effectively carry out the provisions of this

Rule, the DOH-FDA and the DT! may coordinate with DOF-BOC, DILG and DENR-EMB.

TITLE Il
LABELING AND PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS

Rule |
General Requirements
Section 1. Labeling Requirements for Toy and Game. Toys and games covered by
these Rules shall comply with the existing applicable PNS. Any amendments to or

revisions on the said PNS shall be applied accordingly.

The following shall be embossed on, directly printed, appeared on, or affixed to the
package, container, wrapper or protective covering of the product/s:

1.1. LTO Number issued by FDA

1.2. Age Grading - determined by the manufacturer according to international
norms, including but not restricted to ISO Technical Report 8124-8 “Age
Determination Guidelines’ or its equivalent

1.3. Cautionary statements/warnings;

Page 5 of 19

1.4. Instructional literature;

1.5. Manufacturer's marking - The principal component of the toy, the packaging,
label, leaflet/ pamphlet or other descriptive materials e.g. tags accompanying
the toy shall be marked with the complete name and address reflected in the
LTO of the local company (manufacturer/ distributor) responsible for placing the
product in the market and trademark or trade name, if any, which clearly
identifies the manufacturer/ distributor.

These markings shall be visible, readable and easily understood by the
consumer and shall resist normal use conditions. Abbreviations, acronyms and
the like are not allowed to be used as the name of the local company
(manufacturer/ distributor) responsible for placing the product in the market.

1.6. Item, Model, SKU number - All toys and games to be sold within the Philippines
shall have item, model, SKU number. In case of imported products without SKU
numbers, the local company (distributor) responsible for placing the product in
the market shall devise its own system in assigning SKU numbers to their
products.

Section 2. Language. The label shall be generally written in English, otherwise, a
parallel translation in English or Filipino or both shall appear thereon or be made an
integral part thereof.

Section 3. Manner of Labeling. The label shall be in a visible, easily legible,
understandable and indelible form. Component parts of the label such as stickers shall
form an integral part thereof without the danger of being erased or detached under
ordinary handling of the product, provided that, it shall not hide or cover any important
or essential information as required by law.

Section 4. Availability of Instructional Literature for Perusal by Buyer. The products
must be accompanied by an instructional literature for perusal or examination of the
buyer. Small toys, games, leaflets, pamphlets, tags, carton box holding the individual
units prior to retail and other descriptive material may contain the instructional
literature.

Rule Il
Additional Requirements

Section 1. Label Exhaustion. A company may request for the approval of label
exhaustion of not more than six (6) months with the FDA provided that the company
submits the following:

Valid reason for label exhaustion;

Actual label to be used;

Initial inventory of remaining labels;

Reconciliation inventory on the number of labels exhausted and unused for
destruction at the end of the label exhaustion period.

eeee

Page 6 of 19

TITLE Ill
SAFETY LABELING STATEMENTS

Rule |
Cautionary Statements

Section 1. Locally Manufactured and/or Packed Products. The safety information shall
be in a format that draws the attention of the consumer, and shall be placed on the
packaging and also on the toy or game itself so that in the event the packaging thereof
is discarded, the safety or cautionary warning remains.

Any cautionary statements shall be displayed in the following manner:

1.1. On its entirety on the principal display panel of the product’s package which
accompanies the product;

1.2. In the case of bulk sales of such product when unpacked, the cautionary
statement shall be displayed on the bin or container used for the retail display
of the product, and any vending machine from which the unpacked product is
dispensed and displayed in:

1.2.1. English or Filipino or both;

1.2.2. Conspicuous and legible type in contrast by typography, layout, or color
with other printed matter on such package, descriptive materials, bin,
container and vending machine; and

1.2.3. In the manner consistent with the provisions of Chapter IV - Labeling and
Fair Packaging under Republic Act No. 7394, otherwise known as the
“Consumer Act of the Philippines.”

Section 2. Special Rules for Certain Packages. A cautionary statement required under
Title Il, Rule | hereof or in lieu of display on the principal panel of the product’s package,
shall be displayed on another panel of the package if the package has a principal
display panel of approximately ninety-six (96) square centimetres (fifteen (15) square
inches or less) and the statement is displayed on the principal display panel and is
accompanied by an arrow or other indicator pointing towards the place on the package
where the statement required appears.

Section 3. Standard Warnings. All toys and games shall contain labeling requirements
and cautionary statements (warning) with regard to the product’s mechanical and
physical properties which shall be similar to or convey the same meaning as the
following:

Safety Aspects Related Labeling Requirements/Cautionary Statements
to Mechanical and (CS)
Physical Properties

Containing Small Parts

Page 7 of 19

“Warning! Not suitable for children under 3 years.
Contains small parts.”

“Warning! Not for use by children under 3 years of age. Contains small parts.”

The above warning may be substituted with a graphical

symbol below:

The details of the design of the graphical symbol shall
be as follows:

e The circle and the stroke shall be red;

e The background shall be white;

e The age range and the outline of the face shall
be black;

e The symbol shall have a diameter of at least 10
mm and the proportions between its different
elements shall be such as those prescribed in
the above figure; and

e The age range of which the toy is not suitable
shall be expressed in years, e.g. 0-3 years

Balloons

CS:

“Warning! Children under 8 years can choke or
suffocate on uninflated or broken balloons. Adult
supervision required. Keep uninflated balloons from
children. Discard broken balloons at once.”

“Warning! Children under 8 years of age may choke or suffocate on broken or uninflated balloons. Adult supervision required. Discard broken balloons immediately.”

Small Balls and
Marbles

CS:

“This toy is a small ball/marble which may present a
choking hazard. Not for children under 3 years.” or “This
product contains a small ball/ marble which may present
a choking hazard. Not for children under 3 years.”

Page 8 of 19

“This toy contains a small ball/marble that may obstruct a child’s throat. Not for children under 3 years of age.”

Aquatic Toys

CS:

“Warning! This is not a life-saving device. This shall only
be used in shallow water and under supervision.”

“Warning! This toy is not a life-saving device. For use in shallow water only and with adult supervision.”

Playpen Toys, Mobiles
and Similar Toys

The toy and its packaging shall carry a statement
drawing attention to the possible entanglement or
strangulation injury if the toy is not removed when the
baby begins to push up on hands and knees.

Crib gyms and similar toys intended exclusively to be
strung across a crib, playpen or perambulator by string,
cord, elastic or straps, as well as their packaging, shall
carry a statement drawing attention to the possible
entanglement or strangulation injury if attached to the
crib, playpen or perambulator and not removed when
the baby begins to push up on hands and knees.

Toys in Contact with
Food

The packaging, instructions or both, for toys and their
components intended to be used in contact with food,
shall carry a statement to alert adults to wash the
product thoroughly before and after use.

Toys Intended to be
Assembled by an Adult

The packaging of toys that are intended to be
assembled by an adult shall also be labeled.

Simulated Protective
Equipment

Toys that simulate  safety/personal protective
equipment such as but not limited to, construction
helmets, sports helmets and fire-fighter helmets, as well
as their packaging, shall carry a statement informing the
consumer that they are toys and do not offer protection.

Toys with Functional
Sharp Edges and
Functional Sharp
Points

Toys that are intended for use by children from 37
months up to 96 months (> 3-8 years), which contain
accessible sharp edges or accessible sharp points that
are necessary part of the function of the toy, shall carry
a statement on the packaging that sharp edge or sharp
point, or both exists.

Page 9 of 19

Functional Toys

Functional toys shall carry a label stating that the
product shall only be used under direct adult
supervision.

Toy Roller Skates and
Toy Skateboards

Toy roller skates and toy skateboards are products that
are intended for children with a maximum mass of 20
kg. Toy roller skates and toy skateboards shall carry a
label recommending the user to use personal protective
equipment such as helmet, wrist-pads, knee pads and
elbow pads and to avoid use of the product on the road.

Projectile Toys

Toys with projectiles shall be accompanied by
instructions for use which draw attention to the hazard
of aiming at eyes or face and of using projectiles other
than those supplied or recommended by the
manufacturer.

Toy Kites CS:
“Warning! Do not use near overhead power lines or
during thunderstorms.”
“Warning! Do not use near power lines or during storms/thunderstorms.”

Toy Bicycles Toy bicycles shall carry a label recommending the use

of a protective helmet when cycling.

In addition, the instructions for use shall contain a
reminder that this bicycle is not permitted for use on
public highways. Moreover, parents or carers shall
ensure that children are properly instructed in the use of
toy bicycles, particularly in the safe use of the braking
systems.

Percussion Caps

CS:
“Warning! Do not use indoors or near eyes and ears. Do

not carry loose in a pocket.”

“Warning! Do not use inside the house or near the eyes and ears. Do not simply put in your pocket.”

Page 10 of 19

Battery-Operated Toys

The battery compartment or the area immediately
adjacent shall be permanently marked to show the correct
battery polarity and voltage. If it is impractical to mark this
information on the toy, the marking may be placed in the
instructions.

Toys which Produce
High Impulsive Sound
Levels

Cs:

“Warning! Do not use close to the ear! Misuse may
damage hearing.”

“Warning! Do not use close to the ear! Improper use may damage hearing.”

The above stated labeling requirements shall be without prejudice to any cautionary
statements or warnings that may be issued from time to time by the DTI or DOH-FDA,

where necessary.

Section 4. /nstructional Literature. Instructional literature for toys and games covered
under PNS BHDT ISO 8124-1:2008 and its future amendments.

Instructional Literature
for the Following Toy
and Game

Labeling Requirements

Crib, Playpen Toys and
Mobiles

Mobiles intended to be mounted on a crib, playpen, wall
or ceiling shall be provided with instructions for proper
assembly, installation and use to ensure that the products
do not present an entanglement hazard. The instructions
shall include at least the following information:

e Accrib mobile is not intended to be grasped by the
child;

e If attached to the crib or playpen, remove when the
baby begins to push up on hands and knees;

e If mounted on a wall or ceiling, install the mobile
clearly out of a standing baby’s reach;

e Always attach all provided fasteners (strings,
straps, clamps, etc.) lightly to a crib or playpen
according to the instructions. Check frequently;
and

e Do not add additional strings or straps to attach to
a crib or playpen.

Crib Gyms and Similar
Toys

Crib gyms and similar toys intended exclusively to be
strung across a crib, playpen or perambulator by string,
cord, elastic or straps (including, but not limited to, crib
exercises, crib gyms and activity toys) shall be provided
with instructions for proper assembly, installation and use
to ensure that the products do not present an
entanglement or strangulation hazard.

Page 11 of 19

The instructions shall include at least the following
information:

e This toy is not intended to be “mouthed” by the
baby and shall be positioned clearly out of reach
of the baby’s face and mouth;

e On cribs with adjustable mattress levels, the
highest position can cause the toy to be too close
to the baby;

e The drop side of the crib shall never be lowered
with the toy in place and the baby left
unattended;

e Always attach all provided fasteners (stings,
straps, clamps, etc.) tightly to a crib or playpen
according to the instructions. Check frequently;
and

e Do not add additional strings or straps to attach
to a crib or playpen.

Toy Chest

Instructions for proper assembly and maintenance shall
be provided with sufficient detail to describe the correct
assembly of components, the resulting hazard if the lid
support device is not installed, and a description of how
to determine whether the support is working properly.

Liquid-filled Teethers
and Liquid-filled
Teething Toys

Liquid-filled teethers and liquid-filled teething toys shall
be accompanied by instruction that they shall not be
placed in the freezer compartment.

Toys Intended to be
Assembled by an Adult

Assembly instructions that accompany toys that are
intended to be assembled by an adult and that contain
potentially hazardous sharp edges or sharp points, or
contain small parts of the toy intended for children under
3 years of age, shall carry a statement stating this and
also that it is to be assembled by an adult.

Battery-Operated Toys

Battery-operated toys shall contain instructions on safe
battery usage, when applicable. These instructions
shall contain the following to advise the consumer(s):

e How to remove and insert batteries;

e That non-rechargeable batteries are not to be
recharged;

e That adult supervision is required when charging
rechargeable batteries;

e When rechargeable batteries are fully charged,
remove batteries from charger and unplug the
charger from the electrical outlet;

e Do not mix old and new or different types of
batteries;

Page 12 of 19

e To remove exhausted batteries from the toy; and
e That supply terminals are not to be short
circuited.

Section 5. Warnings. Cautionary statements with regard to the product’s flammability
are similar to or convey the same meaning as the following:

Safety Aspects with Regard to Flammability
for the Following Toy and Game Cautionary Statements

Toy Disguise Costumes and Toys Intended “Warning! Keep away from fire.”
to be Worn by a Child in a Play
“Babala! llayo sa apoy.”

Toys Intended to be Entered by a Child “Warning! Keep away from fire.”

“Warning! Keep away from fire.”

The above stated labeling requirements shall be without prejudice to any cautionary
statements or warnings that may be issued from time to time by the DT! or DOH-FDA,
where necessary.

Section 6. Additional Labeling Requirements. Labeling Requirements for Swings,
Slides and Similar Activity Toys for Indoor and Outdoor Family Domestic Use are as
follows:

Safety Aspects with Regard to Swings, Slide and Similar Activity Toys for Indoor
and Outdoor Family Domestic Use

Labeling shall be permanently and prominently applied to both the toy and the

packaging (if supplied). The following information shall be provided:

e That the toy is for domestic use only;

e Whether the toy is intended for indoor or outdoor use;

e Information as to the mass and/or age of the child for whom the toy is intended;

e If appropriate, the maximum number of children that may safely use the equipment
simultaneously; and

e Identity or contact details of the manufacturer or distributor.

Section 7. Assembly and Installation Instructions. Assembly and_ Installation
instructions for Swings, Slides and Similar Activity Toys for indoor and Outdoor Family
Domestic Use are as follows:

7.1 General Information

The information given on the labeling/ purchase information shall also be given
in the installation instructions.

Activity toys that require assembly by the consumer shall be accompanied by
appropriate assembly instructions, including drawings, which shall enable an
unskilled layman to correctly assemble the activity toy.

Page 13 of 19

7.2

The assembly and installation instructions shall also, when appropriate, include:

A recommendation to place the activity toy on a level surface at least 1.8 meters
from any structure or obstruction such as a fence, garage, house, overhanging
branches, laundry lines or electrical wires;

Detailed instructions on how anchors shall be installed to prevent overturning
or lifting of the support members during normal use or foreseeable misuse, also
taking into account the condition of the soil normally encountered;

Instructions that anchors shall be placed in level with or under the ground in
order to reduce tripping hazards;

Instructions that activity toys (for example swings, slides, climbing frames) shall
be installed over impact absorbing surfaces such as sand, wood-bark chips,
rubber and foam and shall not be installed over concrete, asphalt or any hard
surface;

Scale drawings of assembly hardware to facilitate the correct length of
fasteners being used; and

Information to keep assembly and installation instructions for further reference.
Information on Playground Surfacing Materials
7.2.1. Maximum Fall Heights

The instructions shall include the manufacturer's determination of
maximum fall height for the product.

Maximum fall heights for products are determined as follows:

e For swings, the maximum fall height is the height of the suspension
connector;

e For elevated platforms with barriers, the maximum fall height is the
height of the top surface of the barrier;

e For climbing frames and horizontal ladders, the maximum fall height is
the height of the top surface of the component; and

e Forrocking toys and seesaws, the maximum fall height is the maximum
height of the designated play surface normally occupied by a user.

7.2.2. Impact Attenuating Surface

The instructions shall include the “Consumer information sheet for
playground surfacing materials” from Annex B of PNS BHDT ISO 8124-
4:2012 and its future amendments or specific surfacing guidelines for the
product that are consistent with Annex B of PNS BHDT ISO 8124-4:2012
and its future amendments.

Page 14 of 19

Section 8. Maintenance Instructions. Maintenance Instructions for Swings, Slides and
Similar Activity Toys for Indoor and Outdoor Family Domestic Use are as follows:

Maintenance Instruction

Activity toys shall be accompanied by maintenance instructions drawing attention to
the need for carrying out checks and maintenance of the main parts (crossbeams,
suspensions, anchors, etc.) at regular intervals, pointing out that if these checks are
not carried out, the toy could overturn or otherwise become a hazard.

Guidelines shall also be provided on how to determine when deterioration has
occurred and the requirements for replacing parts when necessary.

The maintenance instructions shall include the wording “Please keep for future
reference”.

The maintenance instructions, shall, when appropriate, also include the following
recommendations pointing out that it is of particular importance that they be followed
at the beginning of each season as well as at regular intervals during the usage
season:

Check ali nuts and bolts for tightness and tighten when required;

Oil all metallic moving parts;

Check all covering and bolts for sharp edges and replace when required;

Check swing seats, chains, ropes and other means of attachment for evidence of
deterioration; replace when required in accordance with the manufacturer's
instruction; and

e Sand rusted areas and tubular members and repaint using a non-lead based paint
when required.

TITLE IV
EXCLUSIONS IN CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS

Rule |
Exclusions

Section 1. Excluded Products. Toys and games manufactured and packaged outside
the Philippines and directly shipped from the manufacturer to the consumer by mail or
other delivery services which do not bear the cautionary statement required pursuant
to Section 5 of Republic Act No. 10620 and Rule |, Title Ill (Safety Labeling
Statements) of these Rules shall be admitted, provided that, other accompanying
material shipped with the product bears such statement.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the DOH through the FDA, may exclude specific toys
and games from the cautionary statement required in the label, provided that, other
accompanying material of the product bears such statement. Provided further, that
any toy and game so excluded may be reinstated from the requirement when health
and safety so requires as determined by the FDA.

Page 15 of 19

TITLE V
INSPECTION AND MONITORING

Rule |
General Guidelines

Section 1. General Guidelines. The DOH-FDA with the assistance of the DTI shall
lead the conduct of inspection, monitoring and surveillance of establishments, and
collection of samples, in collaboration with other concerned government agencies to
determine compliance with this Act and its IRR. In every market monitoring
activity/operation, all members of the monitoring team shall, before entering a
particular business establishment, be properly authorized in writing and present their
written authority/valid order and proper identification papers to any responsible person
within the premises.

Section 2. Powers and Functions. The inspection team shall have the following
powers and functions in their respective assigned regions:

2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.4.

2.5.

To enter and inspect establishments and facilities engaged in the manufacture,
importation, exportation, distribution, sale, offer for sale and transfer, and,
where appropriate, use of covered products;

To request or examine relevant documents and other information related to the
covered products;

Upon finding in the course of its evaluation, monitoring, inspection and spot
checking of any violation in the compliance and other requirements required by
this Act and its IRR, submit a report to serve as basis for the motu proprio action
of the FDA;

To conduct post market monitoring of the covered products; and
To exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be

assigned or necessary to carry out its duties and responsibilities.

TITLE VI
ENFORCEMENT AND ACTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS OF RA 10620 AND
ITS IRR

Rule {
Persons Liable

Section 1. Persons Liable. \f the offense is committed by a corporation, trust, firm,
partnership or association or other entity, the penalty shall be imposed upon the guilty
officer or officers of such corporation, trust, firm, partnership or association or entity.

Page 16 of 19

Rule Il
Administrative Action

Section 1. Administrative Action. Administrative action for violations of this Act and its
IRR shall be subject to the provisions of RA No. 9711, otherwise known as the "Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) Act of 2009” and its IRR particularly Book Ill, the
Uniform Rules of Procedures of the Food and Drug Administration and its future
amendments.

Section 2. Seizure of Covered Products. Covered products found to be in violation of
the provisions of this Act and its IRR shall be seized or confiscated in favor of the
government and shall be disposed in accordance with pertinent laws and regulations
without prejudice to Section 3 below. Cost for disposal shall be levied on the
manufacturer and/or distributor (importer, exporter, wholesaler) responsible for the
seized covered products.

Section 3. Custodia Legis. During the pendency of the case filed in violation of this
Act and its IRR, the seized covered products shall remain in custody of the DOH-FDA.
The DOH-FDA shall have the option to have sufficient representative sample retained
of the seized covered products for evidentiary purposes. The retained representative
sample shall remain in custodia legis until the final resolution of proceedings thereon.
Disposal of products mentioned herein shall be in accordance with the FDA guidelines.

Section 4. Development of Regulations on Disposal of Seized Product. Within ninety
(90) days after approval of this IRR, the FDA shall coordinate with the EMB-DENR and
BOC on the development of regulations on imported equipment and materials seized
during the monitoring and inspection including its final disposition.

Section 5. Administrative Penalties. Any violation of this Act and its IRR shall be dealt
with in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 9711, otherwise known as

the "Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Act of 2009", its future amendments, and
other applicable laws.

Rule Ill
Criminal Action
Section 1. /nstitution of Criminal Proceedings. \n the enforcement of RA 10620, the
usual procedure for prosecution provided by the Rules of Court shall be observed and
such prosecution shall be conducted by the appropriate provincial/city prosecutor.

Criminal Penalties:

a. Imprisonment of not less than three (3) months but not more than two (2) years;
or

b. Fine of not less than ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00) but not more than fifty
thousand pesos (P50,000.00); or

c. Both imprisonment and fine at the discretion of the court.

Page 17 of 19

The criminal penalties shall be without prejudice to administrative sanctions which the
DOH may impose.

TITLE VII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Rule |
Misbranded or Banned Toys and Games

Section 1. Misbranded or Banned Hazardous Substance. Covered products which
are not in compliance with Titles II and III of these Implementing Rules and Regulations
(IRR) shall be considered as misbranded or banned hazardous substance.

Section 2. Actions on Misbranded or Banned Toys and Games. Misbranded toys and
games or banned hazardous substances shall be ordered withdrawn from the market
at the expense of the manufacturer or distributor (importer, exporter, wholesaler) and
shall not be allowed to be distributed, sold or offered for sale in the Philippines without
prejudice to any liability and penalty when action is pursued pursuant to Rule II and/or
Rule Ill of Title VI.

Rule Il
Reporting

Section 1. Report to the DOH. A manufacturer, distributor, retailer or importer of a
marble, small ball or latex balloon, or a toy or game that contains a marble, small ball
or latex balloon, or other small parts, shall report to the DOH through FDA, any
information obtained by such manufacturer, distributor, retailer or importer which
reasonably supports the conclusion that an incident occurred in which a child,
regardless of age, choked with such marble, small ball, or latex balloon, or other small
parts contained in such toy or game, and that, as a result of that incident the child died,
suffered serious illness or injury, ceased breathing for any length of time, or was
treated by a medical professional.

Other untoward incident(s) during the usage of any toy and/ or game apart from the
aforementioned toy or game product category resulting to the death, serious illness or
injury, ceased breathing for any length of time, or treatment by a medical professional
of a child shall also be reported.

Rule Ill
Other Provisions
Section 1. Funding. The DTI and the DOH through the FDA shall include in their
respective annual budget the amount necessary for the effective implementation of

this Act and its IRR.

Section 2. Separability Clause. The provisions of this Order are hereby declared be
separable and if any provision or part hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the

Page 18 of 19

remainder of this Order or the provisions not otherwise affected shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 3. Repealing Clause. The provisions of the Department Orders, rules and
regulations and other issuances of the implementing agency which are inconsistent
with these IRR are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

Section 4. Effectivity. This IRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication
in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation,
whichever comes first, and copy thereof furnished the Office of the National
Administrative Register at the UP Law Center, University of the Philippines, Diliman,
Quezon City.

q
Issued this 20% day of January 2018" Ao City, Philippines.

Approved by:

FRANCISCO/T. DUQUE Ill, MD, MSc RAMON OPEZ

Secretary Secretary
Department of Health Department of Trade effing istry

Page 19 of 19