REPUBI,IC OF HE PI{ILIPPINES
DEPARI-N{Er.r" T O F FINAN CE
BUREAU OF INTERNAI RE\'ENUE
Quezon Cir.v
Date
;if ii ,, 5 ?0ili
REVENUE REGULATToNS r,io. 4- 2oll
SUBJECT:
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Repubiic Act No. 71213, Otherwise
Known as the "Tax Amnesty Act", Providing for the Guidelines on the Processing
of Tax Amnesty Applicati.on on Tax Delinquencies
All Revenue Officers and Others Concerned
SECTION 1. SCOPE. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 244 tnrelation to Section 245
of the 1997 Tax Code, as amended, and Section 27 of Repubiic Act (RA) No. 11213, these
Regulations are hereby promulgated to implement the provisions on Tax Amnesty on
Delinquencies under Title IV of the Tax Amnesty Act.
SECTION 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS. For purposes of these Regulations, the words
used herein shall be defined as foliorvs:
A. Delinquent Account - shall perlain to a tax due from a taxpayer arising from the audit
of the Bureau of internal Revenue (BIR) which had been issued Assessment Notices
that have become final and executory due to the following instances:
1. Failure to pay the tax due on the prescribed due date provided in the Final
Assessment Notice (FAN)lFormal Letter of Demand (FLD) and for which no valid
Protest, whether a request for reconsideration or reinvestigation, has been filed
within thirty (30) days from receipt thereof;
2. Failure to file an appeal to the Court of Tax Appeal (CTA) or an administrativc
appeal before the Commissioner of internal Revenue (CIR) rvithin thi*y (30) days
from receipt of the decision denying the request foi reinvestigation or
reconsideration; or
3. Faiiure to fiie an appeai to the CTA within thirly (30) days frorn receipt ol the
Decision of the CIR denying the taxpayer's adrninistrative appeal to the Final
Decision on Disputed Assessment (FDDA).
B, Assesslnent Notice - refers to a notice issued io a taxpayer slating the amount and
basis ct'the defic_iency iax assessed. This term includes FAN/I]LD and PDDA;
z/
-"1
M
,vl
ir- !4 I
t t:il
\v
TG

C. Basic Tax Assessed - The term relers to any of the foliowing:
1. Tax due shown on the Assessment *odr", net of any basie tax paid prior to the
effectivity of these Regulations, exclusive of civil penalties;
2. The computed basic tax liabilities as shown in the criminal complaint filed by the
BIR u,ith the Department of Justice (DOJ)/ Prosecutor's Office cr in the
infonnation hled in the Cor:rts for violations of tax laws and regulations; and
3. The basic tax iiabiiities as per Court's fina1 anC executory decision.
D. Criminal Cases - refer to cases involving crimes and other offenses defined an.i
enumerated under Chapter II of Title X and Section 275 af the 1991 Tax Ccde, as
amended.
E. Withholding Agent.- is a person required to rvithhold, account for, and remit within
the prescribed period any tax irnposed by the 1997 Tax Code, as amendeC.
SECTION 3. COVERAGE. All persons, whether natural or juridical, with internai
revenue tax iiabilities covering taxable year 2017 and prior years, may avail of Tax Amnesty cn
Deliirquencies r.vithin one (1) year from the effectivity of these Regulations, under any of the
folio*'ing instances:
A. Delinquent Accounts as of the effectivity of these R.egulations, including the following:
1. Delinquent Accounts with application for compromise settierrent either on the
basis of (a) doubtful validity of the assessment or (b) financial incapacity of the
taxpayer, whether the same was denied by or still pending rvith the Regional
Evaluation Board (REB) or the National Evaluation Board (l.tEB), as rhe case may
be, on or before the effectivity of these Regulations;
2. Delinquent Withholding Tax liabiiities arising from non-withholding oltax; and
3. Delinquent Estate li'ax liabilities.
B. V/ith pending criminal cases with the DOJlProsecutor's Office or the courts for tax
evasion and other criminal olfenses under Chapter Ii of Title X and Section 275 of tbe
Tax Code, as amended. with or rn'ithout assessments duly issued;
C. With fina1 and e;rr:cutory judgment by the courts on or before the effectivity of these
Regulations; and
D. tVitlrholcling tax iiabiiities of u,ithholding agents arising from iheir failure to ren:it
r.rithheld taxes.
StrCTICi"{.1. TAX Aft{I"{ES'i'Y- RA'flitS. 'fhe tax
?/
,.\ €
: ,r' rl,
,$ l,tt}
'! i!;
\,,."
anrnesty rates shali be i.:; ft;11orvs:
1,",i,ii.:il-,tr i;.- ;I;;;;:";,':;-j
I
l,l'r, 
',1 tl r!.,..i,-:i,,,i 2
:iiiil: 
6,1) 
; r ir
j 'i ii i . 
'vt
ii i\FRCSzfiifi 'irti
i,, 
A:Qt{Aw ;i lj
i ,i''.,:i.. i::i ).i:-:' ,i,.i:t'.:] -' i':, : -. i

A. Delinquent accounts and assessments which have
become final and executory
40% of the basic tax assesseci
B. Tax cases subject of final and exeoutory judgment
by the courts
50% ofthe basic tax assessed
C. Pending criminal cases filed with the
DoJ,Prosecutor's Office or the courts for tax
evasion and other criminal offenses under Chapter II
of Titie X and Section 275 of the Tax Code, as
amenCed
60% ofthe basic tax assessed
D. Withholding agents who withheld taxes but failed to
remit the same to the Bureau
100% ofthe basic tax assessed
The tax amnesty rate of one hundred percent (100%) provided in letter (D) shall apply in
all cases of non-remittalce of withholding taxes, even if the same shail fall under letters (A), (B)
or (C) above.
In cases where the delinquent taxes have been the subject of appiication for compromise
settlement pursuant to Section 2A4 of the Tax Code, whether denied or pending, ihe amount of
payment shal1 be based on the net basic tax as certified by the concemed office foliowing the
procedure under Section 5(C) of these Reguiations.
Illustration 1:
with denied/pending Application for compromise settlement:
Basic Tax per FAN
Basic Tax paid per Compromise Settlement application
Net Basic Tax prior to the effectivity of these Regulations
Multiply by the Tax Amnesty Rate
Amount of Tax Amnesty to be Paid
P 1,000,000.00
400.000.00
P 
600,000.00
40%
P 
240.000.00
P 1,000,000.cc
z0!p!0,09
For all other cases rvith partiai/instalhnent payments, the amount of payrnent shal1 be based
on the net amount as certified by the concerned office as specified under Section 5(C) of these
Regulations.
Illustration 2:
With partiallinstallment payntents:
Basic 1'a:< per FAN
the effectiviry of tircse
iio penalties)
Partial payrneil'Lis made Prior to
Rcgrrlations (nci o Ipayment ; p1--i ied
4
.F'
-"-ia-
u .:'.1
E iTJ
\d
ril'it 0S I$;f
tt.nF
,!. J,t Atr\l
. F- r.,_
'.. i lt/t'j|. 
\l
./ .---)-\ |
;'' i ;:j i,,tl'i l . ili\,I
| .. 
:'t
i:it: 
il
i lii: 
i:-
a:iiil,i,i
I i ( i)
ii'ii
,llL 
I
; tI 
i:-_
I 
:, ::,
I - ._.- :..i :r l::
iiiiIti;
i1
i:
ll
.: 
)
..;
,l 
1
ii:|:
I i:rli
i)a:ii
:'.'
,I
Ii

Net Basic Tax
Multiply by the Tax Amnesty Rate
Amount of Tax Amnesty to be paid
P 
8C0,000.00
40%
P 
320.000.00
In case the delinquent accountlassessment consi.sts only of unpaid penalties due to either
late filing or payment, and there is no basic tax assessed, the taxpayer may avail of the tax amnesty
in accordance with the procedure set fodh in Section 5 of these Regulations, without any payment
due.
SECTIOIT{ 5. MANNER. OF AVAILMENT OF TAX AMNESTY ON TAX
DELINQUENCIES. Any person, whether naturai or juridical, who wishes to avail of the Tax
Amnesty on Delinquencies shail file, u,ithin one (i) year from the effectivity of these R.egula'r.ions,
an application therefor in accordance with the procedures set forth below.
A. DOCUMENTARY REQUIREiVIENTS: The taxpayer shali submit ihe following:
1. Tax Amnesty Retum (TAR) (BIR Form No.2118-DA, Annex "A"), completely and
accurately accomplished and made under oath;
2. Acceptance Payment Form (APF) (BIR Form No. 0621-DA, Annex "B") duly validated
by the Authorized Agent Banks (AABs) or APF duly stamped "received" vviin
accompanying bank deposit slip duly validated by the concerned AABs or Revenue
Official Receipt (ROR) issued by the Revenue Collection Officers (RCOs);
3. Certificate of Tax Delinquencies/Tax Liabilities issued by concerned BIR offices (Annex
"c"); and
4. In case of applications under Section 3(AX2) of these Regulations, a copy of the assessment
found in the FANIFDDA: Provided that,incases of applications under Section 3(D), either
delinquent account or not, with or r.vithout FAN/FDDA, the Preiiminary Assessment
Notice (PAN)A{otice for Informal Conference or equivalent document is sufficient.
B. PLACE OF FILING - The Tax Amnesty Return and other documentaty requirements
shall be filed with the following BIR offices:
Classification
Place of Filins
Non-Large Taxpayers
Revenue District Office (RDO) where applicant-taxpayer is
registered
Large Taxpayers - Cebu or
Davao
Large Taxpayers Division (LI'D) Office where applicant-
taxoaver is reeistered
Large Taxpayers - Excise
and Reguiar
Large Taxpayers Collection Enlorcement Division (LTCED)
- "r \-? i7 rl ..iaj I il
#"

C. PROCEDURES - The taxpayer-applicant shall:
Step 1. Secure the Certificate of Delinquencies/Tax Liabilities from the concerned BIR Office
as specifieci below:
Nature of Tax Liabilities
Large Taxpayer
Non-Large Taxpayer
Delinquent tax cases,
including withholding tax
liabilities of withholding
agents arising from failure
to remit withheld taxes and
those with pending or
denied application for
compromise settlement.
Large Taxpayers
Division (Cebu or
Davao)/ Large
Taxpayers
Collection
Enforcement
Division (LTCED)
a. Regional Collection Division - For
taxpayer-applicants under the
jurisdiction of Revenue Regions (RR)
Nos.5, 6,7 and 8 (Caloocan, Manila,
Quezon City and Makati,
respectively);
b. Revenue District Office (RDO) where
the taxpayer-applicant is registered -
For other taxpayer-applicants
including RDO No. 36 (Puerto
Princesa).
Tax cases subject of f,rnal
and executory judgment by
the courts
Litigation/
Prosecution
Division of the
National Office,
which handled the
case
a. Legal Division of the Regional Office
- For taxpayer-applicants under the
jurisdiction of Revenue Regions (RR)
Nos.5, 6,7 and 8 (Caloocan, Manila,
Quezon City and Makati,
respectively);
b. Legal Division of the Regional Office
or Litigation/Prosecution Division in
the National Office which handled the
case - For taxpayer-applicants under
the jurisdiction of Revenue Regions
other than the RRs mentioned under
(a) hereof.
Tax liabilities covered by
a pending criminal cases
filed 
with 
the
DOJiProsecutor's
Office/Courts
Prosecution
Division of the
National Office
a. Legal Division - For taxpayer-
applicants under the jurisdiction of
Revenue Regions (RR) Nos. 5, 6,7
and 8 (Caloocan, Manila, Quezon
City and Makati, respectively);
b. Legai Division of the Regional Office
or Prosecution Division in the
National Office which handled the
case - For taxpayer-applicants under
tire jurisdiction of Revenue Regions
oiher than the RRs mentioned under
(a) hereof.

Step 2. Present the duly accomplished TAR made under oath and APF, together with the other
required documents, to the concerned RDO/LTD/LTCED for endorsement of the APF
and pay the tax amnesty amount with the AABs or RCOs, whichever is applicable, by
presenting the RDOiLTD/LTCED-endorsed or approved APF: Provided, that if no
payment is required as in the case when assessment consists only of unpaid penalties
due to either late filing or payment, the phrase "no payment required" shall be indicated
in the APF.
Step 3. Submit/file immediately to the RDO/LTD/LTCED where the taxpayer is registered, in
triplicate copies, the duly accomplished TAR, made under oath, together w'ith the
complete documentary requirernents and proof of payment, which in no case shall be
beyond the one (1) year availment period. The taxpayer/applicant shall be fumished
r.vith a copy, stamped as received, of said TAR and APF.
Availment of Tax Amnesty on Delinquencies shall be considered fully complied with upon
completion of the above enumerated steps within the one (1) year availment period.
SECTION 6. ISSUANCE OF AUTHORITY TO CANCEL ASSESSMENT (ATCA)
AND LIFTING OF THE VALIDITY OF THE ISSUED NOTICES AND WARRANTS. The
Notice of Issuance of Authority to Caneel Assessment QTIIATCA) shall be issued by the BIR to
the taxpayer avaiiing of the Tax Amnesty on Delinquencies within fifteen (15) calendar days from
submission of the APF and TAR. Otherwise. the stamped-"received" duplicate copies of the APF
and TAR shali be deemed as sufficient proof of availment.
Insofar as the tax delinquencies covered by the TAR is concemed, any notice, attachment
andlor warrant of garnishment issued against the taxpayer by the concerned BIR office shall be set
aside pursuant to the lifting of the said notices and warrants issued by the concerned BIR Office.
SECTION 7. REPORT TO OVERSIGHT COMMITTEB. Report to the Congressional
Oversight Committee shall be submitted by the BIR within six (6) months aIler the one (1) year
period of availment of the Tax Amnesty on Delinquencies.
SECTION 8. IMMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES OF AVAILII\G TAX AMNESTY
ON TAX DELINQUENCIES. The tax delinquency of those who avail of the Tax Amnesty on
Delinquencies under these Regulations, upon full compliance with all the conditions set forth
hereof, shali be considered settled, and the criminal case in connection therewith and its
coresponding civil or administrative case, if applicable, shall be terminated. The taxpayer shall
be immune from all suits or actions, including the payment of said delinquency or assessment, as
weil as additions thereto, and from ali appurlenant civil, criminal and administrative cases, and
penalties under the 1997 Tax Code, as amended, as such relate to the internal revenue taxes for
taxable years that are subject of the tax amnesty availed of.
;],ri.: ;_r1: ::.; ;,.,
'1:t-.j :'.':l' ':, .
. 
(l t l
r; 
'YV
ii APR 0s
i', 
p: at'
i :' -a'.. ::' ..:"-:." ,l
,.-1.:t 
a../t:
':/-,1'ti
..,.., 
\-' :.. 1..,-; 
;\)1...

The availment of the Tax Amnesty on Delinquencies herein provided and the issuance of
the corresponding APF do not imply any admission of criminal, civil or administrative liability on
the part of the availing taxpayer.
SECTION 9. EFFECTMTY. These Regulations shail take effect fifteen (15) days from
date of its publication in the newspaper of general circulation or Official Gazette.
Recommending Approval:
^ c.Z+-*A' 
o
/\j* 
{*,
- CAESAR R. DULAY
Comrnissioner of Internal Revenue
025018
Secretary of Finance
A i,p l.r ,j ,/rll
CAIILOS G. DO
*F iir:-li: l-.' tri g:. - r: r":
Li rlfi i- iil.:
',-ri T;l
,iii ii--
i ll!i
i irl 1 i
li i il
li\\ ll
ii\i il-.
i i \ i I i-.
Fia-C
APR 08
i.;.: 
!y, i,a