IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS
of

“An Act Preventing the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction by Managing the
Trade in Strategic Goods, the Provision of Related Services, and for Other Purposes”

INTRODUCTION

Pursuant to Sections 7 and 30 of Republic Act No. 10697, otherwise known as the
Strategic Trade Management Act of 2015 (STMA), the following Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR) are hereby prescribed by the National Security Council-Strategic
Trade Management Committee (NSC-STMCom).

RULE |
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Declaration of Policy. — \t is declared a policy of the State to be free from
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) in its territory, consistent with the national interest,
to fulfill its international commitments and obligations, including United Nations Security
Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1540, to take and enforce effective measures to establish
domestic controls to prevent the proliferation of WMDs and their means of delivery; and
to maintain international peace and security and promote economic growth by facilitating
trade and investment through the responsible management of strategic goods and the
provision of related services.

Toward this end and consistent with its foreign policy and national security interests, and
in support of efforts to counter terrorism, control crime, and safeguard public safety, the
State shall manage the trade of strategic goods and provision of related services in
accordance with international standards and best practices.

Section 2. Scope and Coverage. — The rules shall apply to:

a. Any natural or juridical person operating within the Philippines who engages or
intends to engage in the export of strategic goods from the Philippines including
designated special economic and freeport zones; the import of strategic goods
into the Philippines; or the transit or transshipment of strategic goods through the
territory of the Philippines and the provision of related services; and all Filipino
persons providing these services wherever located; and,

b. The re-export of strategic goods that have been exported from the Philippines to a
foreign country, and the reassignment of strategic goods exported from the
Philippines to a new end-user in the country of import subject to the provisions of
the STMA.

Section 3. The National Strategic Goods List. — There shall be a National Strategic
Goods List (NSGL) to describe with specificity the strategic goods subject to
authorization. The NSGL shall be in conformity with international commitments and non-
proliferation obligations pursuant to bilateral and multilateral treaties, international
conventions and international non-proliferation regimes.

Upon its establishment, the NSGL shall be published in the Official Gazette and in at
least two (2) newspapers of general circulation. The NSGL shall be reviewed and
updated on a regular basis by the NSC-STMCom.

Updates and revisions to the NSGL shall also be published in the Official Gazette and in
at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

The NSGL shall comprise three (3) annexes: Military Goods (Annex 1), Dual Use Goods
(Annex 2), and Nationally Controlled Goods (Annex 3).

Section 4. Definition of Terms. — As used in the STMA:

a.

Authorization refers to an individual, global, or general authorization issued by the
STMO for the export, import, transit, transshipment, re-export, reassignment of
strategic goods and provision of related services;

1. Individual authorization shall mean the authorization granted to one specific
person to engage in the export, import, transit, transshipment, re-export,
reassignment of strategic goods, and the provision of related services with
respect to one end-user, consignee and covering one or more strategic goods.

2. Global authorization shall mean the authorization granted to one specific
person or entity to engage in the export, import, transit, transshipment,
re-export, re-assignment of strategic goods, and the provision of related
services regarding strategic goods which may be valid for the export, transit,
transshipment, re-export, re-assignment and provision of related services to
one or more specified end users and/or in one or more countries, and for
imports from one or more foreign exporters and/or from one or more countries.

3. General authorization shall mean the authorization to import, export, transit,
transship, re-export, reassign specified strategic goods or to provide certain
related services to destination countries under the conditions specified in the
general authorization.

. Brokering refers to activities such as: (a) negotiating or arranging transactions

that involve the shipment of strategic goods from a foreign country to any other
foreign country; (b) selling or buying with the intent to move strategic goods that
are in a broker's possession or control from a foreign country to any other foreign
country;

Carrier refers to any vessel, train, vehicle, aircraft, or other modes of
transportation;

. Document refers to any record on paper or in electronic form, kept on any

magnetic, optical, chemical or other medium; photograph map, plan, graph,
picture, drawing, or device;

. Dual-use goods refer to items, software, and technology which can be used for

both civil and military end-use or in connection with the development, production,
handling, operation, maintenance, storage, detection, identification, or
dissemination of WMD or their means of delivery. These goods are listed in
Annex 2 of the NSGL;

End-use controls refer to a specific procedure authorizing the establishment of
controls over any item, software, and technoiogy not listed in the NSGL (unlisted
goods) based on concerns related to WMD, their means of delivery, or military
end-use in destinations subject to embargoes decided by the United Nation (UN)
Security Council, or to prohibited/restricted end-users;

. End-user refers to a person who is outside or inside the Philippines and is the

recipient and ultimate user of the strategic goods and related services that are
exported from or imported to the Philippines;

h. End-user certificate refers to a document which contains confirmation of the
following: (a) that the end-user has undertaken io import the goods with specific
value and amount; (b) the purpose of the use of the goods; and, (c) that the end-
user shall not re-export or re-assign the goods without prior written authorization.
The certificate likewise refers to a document that verifies the end-use and end-
user of military and dual-use items as defined by the STMA;

i. Export refers to an actual shipment of strategic goods out of the Philippines, or to
a transmission of software and technology by electronic media, including by fax,
telephone, electronic mail or any other electronic means to an ultimate destination
outside the Philippines. The term includes making available in electronic form
such software and technology to persons outside the Philippines. It also applies to
non-electronic reassignments of software or technology through face-to-face
communication, personal demonstration, or handing over material or information
to a foreign person wherever located;

j. Financing refers to making available or providing funds to facilitate the
movement/flow of (a) strategic goods and/or related service if this contributes to
WMD or their means of delivery; or, (b) military goods if destined for a destination
subject to a UN Security Council embargo or to prohibited/ restricted end- users;

k. Governmental End-Use Assurance refers to a formal security guarantee issued
by the STMO, in consultation with the NSC — STMCom, upon request of the
country of origin of the strategic items, certifying the end use of those goods in the
Philippines based on the International Import Certificate, End-Use Certificate, and
Delivery Verification Certificate submitted by the applicant;

|. Import refers to the shipment of strategic goods or transmission of software or
technology by any means from a foreign country into the Philippines;

m. Internal Compliance Program refers to an effective, appropriate, and
proportionate means and procedures, including the development, implementation,
and adherence to standardized operational compliance policies, procedures,
standards or conduct, and safeguards, developed by exporters to ensure
compliance with the provisions and with the terms and conditions of
authorizations set out in the STMA;

n. Juridical person refers to either: (a) a partnership, a cooperative, and a private
corporation, to which the law grants a juridical personality, separate and distinct
from that of each shareholder, partner, or member; or, (b) a government-owned
and -controlled corporation created by law that engages or intends to engage in
the trade of strategic goods or provision of related services;

0. Knowledge refers to awareness or cognizance that a circumstance exists or is
substantially certain to occur. It is also an awareness or cognizance of facts and
circumstances that would lead a reasonable person to believe its existence or
factual occurrence. It also refers to the willful disregard of facts known to a person
or willful avoidance of facts;

p. Military goods refer to items, software, and technology that are specifically
designed, developed, configured, adapted, or modified for military end-use. These
goods are listed as Annex 1 of the NSGL;

q. Military end-use refers to: (a) incorporation into “military goods” listed in the
NSGL; (b) use of production, test, or analytical equipment and its components for
the development, production, or maintenance of “military goods” listed in the
NSGL; and, (c) use of any unfinished products in a plant for the production of
“military goods” listed in the NSGL;

aa.

bb.

cc.

dd.

Nationally controlled goods refer to strategic goods placed under unilateral
controls for reasons of national security, foreign policy, anti-terrorism, crime
control, and public safety;

Orders for corrective action refers to an order to the authorization holder to make
necessary corrective measures to ensure compliance with the STMA;

Premises refer to any land, place or building, whether open or enclosed, and
whether built on or not, including any free trade zones within the territory of the
Philippines;

. Reassignment refers to the reallocation of strategic goods previously exported

from the Philippines from one person to another within a single foreign country by
any means, including the electronic transmission of software and technology;

Re-export refers to the export from a foreign country to another of strategic goods
previously exported from the Philippines;

. Registration refers to the act of entering the exporters, importers and brokers of

strategic goods and providers of services into the registry established by the
STMO;

Related services refer to brokering, financing, and transporting in relation to the
movement of strategic goods between two (2) foreign countries and providing
technical assistance;

Software refers to a collection of one or more programs or microprograms fixed in
any tangible medium of expression;

Strategic goods refer to products that, for security reasons or due to international
agreements, are considered to be of such military importance that their export is
either prohibited altogether or subject to specific conditions. Such goods are
generally suitable to be used for military purposes or for the production of WMD,
and for the purposes of the STMA, are goods listed in the NSGL under Annex 1
(Military Goods); Annex 2 (Dual Use Goods); Annex 3 (Nationally Controlled
Goods); and any unlisted goods as provided for in Section 11 of the STMA;

Technical assistance refers to any support provided in relation to strategic goods
such as repair, development, manufacture, assembly, testing, maintenance, or
any other technical service, and may take such forms as instruction, training,
transmission of working knowledge or skills, or consulting services. Technical
assistance can be provided by inter alia verbal, written, or electronic means;

Technology refers to specific information and processes necessary for the
development, production, or use of strategic goods, and may take such forms as
blueprints, plans, diagrams, models, formulae, tables, engineering designs and
specifications, manuals, and instructions writer. or recorded on other media or
devices such as disk, tape, read-only memories;

Transporting refers to the act of moving the strategic goods, agreeing to move
them, any supporting services being provided to the transport provider, and any
act calculated to promote their supply or delivery if this contributes to WMD, or
means of their delivery, or military goods if destined to an embargoed destination
subject to a UN Security Council embargo, or to prohibited/ restricted end-users;

Transit refers to shipment of strategic goods within the Philippines and those
entering and passing through the territory of the Philippines with an ultimate

destination outside the Philippines in such a manner that the strategic goods
remain at all times in or on the same carrier;

ee. Transshipment refers to a mode of shipping a good on a carrier which enters the
territory of the Philippines, wherein the good is unloaded from the carrier and
reloaded in the same or on another carrier that is bound for an ultimate
destination outside the Philippines;

ff. Unlisted goods refer to goods that are not in the NSGL and may be subject to an
authorization requirement under Section 11 of the STMA;

gg. Warning letter refers to a letter issued by the STMO that an apparent violation of
the STMA has occurred; and,

hh. WMD refers to any destructive device or weapon that is designed or intended to
cause death or serious bodily injury through the release, dissemination, or impact
of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or their precursors, any weapon involving a
biological agent, toxin, or vector, or any weapon that is designed to release
radiation or radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life. This includes, but not
limited to: (a) nuclear and radiological explosive devices and their major sub-
systems; (b) chemicals covered by Schedule |, II and III of the Chemical Weapons
Convention; and (c) biological agents and biologically derived substances
specifically developed, configured, adapted, or modified for the purpose of
increasing their capability to produce casualties in humans or livestock, degrade
equipment, or damage crops.

RULE II
IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE AND MECHANISM

Section 1. Central Authority. - A permanent committee under the National Security
Council (NSC), to be known as the National Security Council - Strategic Trade
Management Committee (NSC-STMCom), is hereby constituted and deemed the central
authority on any and all matters relating to strategic trade management with the following
composition: 1) the Executive Secretary, as Chairperson; 2) the Secretary of Trade and
Industry, as Vice Chairperson; and 3) the Secretary of Foreign Affairs; 4) the Secretary
of Justice; 5) the Secretary of National Defense; 6) the Secretary of the Interior and
Local Government; 7) the Secretary of Finance; 8) the Secretary of Transportation; 9)
the National Security Advisor; 10) the Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources;
11) the Secretary of Science and Technology; 12) the Secretary of Agriculture; and, 13)
the Secretary of Health, as Members. The Anti-Terrorism Council — Program
Management Center (ATC-PMC) shall serve as the Secretariat of the NSC-STMCom.

However, by virtue of Section 15 of Republic Act No. 10844, “An Act Creating the
Department of Information and Communications Technology, Defining its Powers and
Functions and Appropriating Funds therefor, and jor other Purposes,” the
communications part of the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC)
has been transferred to the Department of Information and Communications Technology
(DICT), and thus, renaming the former as the Department of Transportation (DOTr).
Accordingly, the Secretary of Information and Communications Technology is hereby
added as a member of the NSC-STMCom.

The members may designate a representative to the NSC-STMCom, who shall have a
rank not lower than an Undersecretary. Five (5) members of the NSC-STMCom shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

The NSC-STMCom shall be complemented by the following support agencies and
bureaus:

Armed Forces of the Philippines (DND-AFP)
Bureau of Animal Industry (DA-BAI)
Bureau of Customs (DOF-BOC)
Bureau of Quarantine (DOH-BOQ)
Environmental Management Bureau (DENR-EMB)
Food and Drug Administration (DOH-FDA)
National Bureau of Investigation (DOJ-NBI)
National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (OP-NICA)
Office for Transport Security (DOTr-OTS)
Office of the Special Envoy on Transnational Crime (OP-OSETC)
Philippine Center on Transnational Crime (OP-PCTC)
Philippine Coast Guard (DOTr-PCG)

. Presidential Legislative Liaison Office (OP-PLLO)
Philippine National Police (DILG-PNP)
Philippine Nuclear Research Institute (DOST-PNRI)
Such other offices, agencies or units as necessary.

POSsRZc>ATTsFa>9a0T7m

Section 2. Powers and Functions of the NSC-STMCom. — As the central authority
focused on the country’s international commitment towards the promotion of a secure
and safe environment for the trade in strategic goods consistent with the objectives of
the STMA, the NSC-STMCom shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Formulate and adopt strategies, policies, and guidelines for the effective
implementation of the STMA;

b. Establish, publish, review, and update the NSGL;

c. Develop a standard end-users’ certification;

d. Monitor and evaluate the implementation of plans, programs, and activities of the
STMO;

e. Review and decide appeals on decisions made by the STMO;

Establish exemptions from an authorization requirement as provided for in

Section 15 of STMA, and taking into consideration national security, foreign

policy, and law enforcement concerns. These exemptions shall be published,

reviewed, and updated;

g. Create working groups on specific issues by enlisting the assistance and support
of government agencies, the academe, as well as private institutions, or persons
to carry out its functions;

h. Establish and maintain coordination, cooperation, assistance, and information
sharing with government agencies in the implementation of the STMA;

i. Establish and maintain coordination, cooperation, assistance, and information
sharing with other nations in the regulation of strategic goods; and,

j. Perform such other tasks and functions it may deem necessary to effectively carry out the provisions of the Act.

a

Section 3. Executive and Technical Arm. — The Strategic Trade Management Office
(STMO) is hereby created as a bureau under the administrative supervision of the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) to serve as the executive and technical agency
of the national government for the establishment of the management systems for the
trade in strategic goods pursuant to STMA. The STMO shall be headed by a Director
who shall be responsible for the pursuit of the office mandate, the discharge of its duties
and functions and the exercise of supervision and control over the STMO and its
constituent units. The STMO, through the Secretary of Trade and Industry, shall submit
periodic updates to NSC-STMCom.

The organizational structure and staffing pattern of the STMO shall be formulated by the
DTI Secretary in coordination with the NSC-STMCom, subject to the approval by the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) in accordance with Executive Order No.
292 (Administrative Code of 1987).

Section 4. Powers and Functions of the STMO. — The STMO shall have the following
powers and functions:

a. Implement strategies, policies, and guidelines formulated by the NSC-STMCom
and develop, evaluate, and monitor corresponding programs and activities;

b. Develop and maintain the register and carry out registration activities to include
registration, registration with conditions, denial of registration, modification,
suspension, revocation, or annulment of registration;

c. Establish and maintain a comprehensive database information system on
strategic goods and on persons engaged in the trade of strategic goods and the
provision of related services;

d. Issue or deny issuance of authorizations for the trade of strategic goods and the
provision of related services;

e. Modify, condition, limit, suspend, revoke, or annul authorizations that have been
issued as circumstances warrant in consultation with NSC-STMCom;

f. Issue, modify, suspend, and revoke governmental! end-use assurances in
consultation with the NSC-STMCom;

g. Ensure and operate end-use/ end-user controls and establish compliance checks
and exercise authority to enter premises for such purposes;

h. Issue warning letters and orders for corrective action;

i. Conduct investigation into violations committed under STMA;

j. Undertake the enforcement of the provisions of the STMA in cooperation with
other agencies;

k. Coordinate, cooperate, provide assistance, and share information with ATC and
other Departments/ Agencies;

|. Conduct capacity building and training of personnel for the effective
implementation of the STMA;

m. Coordinate with the industry and the public regarding their obligations under the
STMA;

n. Encourage and facilitate international cooperation, including the exchange of
assistance such as information on matters regarding the implementation and
application of the STMA or its IRR; and,

o. Perform such other tasks and functions necessary to effectively carry out the
provisions of the STMA.

RULE Ill
REGISTRATION

Section 1. Registration. — Any person who engages or intends to engage in the
export, import, and re-export of strategic goods or provides related services shall
register directly with the STMO prior to applying for an authorization or a governmental
end-use assurance.

Section 2. Requirements for Registration. — In order for a natural or juridical person to
be registered, a standard format application shall be submitted to the STMO. The
application shall be signed by the applicant or an authorized representative. Information
which does not fit in the data fields of an application form may be provided on one or
several additional sheets of paper signed by the same person/s who sign/s the
application. The application form for registration shall be. in the manner and form as
prescribed by the STMO. Further, the STMO shall require the applicant to provide other
documentary requirements relevant to their application for registration. Applications and
any materials attached to an application must be submitted in English.

Section 3. Review of Applications and Grounds for Refusal. - The STMO shall be
responsible for maintaining the Register and carrying out registration activities.

The STMO may refuse to enter a person into the Register in connection with the
application for registration based on the following reasons:

a. If the applicant falsely represents or conceals any material fact or submits
misleading information, including the submission of forged documents;

b. In the past five years, the applicant has been held responsible for violating an
international embargo or sanction binding on the Philippines;

c. National security related civil or criminal proceedings have commenced against
the applicant; and,

d. Any other national security concerns that may exist.

The STMO may refer the application for an advisory opinion to any government agency,
as needed.

The STMO shall review an application and make a corresponding decision within thirty
(30) calendar days from the date the application was accepted for processing.

If the STMO requires additional information to make a decision, or if the submitted
information requires additional verification, the STMO shail have the right to extend the
term of review of the application for an additional thirty (30) calendar days. In case of
extension, the STMO shall notify the applicant within two (2) calendar days from the time
the decision to extend the term of review is made. If the applicant fails to complete the
requested information and requirements, the STMO can send a follow-up letter
specifying the deadline for the submission of the required information or document
before closing down the application.

Upon approving the application, the STMO shall enter the juridical or natural person into
the Register and issue the registration certificate to the applicant.

After the STMO renders a decision to register the applicant, a paper or electronic
Register entry certificate shall be issued by the STMO bearing the registration number,
date of registration, and other relevant information. The applicant shall provide the
registration number when submitting an authorization application or in any other
communication with the STMO.

Section 4. Amendment of Register Entry. — In order to amend a Register entry, a written
application shall be submitted to the STMO. The STMO may request additional
documents, if necessary.

The STMO may refuse to amend a register entry on the grounds specified in Section 3 (b), Rule Ill.

Section 5. Revocation of the Register Entry. A registration entry may be revoked by the STMO on the following grounds:

a. At the request of the person entered into the Register;

b. If the person entered in the register has not applied for any authorization from the
STMO within two (2) years from its issuance;

c. If new facts emerge which would have resulted in a cenial to enter the person into
the Register at the time of application;

d. If the person entered into the Register is heid responsible for violating any legal
provisions related to national security;

e. If the person entered into the Register is held responsible for violating an
international sanction or embargo binding on the Philippines;

f. The natural person who is entered into the Register dies;

g. The juridical person who is entered into the Register is dissolved;

h. By order of a competent court; and,

i. Any other national security, foreign policy, counter-terrorism, crime control, or
public safety related concerns.

RULE IV
AUTHORIZATIONS AND GOVERNMENTAL END-USE ASSURANCES

Section 1. Application for Authorization and Governmental End-Use Assurances. —Any
person, prior to engaging in the export, import, transit, transshipment, re-export, and
reassignment of strategic goods, or the provision of technical assistance or related
services shall apply for authorization from the STMO.

In order to obtain an individual authorization, global authorization, or a governmental
end-use assurance, a person shall submit a standard format application, including
documents meeting the relevant requirements, to STMO on paper or electronically. The
application shall be signed personally by the applicant, be it a natural person or a duly
authorized legal representative of a juridical person. Applications in electronic form shall
be accompanied by a digital signature, in accordance with applicable laws and rules and
regulations. Information which does not fit in the data fields of an application form may
be provided on one or several additional sheets of paper signed by the same person/s
who sign/s the application. Applications and any materials attached to an application
must be submitted in English.

The application forms and the format of the authorizations and end-use documents shall
be provided by the STMO.

An applicant, or its duly authorized legal representative, must include in the application a
written statement that the applicant will immediately inform the STMO if he or she
becomes aware of information concerning the use of the goods, in whole or in part, for
the development, production, use, maintenance, stockpiling, detection, identification, or
dissemination of weapons of mass destruction, means of their delivery, for military
purposes in an embargoed destination, or for purposes of endangering national security.

A person intending to obtain a governmental end-use assurance shall confirm in the
corresponding application that he will comply with the terms and conditions specified in
the document. In addition to the governmental end-use assurances contained in the
document, the STMO may add other terms and conditions in order to meet the
requirements of the exporting country and protect the national security interests of
Philippines.

The STMO may require among others establishment of an Internal Compliance Program
as a precondition for the issuance of a global authorization, on a case-by-case basis.

After the export, transit, transshipment, re-export, or reassignment of goods, the STMO
may require the authorization holder to submit a delivery verification certificate issued by
the appropriate authorities of the destination country or any form of document to show
proof of delivery to the end-user.

Section 2. Additional Application Requirements. — The following documents shall be
appended to the application for authorization:

a. Export or re-export authorization application:

1) Technical specifications, allowing the STMO to classify the commodity against
the control list;

2) Documents certifying the origin and acquisition of the strategic goods, when
appropriate;

3) Copies of relevant commercial documents, in particular, any sales contract,
order confirmation, invoice, or dispatch note, if available;
4) Original End-Use Statement or End-User Certificate, for individual
authorizations;
5) Copy/ies of relevant license/s or business permits, if applicable;
6) Copies of additional authorizations such as transit and/or import
authorizations, if applicable;
(a) Technology Control Plan, in case of technology transfer;
(b) Network Security Plan, in case of intangible software transmission; and,
7) Proof of payment of the processing fee.

. Reassignment authorization application:

1) Copy/ies of relevant commercial documents, in particular, any sales contract,
order confirmation, invoice, or dispatch note, if available;

2) Original End-Use Statement or End-User Certificate;

3) Copy/ies of relevant license/s or business permits, if applicable; and,

4) Proof of payment of the processing fee.

. Transit, transshipment, or transportation authorization application:

1) Technical specifications, allowing the STMO to classify the commodity against

the control list;

Copy/ies of relevant commercial documents, in particular, any sales contract,

order confirmation, invoice, or dispatch note, if available;

3) Copy/ies of the End-Use documents;

4) Copy/ies of authorizations from exporting country and importing country, if
applicable;

5) Copy/ies of transit authorization from the next country in the shipment route, if
applicable;

6) Copy/ies of authorization to transport dangerous or hazardous items, if
applicable; and,

7) Proof of payment of the processing fee.

Se LYS

. Brokering authorization application:

Note: Availability of supplementary documentation is dependent on the role of the
broker in the transaction, and in which phase the broker is involved to arrange the
transaction (e.g. negotiating contract, arranging the shipment after the conclusion
of the contract).

1) Technical specifications, allowing the STMO to classify the commodity against
the control list, if available;

2) Copy/ies of relevant commercial documents, in particular, any sales contract,
order confirmation, invoice, or dispatch note, if available;

3) Copy/ies of the End-Use documents, if available;

4) Copy/ies of authorizations from exporting, importing, and transiting country, if
applicable;

5) Copy/ies of transit authorization form the next country in the shipment route, if
applicable; and,

6) Proof of payment of the processing fee.

. Import authorization application:

1) Technical specifications, allowing the STMO to classify the commodity against
the control list;
2) Copy/ies of relevant commercial documents, in particular, any sales contract,
order confirmation, invoice, or dispatch note, if available;

3) Copy/ies of export control license if the goods come from a country with export
control laws;

4) Copy/ies of relevant license/s or business permits, if applicable; and,

5) Proof of payment of the processing fee.

f. Technical assistance authorization application:

1) Copy/ies of relevant commercial documents, in particular, any contract, order
confirmation, or invoice, if available;

2) Original End-Use Certificate;

3) Copy/ies of relevant license/s or business permits, if applicable; and,

4) Proof of payment of the processing fee.

g. Financing authorization application:

1) Copy/ies of relevant commercial documenis, in particular, any contract;
2) Copy/ies of the End Use documents, if availadie; and,
3) Proof of payment of the processing fee.

The STMO may request additional documents or information from the applicant or the applicant may submit other documents which may be relevant to review and assess the application for authorization.

Documents submitted by electronic means shall be in the Portable Document File (PDF)
format or other formats where information cannot be tampered. The STMO shall
subsequently require the submission of the original document on paper in order to verify
the authenticity of the documents.

At the request of the STMO, a certified copy or an origina! document shall be submitted
on paper. Only an original end-use control document issued by the relevant authority of
a foreign state and a confirmation by the end-user shall be submitted.

Section 3. Application Procedures. — After receipt of an application, the STMO shall
conduct an initial screening for completeness of the documentary requirements within
seven (7) calendar days following the date of submission of the properly completed
application form with all supplementary documentation/s.

If the application is incomplete or inaccurate, the STMO shall, within seven (7) calendar
days, inform the applicant and request for the submission of complete or correct
information and/or documents.

If the applicant fails to act in accordance with the request cf the STMO within fourteen
(14) calendar days, the application shall be returned without action.

If the applicant submits an application for the transaction, which is not subject to an
authorization requirement, the STMO shall advise accordingly.

Section 4. Review of Applications. — After receipt of the complete document/s or
information, the STMO shall review the application for authorization taking into
consideration the sensitivity of the goods, end-use, end-user, and the reliability of each
party to the transaction. In reviewing the application, the STMO may consider any
pertinent information available to it.

Upon acceptance of the application, the STMO must determine, whether there is any
additional end-use and end-user information that is needed to review and assess the
application. The STMO will then promptly request such information from the applicant,
other government agencies, or subject matter experts. The time that elapses between
the date the information is requested by the STMO and the date such information is

received will not be counted in the processing timeframe. If the STMO needs additional
information for making a decision, or if the submitted iformation needs additional
verification, the applicant will be informed immediately.

The STMO will provide a recommendation concerning the application within thirty (30)
calendar days for individual authorizations and ninety (90) calendar days for global
authorizations.

Prior to denial of an application, the applicant shall be initially informed by the STMO
through a letter specifying the reasons for the denial thereof. The period to decide shall
be suspended until the requested information is received by the STMO.

Should the application be denied, the denial must state the reasons thereof in
accordance with the provisions of the STMA, its IRR, and/ or the NSC-STMCom policies
and guidelines.

The STMO may seek transaction-specific policy guidance from the NSC-STMCom.

Section 5. /ssuance of Authorizations and Governmental End-Use Assurances. — An
authorization shall be issued when an application is approved by the STMO. An
authorization permits only a specific transaction, or series of transactions, as described
in the application and any supporting documents. An application may be approved in
whole or in part, or limited by conditions, or other restrictions appearing in the
authorization itself.

After an authorization or governmental end-use assurance application is approved, a
paper and/or electronic authorization shall be issued by the STMO bearing the
authorization number, validation date, expiration date, and other relevant information.
When necessary, attachments to an authorization will also be validated with the STMO
seal and the date of validation.

A holder of the authorization/end-use control document must use the designated
authorization/end-use control document number when preparing customs and relevant
documents, and in communicating with the STMO.

An authorization or governmental end-use assurance shall be sent to the applicant by
registered mail or electronically.

The STMO shall provide a copy to the BOC and other relevant government agencies
upon issuance of authorizations and governmental end-use assurances.

Section 6. Grounds for Refusal to Issue an Authorization or Governmental End-Use
Assurance. — The STMO shall refuse to issue an authorization or governmental end-use
assurance on the following grounds:

a. The applicant does not fulfill the conditions or requirements established by the
STMA or its IRR;

b. The strategic goods exported, transited, transshipped, re-exported, reassigned,
or related services provided are in breach of UN Security Council sanctions or
embargoes;

c. The proposed export, import, transit, transshipment, re-export, reassignment, or
provision of related services will impede the fulfillment of other Philippine
international commitments or obligations;

d. There is credible information that the strategic goods or related services will
endanger national or international security, regional stability, or contribute to
terrorist acts; and,

e. There is credible information or risk that the proposed transaction will result in the
diversion of strategic goods to an unauthorized end-user or end-use.

In deciding whether or not to grant the authorization, the STMO shall take into account
all relevant considerations including the following: :

a. The national security or foreign policy interests of the Philippines, in particular,

respect for international obligations and commitments under the UN Security

Council sanctions, or relevant international treaties and non-proliferation

agreements;

Preservation of regional peace, security, and stability;

Internal tensions or armed conflict in the destination country;

The human rights and international humanitarian law;

Terrorism or organized criminal activities;

Security interests of a country which is an ally to the Philippines;

Risk of illegal end-use or by a restricted party;

Risk of diversion to an unauthorized end-user or end-use;

Technical capacity of the recipient country;

The applicant submitted false documents, made misleading representations, or

concealed material facts in the application or appended materials;

In the past five years, the applicant has violated the STMA or its IRR, or any other

legal provisions related to state security;

In the past five years, the applicant has violated an international embargo or

sanction binding on the Philippines;

m. Criminal or civil proceedings related to national security have commenced against
the applicant;

n. The goods for which the authorization is requested are under a_ police
investigation procedure or court proceedings; and,

o. Other relevant national security or foreign policy reasons.

“rampage

x

Section 7. Validity of Authorizations and Governmental End-Use Assurances. — An
individual authorization for export, import, re-export, or re-assignment of strategic goods
or for the provision of related services shall be valid for a maximum period of two (2)
years.

An individual authorization for transit or transshipment. shall be valid for a maximum
period of six (6) months.

A global authorization shall be valid for a maximum period of five (5) years.

The governmental end-use assurances issued by the STMO must be presented to the
appropriate authorities within six (6) months.

Section 8. Extension of an Authorization. — In order to extend the term of an
authorization, the authorization holder shall provide the original copy of the authorization
and a written application to the STMO not later than fifteen (15) calendar days before the
expiration of the authorization.

The STMO shall make a decision on the application taking into consideration the
circumstances as specified in Section 6, Rule IV.

If the extension is approved, the STMO shall issue a new authorization with validity
terms established in Section 7, Rule IV and send the same to the applicant either by
registered mail or electronically. :

Control over end-use of the imported strategic goods is exercised by the relevant
agencies on the basis of end-use control documents. If enforcement agencies discover
any violations relating to strategic goods, they shall notify the STMO immediately.

Section 9. Annulment, Revocation, Limitation, or Modification of an Authorization. — An
authorization may be annulled by the STMO if it was obtained under false pretenses,

misleading representation, or concealment of materia! facts. In such a case, the
authorization is null and void and any activity thereunder is deemed illegal.

An authorization may be revoked by the STMO, if:

a. The authorization holder requests its termination;

b. New facts emerge which, had they been known or existed at the time of the
application, would have resulted in its denial;

c. A substantive change to the information in the authorization occurs;

d. The authorization holder fails to comply with the obligations, terms, or conditions
of the authorization;

e. The authorization holder is held responsible for violating the STMA, its IRR, or

other national security-related legal provisions;

The authorization holder fails to comply with request of the STMO for additional

information about the activities conducted under the authorization;

The authorization is destroyed or lost;

The natural person who is the authorization holder dies;

The juridical person who is the authorization holder is dissolved;

International sanctions are introduced or amended on a specific country; and,

The STMO becomes aware of violations of other national security-related

concerns.

ral

aT Te

An authorization may be limited by the STMO pursuant to paragraph b of this section.

The STMO shall immediately notify the BOC and other relevant government agencies of
the annulment, revocation, or limitation of an authorization.

An authorization may be modified by the STMO, in case of a change in the destination or
end-user or for other reasons.

The STMO shall notify the authorization holder in writing, within five (5) calendar days, of
the annulment, revocation, limitation, or modification of an authorization.

Section 10. Revocation of Governmental End-Use Assurance. — A governmental end-
use assurance issued by the STMO can be revoked only to the extent that the strategic
goods covered by the end-use documents have not been imported into the Philippines.

The STMO shall be responsible for informing the competent authority of the
exporting country in case of:

a. Revocation of the governmental end-use assurance; or,

b. Substantial change to the end-use occurs regarding strategic goods imported
into the Philippines on the basis of a governmenta! end-use assurance issued
by the STMO.

Section 11. Suspension of an Authorization. — Authorizations may be suspended under the following circumstances:

a. When the authorization holder has received a warning letter identifying failure to
comply with a request for corrective action. Failure to comply with the warning
letter may result in authorization being suspended until the authorization holder
can show compliance to the satisfaction of the STMO.

b. In case of information that the export, import, transit, transshipment, re-export,
reassignment, or provision of related services is or will be conducted in
contravention of existing authorization conditions, the STMO may order to stop a
shipment of strategic goods or provision of related services at any stage in the
process in order to verify its legality. If a shipment is already en route, the STMO
is authorized to order the return or unloading of such shipment at any port of call.

c. When the strategic goods are destined to countries experiencing a sharp
deterioration in security or stability.

In the event that the authorization is suspended, the authorization holder will be notified
in writing, within five (5) calendar days of the fact of suspension and the initial period of
suspension.

Where at the end of the initial period, the grounds for suspension still stand, the period of
suspension may be extended. The authorization holder shall be notified of such an
extension in writing.

The suspension shall be lifted where the STMO considers it appropriate to do so.

In case of suspension of an authorization, the STMO shaii immediately notify the BOC
and other relevant agencies of such suspension.

Section 12. Notice to Limit, Suspend, Revoke or Annul Authorization or Governmental
End-Use Assurance. — The STMO shall notify the authorization or governmental end-use
assurance holder in writing, within five (5) calendar days, of the decision to limit,
suspend, revoke, or annul such document and the reasons thereof.

Section 13. Return of an Authorization or Governmental End-Use Assurance. — The
authorization holder shall return the authorization to the STMO within five (5) calendar
days under the following circumstances:

a. After official notification of the revocation, annulment, or suspension of the
authorization, unless the authorization is destroyed or lost. In case the
authorization is lost or destroyed, the authorization holder shall execute an
affidavit of loss in lieu of the authorization. However, if the authorization is
subsequently found, it shall be returned immediately.

b. The authorization holder decides not to use the authorization.

If the authorization expires without being used.

If a governmental end-use assurance is not submitted to the appropriate foreign

authorities within 6 months from issuance or when the goods are not imported

into the Philippines.

a9

Section 14. Use of the Authorization. — |n order to export strategic goods, a person shall
submit a copy of the authorization to the BOC and to any other relevant authorities. The
customs declaration shall include a reference to the use of the relevant authorization,
including a general authorization, as appropriate.

In order to import strategic goods, a person shall submit a copy of the authorization to
the BOC in the course of customs formalities upon entry inte the national territory and to
any other relevant authorities for the release of goods from Customs supervision. The
customs declaration shall include a reference to the use of the relevant authorization, as
appropriate.

In order to transit or transship strategic goods, a person shall submit a copy of the
authorization to the BOC before the shipment exits the port of entry. The customs
declaration shall include a reference to the use of the relevant authorization, as
appropriate.

A provider of related services shall submit a copy of the authorization to the relevant
supervisory agency, upon the request of that agency.

A person that transfers technology electronically shall submit an authorization to the
relevant supervisory agency, upon the request of that agency.

Section 15. Description Requirement. — The relevant commercial documents relating to
export, re-export, import, transit, or transshipment of strategic goods shall clearly
indicate that those goods are strategic and subject to controls; relevant commercial
documents include, in particular, any sales contract, order confirmation, invoice, or
dispatch note.

Section 16. Authorization Form. — The authorization forms shall be annexed in the
Registration and Authorization Manual to be issued by the STMO.

Section 17. Exemption from Authorization Requirement. — An authorization is not
required under the following circumstances:

a. Import of strategic goods by the government for the use of the Philippine military
or police forces;

b. Temporary export of strategic goods by the government for the use of the
Philippine military or police forces assigned outside of Philippine jurisdiction;

c. Export, transit, and transshipment of strategic goods which are provided in
connection with a military, peacekeeping, or government humanitarian mission;

d. Export, import, transit, and transshipment of strategic goods by the government in
connection with law enforcement activities; and,

e. Any other circumstances as provided by the NSC-STMCom pursuant to Section
2(f), Rule Il.

Section 18. Control Over End-Use of Strategic Goods in the Philippines Under
Governmental End-Use Assurances. — The STMO, in consultation with the NSC-
STMCom as may be necessary, is authorized to certify the end-use of strategic goods in
the Philippines based on the International Import Certificate, End-Use Certificate and
Delivery Verification Certificate.

The STMO, within the limits of its competence on ihe basis of end-use licensing
documents, shall exercise the function of certification cf the end-use of strategic goods.
In addition to the standard end-use certification assurances contained in the end- use
documents, the STMO, in consultation with the NSC- STMCom, may add other terms
and conditions in order to meet the requirements of the exporting country of the goods
and the security interest of the Philippines.

The STMO shall be responsible for informing the competent authority of the end-use
country and all countries through which the goods will be transshipped or transited. In
fulfilling this responsibility, the STMO may request additional documents such as
declarations of the shippers or refer to other relevant information obtained in the course
of performing their functions under this Act.

The application, issuance, modification, suspension, or revocation procedures of end-
use certification documentation shall be in accordance with the IRR and in consultation
with the NSC-STMCom as may be necessary.

Section 19. Liability Limitation. — If the STMO denies, suspends, limits, revokes or
annuls an authorization or registration, it shall not be liable for damages that may be
caused by such acts.

Section 20. Confidentiality of Business Proprietary Information. — Any information
obtained under the STMA and its IRR that are marked as confidential business
information shall not be disclosed to any other party except in the furtherance of justice
and law enforcement, national security, or foreign policy interest, as determined by the
STMO, unless the party providing such information has consented to its disclosure.

RULE V
RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS IN STRATEGIC TRADE TRANSACTIONS

Section 1. Securing an Authorization. — It shall be the responsibility of any person,
subject to the STMA, who intends to engage in the export, import, transit, and
transshipment of strategic goods, under the NSGL, or the provision of related services to
obtain an authorization from the STMO as provided in the STMA and as prescribed
herein. In addition, any person who intends to engage in the re-export or reassignment
of strategic goods is required to obtain an authorization when this has been made a
condition for the authorization of the exports from the Philippines.

Section 2. Placing Strategic Goods on Carriers. — No person shall be allowed to place
any strategic goods in or on any carrier located within the territorial and economic
jurisdiction of the Philippines without the consent of the owner or operator of the carrier.
Such owners and operators shall be prohibited from allowing the placement of strategic
goods in or on any carrier unless the person presents an authorization issued by the
STMO to export, import, transit or transship strategic goods.

Section 3. Recordkeeping Requirements for the Authorization Holder. — All persons
engaged in the business involving strategic goods are required to keep at their principal
place of business in a secure manner, the details of which will be provided in a guideline
to be formulated by the STMO, for a period of ten (10) years from the date of completion
of the transaction, all records, in both hard copy and electronic copy, of the transaction
and/or books of accounts, business and computer systems and all commercial and
technical data related to the transaction including:

a. The description of the strategic goods or related services;

b. The quantity and the value of the strategic goods or value of the related service
provided;

c. The name and address of the parties in the transaction or activity;

d. The end-use and end-user of the strategic goods or related services; and,

e. The date of the transaction or activity.

Section 4. Submission of Documents. — The customs broker or any authorized agent of
any entity engaged in the trade of strategic goods shall submit to the BOC, a copy of the
authorization and a copy of the extract of the manifest of the carrier, in or on which the
strategic goods were loaded prior to its departure or arrival.

Section 5. End-Use Controls. — End-use controls may be imposed on strategic goods
that are not listed in the NSGL and related services, and shall apply as follows:

a. An_ individual authorization shall be required for the export, re-export,
reassignment, transit and transshipment of unlisted goods, or the provision of
technical assistance or related services if the exporter or principal party has been
informed by the Strategic Trade Management Office (STMO) that the goods or
services are or may be used, partly or entirely, in corinection with the acquisition,
development, production, handling, operation, maintenance, storage, detection,
identification or dissemination of WMDs or their means of delivery;

b. An individual authorization shall also be required for the export, re-export,
reassignment, transit and transshipment of unlisted goods, or the provision of
technical assistance or related services if the purchasing country or country of
destination or juridical or natural person receiving the goods is subject to an
international sanction or an arms embargo imposed by a binding resolution of the
UN Security Council and if the exporter or principal party has been informed by
the STMO in close consultation with the NSC-STMCom that the goods in question
are or may be used, partly or entirely, for a military end-use;

c. An individual authorization shall also be required for the export of unlisted goods,
or the provision of related services if the exporter has been informed by the
STMO that the goods in question are or may be used, partly or entirely, as parts
or components of military items listed in the NSGL, that have been exported from
the territory of the Philippines without authorization or in violation of an
authorization; and

d. If an exporter or principal party has knowledge or has grounds for suspecting that
unlisted goods proposed for export are or may be used, partly or entirely, for any
of the uses referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b), or for suspecting that the
provision of related services will facilitate that use, the exporter or principal party
must notify the STMO. The STMO shall decide whether or not such goods are
subject to an authorization.

RULE VI
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY GUIDELINES

Section 1. Administrative Penalties. — The STMO shall impose on any person found to
have committed violations under the STMA the following administrative penalties:

a. Limitation, revocation, or annulment of any authorization and/or registration;

b. Imposition of fines of up to two hundred fifty thousand pesos (P250,000.00) or
twice the value of the strategic good or related service under the contract, or as
assessed by the STMO; and,

c. Upon request by the Securities and Exchange Commission and/or the
Department of Trade and Industry or any other relevant agencies, order the
cancellation or suspension of the registration and authorization to operate of the
partnership, corporation, association, and other juridical entity.

The imposition of the penalty shall be without prejudice to the filing of appropriate
criminal charges against the persons responsible for the violation.

Section 2. Warning Letter and Orders for Corrective Action. — In the exercise of its
discretion, the STMO may determine in certain instances that issuing a warning letter,
instead of filing an administrative or criminal complaint, will achieve the desired result.

A warning letter shall fully explain the apparent violation of the STMA or its IRR.

The STMO may issue a warning letter for an apparent violation of a technical nature,
provided there are efforts to comply with the law in good faith and cooperate with the
investigation, or where the investigation commenced as a result of voluntary self-
disclosure.

The authorization holder shall be given ten (10) caiendar days from receipt of the
warning letter within which to file his comments.

In the following instances, the STMO shall issue an order for corrective action:

a. Failure to file a comment within the prescribed period: or,
b. The comment was found unsatisfactory by the STMO.

Section 3. Limitation, Revocation, or Annulment of Authorization and/or Registration. —
The STMO shall issue an order limiting, revoking, or annulling authorization or
registration under Rule IV.

Section 4. Suspension of Administrative Penalty Order. — In exceptional circumstances,
the STMO shall suspend an administrative penalty order to limit, revoke, or annul

authorizations and/or registration after the finality of the administrative appeals. The
period of suspension shall be determined by the NSC-STMCom.

Section 5. Fines. - The STMO shall assess a fine for each violation of the STMA and its
IRR taking into account the circumstances provided under Section 6, Rule VI.

Section 6. Attendant Circumstances. — In determining the appropriate administrative
penalties to apply, the STMO may consider the following or other similar circumstances:

a. The person made a voluntary disclosure of any violation of the STMA or its IRR;

b. Level of compliance with the documentary requirements of, and/or responsibilities
imposed by the STMA or its IRR;

c. Prior violations of the STMA;

d. Quantity and/or value of the transaction; and,

e. Potential harm to the Philippines’ national security or foreign policy interest.

RULE VII
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS

Section 1. Who May File an Administrative Appeal. — Any person whose registration or
authorization has been denied, suspended, modified, limited, revoked, or annulled, and
any person upon whom administrative penalties have been imposed shall have the right
to appeal.

Section 2. Filing and Content of Administrative Appeals. — The aggrieved applicant or
the authorization holder may file a motion for reconsideration within fifteen (15) calendar
days from receipt of the decision from the STMO.

A decision or order of the STMO denying the motion for reconsideration may be
appealed administratively to the NSC-STMCom within fifteen (15) calendar days from
receipt of said decision or order.

Within the period for filing an appeal, a filing fee shall be paid by the aggrieved applicant
or authorization holder in the amount to be determined by the NSC-STMCom.

The administrative appeal is taken by filing a position paper with the Secretariat of the
NSC-STMCom within fifteen (15) calendar days from receipt of the decision of the
STMO denying the aggrieved applicant's or authorization holder's motion for
reconsideration.

Within five (5) calendar days from receipt of the position paper, the NSC-STMCom,
through the Secretariat, shall request the STMO to forward the records of the case to the
NSC-STMCom. STMO shall forward the records of the case within fifteen (15) calendar
days.

The administrative appeal shall be considered as filed and perfected, upon receipt by the
Secretariat of the position paper of the aggrieved appiicant or authorization holder and
proof of payment of the filing fee.

Section 3. Review of Appeals. — To assist the NSC-STMCom in deciding an appeal, an
ad hoc committee shall be created by the NSC-STMCom Chairperson to review the
appeal. The members of the ad hoc committee shall be composed of three (3) or five (5)
designated representatives from member and support agencies. The ad hoc committee
shall make a recommendation on whether to uphold, reverse or modify the decision of
the STMO, stating the reasons therefor. Said recommendations shall then be submitted
to the NSC-STMCom for its consideration.

The ad hoc committee’s recommendation shall be based on the aggrieved applicant's or
authorization holder's position paper, the records of the case from the STMO, and if
necessary, expert opinion as may be requested by the ad hoc committee.

The ad hoc committee shall submit its recommendation to the NSC-STMCom within
thirty (30) calendar days.

Section 4. Decisions. - The ad hoc committee’s recommendation shall be deemed
adopted after approval by a majority of the members of the NSC-STMCom.

The NSC-STMCom may reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the STMO. The
Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson shall sign the decision of the NSC-STMCom.

The decision of the NSC-STMCom shall be final and executory, without prejudice to
judicial appeal.

RULE VIII
LIABILITIES, VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND SANCTIONS

Section 1. Unlawful Act and Penalties. — Any person who willfully and intentionally
engages in any of the following activities shall be imprisoned for a period of six (6) years
and one (1) day to twelve (12) years imprisonment, and a fine of one million pesos
(P1,000,000.00) to five million pesos (P5,000,000.00):

a. To engage in any of the regulated activity prohibited by, or in contravention of the
STMA and its IRR, including: failure to register; acts without an authorization; or
acts in breach of the conditions and terms of an authorization or governmental
end-use assurances;

b. To make false or misleading representations or conceal any material fact,
including in the submission of any document, to the NSC-STMCom, the STMO, or
any other Philippine government agency;

c. To engage in any activity prohibited by, or in contravention of, any orders or
regulations issued by the NSC-STMCom to implement the provisions of the
STMA;

d. To conspire or act in concert with one or more persons in any manner or for any
purpose to bring about or to do any act that constitutes a violation of the STMA, or
any order, regulation, or authorization issued thereunder;

e. To forge or alter any authorization, registration, certificate or any or other
document issued under the provisions of the STMA;

f. To obstruct or hinder the NSC-STMCom or any government agency in the
execution of its powers conferred under the STMA; or,

g. To induce a violation of the STMA or any order, regulation, or authorization issued
thereunder.

Any person found guilty of committing any of the following shall be imprisoned for a
period of six (6) months and one (1) day to six (6) years imprisonment, and a fine of one
hundred thousand pesos (P 100,000.00) to one million pesos (P1,000,000.00):

a. To fail to report or notify the STMO as required by the STMA;

b. To fail to comply with record keeping requirements as provided in the STMA; or,

c. To engage in any activity with intent to evade the provisions of the STMA, or any
order, regulation, or authorization issued thereunder.

Section 2. Attempt to Commit Violations of the STMA. — Any attempt to commit any
crime under Section 19(a) of the STMA shall be penalized by imprisonment for a period
from six (6) months and one (1) day to six (6) years, and a fine from one hundred
thousand pesos (P100,000.00) to one million pesos (P1,000,000.00).

Section 3. Investigation. — If in the course of conducting an investigation for violations
committed under the STMA, the STMO comes across evidence of possible criminal
violations, it shall refer the matter and turn over all available evidence to the following
agencies:

a. BOC on matters involving violations of import and export provisions of the STMA
as well as the Tariff and Customs Code;

b. PCG on matters involving violations that pertain to physical or outright smuggling
on border security; or,

c. PNP/ NBI on acts involving violations outside the jurisdiction of the BOC and
PCG.

After a finding that a prima facie case exists, the aforementioned agencies shall refer
such case to the Department of Justice (DOJ) for preliminary investigation.

Appropriate forfeiture proceedings for materials and goods confiscated shall be filed in
accordance with existing laws, rules, and regulations.

Section 4. Criminal Liability of Officers of Partnerships, Corporations, and Other
Juridical Entities. — In case any of the violations of the STMA is committed by a
partnership, corporation, association, or any other juridical! persons, the partner,
president, director, manager, trustee, administrator, or officer who willfully and
intentionally consents to, or tolerates such violation shall be held criminally liable as co-
principal. The penalty provided for the offense shall be imposed upon the responsible
officers who participated in the commission of the crime or who have willfully and
intentionally permitted its commission.

Section 5. Administrative Liability of Government Officials and Employees. — Any
government official or employee who commits, or facilitates the commission of, any
violation of the STMA shall be administratively liable under Civil Service rules, without
prejudice to criminal liability under the STMA. The concerned government official or
employee shall, upon conviction, be dismissed from the service.

Section 6. Additional Penalty if Offender is an Alien/ Foreign National. — \n addition to
the penalties prescribed in the STMA, any alien/foreign national who violates any
provision of the STMA shall, after service of sentence, be deported immediately without
further proceedings, and be barred permanently from entering the country.

Section 7. Forfeiture. — In addition to imprisonment and fine, the strategic goods subject
of the offense, including the proceeds derived therefrom, shall be forfeited in favor of the
government.

After conviction, the Regional Trial Court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture of the
goods, including its proceeds, in favor of the Government of the Philippines and shall
authorize the forfeiture of the seized goods.

Following the seizure of the strategic goods, the relevant government agency shall direct
the disposition of the property by sale or other commercially feasible means. The
offender or any person acting on behalf of the offender sina!l not be eligible to purchase
the forfeited property. The proceeds of any sale or disposition of any property
confiscated or forfeited under this section shall be paid directly to the National Treasury.
All proper expenses incurred in the proceedings for the confiscation, forfeiture, custody,
and maintenance of the property pending disposition, as well as expenses for publication
and court costs shall be taken from the General Appropriations Act (GAA).

If the strategic goods are located outside of the Philippines, the court may order the
convicted offender to pay to the National Treasury the amount equal to the value of the

strategic goods or related services under the contract or as assessed by the STMO,
whichever is greater.

Section 8. Protection of Officers. — No action or prosecution shall be brought, instituted,
or maintained against the NSC-STMCom, the STMO, or an authorized officer for or on
account of or in respect of any act ordered or done for the purpose of carrying into effect
the STMA or the IRR if the act was done in good faith and under a reasonable belief that
it was necessary for the purpose intended to be served thereby.

Section 9. Jurisdiction. - The Regional Trial Court shall have jurisdiction over criminal
prosecutions for violation of any provision of the STMA, as well as over applications for
the issuance and grant of applicable provisional remedies under the Rules of Court.

Section 10. Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters. — The DOJ, through the Office
of the Chief State Counsel (Legal Staff), shall make and receive requests for assistance,
and to execute or arrange for the execution of such requests.

a. Types of Assistance —

9)

Take evidence to obtain voluntary statements from persons;

Make arrangements for persons to give evidence or to assist in criminal
matters;

Effect service of judicial documents;

Execute searches and seizures;

Examine objects and sites;

Provide or obtain original or certified true copies of relevant documents,
records, and items of evidence;

Identify or trace property derived from the commission of an offense and
instrumentalities of crime;

Restrain dealings in property or freeze property derived from the commission
of an offense that may be recovered, forfeited or confiscated;

Recover, forfeit, or confiscate property derived from the commission of an
offense; and,

10)Locate and identify witnesses and suspects.

b. Requirements for Requests — The request for assistance from a foreign state
shall contain the following:

1)

2)
3)

4)

a

i)

Name of the authority conducting the investigation, prosecution, or judicial
proceeding to which the request relates, including contact details of the person
capable of responding to inquiries concerning the request;

Specific purpose of the request and the nature of the assistance sought;
Confirmation that the person named therein is under investigation or
prosecution or said person has been convicted for violation of any of the
regulated particulars, if known;

Specify the manner in which and to whom said information, document,
material or object obtained pursuant to the request, is to be produced;

All particulars necessary for the issuance by the court in the Philippines of the
writs, orders or processes needed by the requesied State; and,

Such other information as may assist in the execution of the request.

c. Authentication of documents — Any document submitted by the foreign state
proceeding, without the need for further authentication.

d. In any request for legal assistance from a foreign state, the DOJ —

1)

Shall endeavor to promptly execute the request cr arrange for its execution:

2) Shall inform the requesting State of a decision not to comply, in whole or in
part, with a request for assistance and the reason or reasons for that decision;
and,

3) May refuse to grant the request if the assistance sought or the execution of
the request contravenes any provision of the Constitution or is likely to
prejudice the national interest of the Philippines;

e. The request shall be executed in accordance with the laws of the Philippines.

Section 11. Extradition. — Subject to the provisions of the extradition law and the
applicable extradition treaty, the offenses defined in the STMA shall be deemed included
as an extraditable offense defined in an extradition treaty in which the Philippines is a

party.

RULE IX
FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Separability Clause. — If any provision of the STMA is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the provisions not otherwise affected shall remain valid and subsisting.

Section 2. Suppletory Application. — For purposes of this Act, the Revised Penal Code
and other applicable laws shall have suppletory application.

Section 3. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and
regulations and other issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the
provisions of the STMA are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

Section 4. Effectivity Clause. — This IRR shall take effect after fifteen (15) days from its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

This “Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10697” is hereby
approved by the NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL -— STRATEGIC TRADE
MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE this 31st day of August 2017 in the City of Manila,
Philippines.

A
fa te

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Chairman, &

(Executive Secretary, Office of the President)

(Secretary, Departm dustry)

VITALIANO N. AGUIRRE II ALAN PETER S. CAYETANO
Membe' Member
(Secretary, Department of Justice) (Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs)

A M. ANO
Member

(OIC, Department of the Interior and Local
Government)

! I]
HERMOGENES C. ESPERON
ember
(National Security Adviser)

DELFIN N. LORENZANA
Member
(Secretary, Department of National Defense)

FORTUNATO T. DELA PENA
Member
(Secretary, Department of Science and
Technology)

CARLOS G. Domenie

Member
(Secretary, Department of Finance)

Al ll

ELISEO M. RIO JR.
Member
(Secretary, Department of Information and
Communications Technology)

=. ~~
ROY A. CIMATU
Member
(Secretary, Department of Environment and

(Secretary, Department of Health)