- Republic of the Philippines 2) BR
* DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT | AJA|\/AB

More than Jobs! Intramuros, Manila \cmmE
He decent jobs, Certificate Number: AJA15-0048
DEPARTMENT ORDER NO. las 8 Wu dy
Series of 2018 AA Left sores

IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11058 ENTITLED “AN ACT STRENGTHENING
COMPLIANCE WITH OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS
AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF”

Compliance with Occupational Safety and Health Standards and Providing Penalties for
Violations Thereof, the following implementing rules and regulations are hereby issued:

CHAPTER I
DECLARATION OF POLICY

Section 1. Declaration of Policy. — The State affirms labor as a primary social and
economic force, and that a safe and healthy workforce is an integral aspect of nation building.

The State shall ensure a safe and healthful workplace for all working people by
affording them full protection against all hazards in their work environment. It shall ensure
that the provisions of the Labor Code of the Philippines, all domestic laws, and
internationally-recognized standards on occupational safety and health are being fully
enforced and complied with by the employers, and it shall provide penalties for any violation
thereof.

The State shall protect every worker against injury, sickness or death through safe and
healthful working conditions thereby assuring the conservation of valuable manpower
resources and the prevention of loss or damage to lives and properties consistent with
national development goals, and with the State’s commitment to the total development of
every worker as a complete human being.

The State, in protecting the safety and health of the workers, shall promote strict but
dynamic, inclusive, and gender-sensitive measures in the formulation and implementation of
policies and programs related to occupational safety and health.

CHAPTER II
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2. Coverage. — This Rules shall apply to all establishments, projects and sites,

and all other places where work is being undertaken in all branches of economic activity,
including:

Page 1 of 23

(a) Establishments located inside special economic zones and other investment
promotion agencies (e.g., Philippine Economic Zone Authority [PEZA], Clark
Development Corporation [CDC]);

(b) Utilities engaged in air, sea, and land transportation; and

(c) Industries such as mining, fishing, construction, agriculture, and maritime.

This Rules shall also cover contractors and subcontractors including those engaged in
the projects of the public sector. Workers of contractors and subcontractors should follow the
OSH policy and program of the establishment where they are assigned.

This Rules does not apply to the public sector such as national government agencies,
government-owned and controlled corporations with original charters, government financial
institutions, state universities and colleges and local government units which shall be
governed by appropriate rules and regulations issued by the Civil Service Commission and
other government agencies.

Section 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Rules, the following terms shall
mean:

(a) Certified first-aider refers to any person trained and duly certified to administer
first aid by the Philippine Red Cross or any organization authorized by the Secretary of Labor
and Employment.

(b) Competency Standards refer to industry-determined specifications of proficiency
required for effective work performance. These are expressed as outcomes with focus on
workplace activity rather than training or personal attributes, and the ability to apply new
skills in new situations or changing work organization.

(c) Covered workplaces refer to establishments, projects, sites and all other places
where work is being undertaken wherein the number of employees, nature of operations, and
risks or hazards involved in the business, as determined by the Secretary of Labor and
Employment, require compliance with the provisions of this Rules.

(d) Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE)-Accredited Training
Organizations refer to those which have been granted accreditation by DOLE pursuant to
Department Order No. 16, Series of 2001 and its subsequent regulations.

(e) Employer refers to any person, natural or juridical, including the principal
employer, contractor or subcontractor, if any, who directly or indirectly benefits from the
services of the employee.

(f) Equipment refers to any machine with engine or electric motor as prime mover.

(g) General safety and health inspection refers to an examination of the work
environment, including the location and operation of machinery other than those covered by
technical safety audits, adequacy of work space, ventilation, lighting, conditions of work
environment, handling, storage or work procedures, protection facilities and other possible
sources of safety and health hazards in the workplace.

(h) High risk establishment refers to a workplace wherein the presence of hazard or
potential hazard within the company may affect the safety and/or health of workers not only
within but also persons outside the premises of the workplace. There is high level of
exposure to safety and health hazards, and probability of a major accident resulting to

Page 2 of 23

disability or death or major illness is likely to occur if no preventive or control measures are
in place. The following are workplaces commonly associated with potentially high-risk
activities:

. Chemical works and chemical production plants;

. Construction;

. Deep sea fishing;

. Explosives and pyrotechnics factories;

. Firefighting;

. Healthcare facilities;

. Installation of communication accessories, towers and cables;

. LPG filling, refilling, storage and distribution;

. Mining;

10. Petrochemical and biofuel works and refineries;

11. Power generation, transmission and distribution in the energy sector;

12. Storage, handling, and distribution center for toxic or hazardous chemicals;
13. Storage and handling of fertilizers in high volume;

14. Transportation;

15. Water supply, sewerage, waste management, remediation activities;

16. Works in which chlorine is used in bulk; and

17. Activities closely similar to those enumerated above and other activities as
determined by DOLE in accordance with existing issuances on the
classification of establishments.

WMPMNAMNLWND =

(i) Imminent danger refers to a situation caused by a condition or practice in any
place of employment that could reasonably be expected to lead to death or serious physical
harm.

(j) Low risk establishment refers to a workplace where there is low level of danger or
exposure to safety and health hazards and not likely or with low probability to result in
accident, harm or injury, or illness.

(k) Medium risk establishment refers to a workplace where there is moderate
exposure to safety and health hazards and with probability of an accident, injury or illness, if
no preventive or control measures are in place.

(1) Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) refers to establishments employing less than
ten (10) employees, and the establishments employing less than one hundred (100)
employees, respectively, regardless of capitalization.

(m) Occupational Health (OH) personnel refer to a qualified first-aider, nurse, dentist
or physician engaged by the employer to provide occupational health services in the
establishment, project, site or workplace.

(n) Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) consultant refers to a qualified Safety
Officer 4 or its equivalent, duly certified by DOLE to perform and/or render consultative
services on occupational safety and health in at least two (2) fields of specialization as
determined by DOLE.

(0) Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) practitioner refers to a qualified Safety
Officer 3 or its equivalent, duly certified by DOLE to render occupational safety and health
services in a defined and specific scope or core competency.

Page 3 of 23

(p) Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) standards refers to a set of rules issued by
DOLE which mandates the adoption and use of appropriate practices, means, methods,
operations or processes, and working conditions reasonably necessary to ensure safe and
healthful employment.

(q) Personal protective equipment (PPE) refers to a specialized clothing or
equipment designed to protect workers against safety and health hazards that may cause
serious workplace injuries and illnesses, i.e., protection for the body, eyes, head, face, hands,
feet, ears, etc.

(r) Safety and Health Audit refers to a regular and critical examination of project
sites, safety programs, records, and management performance on program standards on safety
and health conducted by the safety officer.

(s) Safety and Health Committee refers to a body created within the workplace tasked
with the authority to plan, develop and implement OSH policies and programs, monitor and
evaluate the OSH program, and inspect and investigate all aspects of the work pertaining to
the safety and health of workers.

(t) Safety and Health program refers to a set of detailed rules to govern company
policies, processes and practices in all economic activities to conform with OSH standards,
including the personnel responsible, and penalties for any violation thereof.

(u) Safety officer refers to any employee or officer of the company trained by DOLE
or DOLE-Accredited Training Organization and tasked by the employer to implement an
OSH program, and ensure that it is in accordance with the provisions of OSH standards.

(v) Safety Officer 1 (SOI) refers to an employee who has completed the mandatory
eight (8)-hour OSH orientation course as prescribed in the OSH standards and two (2)-hour
trainers’ training.

(w) Safety Officer 2 (SO2) refers to an employee who has completed the mandatory
forty (40)-hour OSH training course applicable to the industry as prescribed in the OSH
standards.

(x) Safety Officer 3 (SO3) refers to an employee who has completed the mandatory
forty (40)-hour OSH training course applicable to the industry, additional forty-eight (48)
hours of advanced/specialized occupational safety training course relevant to the industry,
relevant experience in OSH for at least two (2) years, and other requirements as prescribed in
the OSH standards. Qualified SO3 shall be eligible for certification as OSH practitioner.

(y) Safety Officer 4 (SO4) refers to an employee who has completed the mandatory
forty (40)-hour OSH training course applicable to the industry, additional eighty (80) hours of
advanced/specialized occupational safety training course relevant to the industry, an
aggregate of three hundred twenty (320) hours of OSH related training or experience, an
actual experience as SO3 for at least four (4) years, and other requirements as prescribed by
the OSH standards. Additional training may be converted to years of experience where eighty
(80) hours of training may equal to one (1) year of experience and vice versa. Qualified SO4
shall be eligible for certification as OSH consultant.

(z) Safety signage refers to any emergency, warning or danger signpost or any safety
instruction using the standard colors and sizes, including the standard symbols for safety
instructions and warnings in the workplace, prescribed by DOLE in accordance with the OSH
standards.

Page 4 of 23

(aa) Workplace refers to any site or location where workers need to be present or to go
to by reason of their work, and which are under the direct or indirect control of the employer,
including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and
classroom spaces, employee cafeterias, hallways and emergency access.

(bb) Worker refers to any member of the labor force, regardless of employment status.

(cc) Workers’ OSH Seminar refers to the mandatory eight (8)-hour module conducted
by the safety officer of the workplace as prescribed by the OSH standards.

CHAPTER III
DUTIES AND RIGHTS OF EMPLOYERS, WORKERS
AND OTHER PERSONS

Section 4. Duties of Employers, Workers and Other Persons. —

(a) Duties of Employers.— Every employer, contractor or subcontractor, if any, and
any person who manages, controls or supervises the work being undertaken shall:

8.
9}

Equip a place of employment for workers free from hazardous conditions
that are causing or are likely to cause death, illness or physical harm to the
workers;

Provide complete job safety instructions and proper orientation to all workers
including, but not limited to, those relating to familiarization with their work
environment;

Ensure that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the chemical, physical and
biological substances and agents, and ergonomic and psychosocial stresses
under their control are without risk to health when the appropriate measures
of protection are taken;

Use only approved specific industry set of standards of devices and
equipment for the workplace, as applicable;

Comply with OSH standards including training, medical examination, and
when necessary, provisions on protective and safety devices such as PPE and
machine guards. Training for workers shall include health promotion,
hazards associated with their work, health risks involved or to which they are
exposed to, preventive measures to eliminate or minimize risks, steps to be
taken in cases of emergency, and safety instructions for the jobs, activities
and tasks to be handled by workers;

Make arrangements for workers and their representatives to have the time
and resource to participate actively in the processes of organizing, planning
and implementation, monitoring, evaluation and action for improvement of
the OSH management system;

Provide, when necessary, for measures identifying trainings and drills,
evacuation plans, etc., to deal with emergencies, fires and accidents including
first-aid arrangements;

Comply with all reportorial requirements of the OSH standards; and

Register establishment to DOLE as provided under the OSH standards.

(b) Duties of Workers.— Every worker, in order to ensure compliance with OSH

Page 5 of 23

1. Participate in capacity building activities on safety and health and other OSH
related topics and programs;

2. Proper use of all safeguards and safety devices furnished for workers’
protection and that of others;

3. Comply with instructions to prevent accidents or imminent danger situations
in the workplace;

4. Observe prescribed steps to be taken in cases of emergency including
participation in the conduct of national or local disaster drills; and

5. Report to their immediate supervisor or any other responsible safety and
health personnel any work hazard that may be discovered in the workplace.

(c) Duties of Other Persons. — Any other person, including the builder or contactor
who visits, builds, renovates or installs devices or conducts business in any establishments or
workplace, shall comply with the provisions of this Rules and all other regulations issued by
the Secretary of Labor and Employment.

Whenever two (2) or more undertakings are engaged in activities simultaneously in
one (1) workplace, it shall be the duty of all concerned to collaborate and cooperate to ensure
compliance with OSH standards and regulations.

Section 5. Workers’ Right to Know. — The right to safety and health at work shall be
guaranteed. All workers shall be appropriately informed by the employer about all types of
hazards in the workplace, and be provided access to training, education, and orientation on
chemical safety, electrical safety, mechanical safety, ergonomics, and other hazards and risks.

All workers, including new hires, shall be provided training and information for all
types of hazards in the workplace in a language and dialect that workers can understand.
Training and information materials used shall be made readily available and accessible to
workers,

A re-orientation on safety and health for workers in high risk establishments must be
conducted regularly, not less than once a quarter, and to be conducted immediately following
any changes in the operations and production process.

Section 6. Workers’ Right to Refuse Unsafe Work. — The worker has the right of
refusal to work without threat or reprisal from the employer if, as determined by DOLE, an
imminent danger situation exists. As a preventive measure, the safety officer may, following
his/her own determination and without fear of reprisal, implement a work stoppage or
suspend operations in cases of imminent danger. The employer, safety officer or worker shall
immediately notify the DOLE that an imminent danger situation exists in the workplace.

The employer or safety officer cannot require the workers to return to work where
there is a continuing imminent danger. A worker may also refuse to work until the lifting of
the Work Stoppage Order (WSO) after implementing the appropriate corrective measures

Workers affected by the existence of an imminent danger situation may be

temporarily assigned to other areas within the workplace provided there is no impending
issue with safety and health.

Page 6 of 23

Section 24 of this Rules shall apply during the period of such WSO or suspension of
operations due to an imminent danger situation.

Section 7. Workers’ Right to Report Accidents. — Workers and their representatives
shall have the right to report accidents, dangerous occurrences, and hazards to the employer,
to DOLE and to other concerned competent government agencies. They shall be free from
any form of retaliation for reporting of any accident.

Reporting of accidents to DOLE may be made through any means of communication,
including the DOLE hotline, whichever is most convenient to the worker. The same may be
reported to the nearest DOLE Regional, Field, Provincial or Satellite Office having
jurisdiction over the place of the incident.

Section 8. Workers’ Right to Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) — Every
employer, contractor or subcontractor, if any, shall provide his/her workers, free of charge,
PPE for any part of the body that may be exposed to hazards, and lifeline, safety belt or
harness, gas or dust respirators or masks, and protective shields whenever necessary by
reason of the hazardous work process or environment, chemical, radiological, mechanical,
and other irritants or hazards capable of causing injury or impairment in the function of any
part of the body through absorption, inhalation or physical contact. The cost of PPE shall be
part of the safety and health program which is a separate pay item pursuant to Section 21 of
this Rules.

All PPE shall be of the appropriate type as tested and approved by the DOLE based on
its standards and/or other means of verification.

The usage of PPE in all establishments, projects, sites and all other places where work
is being undertaken shall be based on the evaluation and recommendation of the safety officer
as a result of the workplace hazard assessment.

All PPE must be of appropriate size, weight, and type to specific workers exposed to
hazards from which PPE are meant to ensure effective protection. Issuance of PPE shall be
supplemented by training on the application, use, handling, cleaning and maintenance of said
PPE in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

Failure to provide appropriate PPE in high risk activities shall give rise to the right of
the worker to refuse unsafe work.

Section 9. Safety Signage and Devices. — All establishments, projects, sites and all
other places where work is being undertaken shall have safety signage and devices to warn
the workers and the public of the hazards in the workplace. Safety signage and devices shall
be posted in prominent positions at strategic locations in a language understandable to all,
and in accordance with the OSH standards on color of signs for safety instructions and
warnings, Globally Harmonized System (GHS) pictograms, construction safety, classification
and labelling of chemicals, radiation, safety instructions and warning signs, set by DOLE. All
signage shall also be of appropriate quality to ensure their legibility.

Section 10. Safety in the Use of Equipment. — In relation to the use of equipment,

such as but not limited to, earth moving equipment, heavy duty equipment, materials
handling equipment, and construction equipment, the employer, contractor or subcontractor,

Page 7 of 23

if any, must comply with the OSH standards set by DOLE on safety and use of such
equipment in the different phases of the company or project operation including the transport
to and from the establishment, project, site or place where work is being undertaken.

Appropriate training and certification by the Technical Education and Skills
Development Authority (TESDA), Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) or other
concerned government agency shall be a requirement for operators before use of equipment,
if applicable. Trainings provided by international organizations or suppliers if not locally
available, shall be recognized by the DOLE.

Section 11. Occupational Safety and Health Information. — The employer,
contractor or subcontractor, if any, shall provide the workers in all establishments, projects,
sites and all other places where work is being undertaken adequate and suitable information
on the following:

(a) Workplace hazards and the risk posed on the safety and health of the workers
such as chemical safety data sheets;

(b) Control mechanisms in place that reduces or minimizes the risk of exposure to
hazards and other preventive strategies (e.g., training on specific hazards, medical
monitoring tests, immunization and control of lifestyle-related diseases);

(c) Appropriate measures, including the probable location of workers, for the
prevention, control and protection against those hazards; and

(d) Emergency and disaster management protocols including proper evacuation and
shut-down procedures.

Information materials shall be revised regularly by the OSH committee.

CHAPTER IV
COVERED WORKPLACES

Section 12. Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Program. — Covered
workplaces shall develop and implement a suitable OSH program in a format prescribed by
DOLE which shall be posted in prominent places.

(a) For establishments-with less than ten (10) workers and low risk establishments
with ten (10) to fifty (50) workers. - The OSH program, which shall be duly signed by the
employer, must include at least the following:

1. Company commitment to comply with OSH requirements;
2. General safety and health programs, including:
e Safety and health hazard identification, risk assessment and control
(HIRAC),
e Medical surveillance for early detection and management of
occupational and work-related diseases, and
e First aid and emergency medical services;
3. Promotion of the following health domains:
e Drug-free workplace (RA 9165),
e Mental health services in the workplace (RA 11036), and
e Healthy lifestyle;

Page 8 of 23

Philippine National Implementation Monitoring System

Prevention and control of the following health domains:
e Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (RA 8504),
e Tuberculosis (EO 187-03), and
e Hepatitis B (DOLE DA 05-2010);
Complete company or project details;
Composition and duties of the OSH committee;
OSH personnel and facilities;
Safety and health promotion, training and education, including:
e Orientation of all workers on OSH, and
e Conduct of risk assessment, evaluation and control;
Conduct of toolbox or safety meetings and job safety analysis, if applicable;

. Accident/incident/illness investigation, recording and reporting;
. Provision and use of PPE;

. Provision of safety signage;

. Provision of workers’ welfare facilities;

. Emergency and disaster preparedness and mandated drills;

. Solid waste management system; and

. Control and management of hazards.

(b) For medium to high risk establishments with ten (10) to fifty (50) workers and
low to high risk establishments with fifty-one (51) workers and above. — The OSH program,
which shall be duly signed by the employer, must include at least the following:

1

Company commitment to comply with OSH requirements;

2. General safety and health programs including:

PIA

e Safety and health hazard identification, risk assessment and control
(HIRAC),
¢ Medical surveillance for early detection and management of
occupational and work-related diseases, and
e First aid and emergency medical services;
Promotion of the following health domains:
e Drug-free workplace (RA 9165),
© Mental health services in the workplace (RA 11036), and
e Healthy lifestyle;
Prevention and control of the following health domains:
1. Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (RA 8504),
2. Tuberculosis (EO 187-03), and
3. Hepatitis B (DOLE DA 05-2010);
Complete company or project details;
Composition and duties of the OSH committee;
OSH personnel and facilities;
Safety and health promotion, training and education, to include the
following:
e Orientation of all workers on OSH,
e Conduct of risk assessment, evaluation and control,
e Continuous training on OSH of OSH personnel, and

Page 9 of 23

e Work Permit System such as working at height, working at confined
space, hot works, and other related activities;

9. Conduct of toolbox or safety meetings and job safety analysis;

10. Accident/incident/illness investigation, recording and reporting;

11. Provision and use of PPE;

12. Provision of safety signage;

13. Dust control and management, and regulations on activities such as building
of temporary structures, and lifting and operation of electrical, mechanical,
communications system, and other equipment;

14. Provision of workers’ welfare facilities;

15. Emergency and disaster preparedness and response plan to include the
organization and creation of disaster control groups, business continuity plan,
and updating the hazard, risk and vulnerability assessment, as required;

16. Solid waste management system;

17. Control and management of hazards;

18. Prohibited acts and penalties for violations; and

19. Cost of implementing company OSH program.

The DOLE shall prescribe a format that should be accomplished fully by the
employer, contractor or subcontractor, if any, in consultation with the workers and their
representatives.

The OSH program shall be communicated and be made readily available to all
persons in the workplace. It shall be updated periodically whenever the DOLE, other
regulatory or government agencies and institutions promulgate new rules, guidelines and
other issuances related to workers’ safety and health.

The establishment shall ensure that the core elements of OSH program are integrated
in the company OSH program such as management commitment and employee involvement,
workplace risk assessment, hazard prevention and control, safety and health training and
education, and OSH program evaluation.

The establishment shall submit a copy of the OSH program to the DOLE Regional,
Provincial, Field or Satellite Office having jurisdiction over the workplace. A duly signed
company commitment to comply OSH requirements together with the company OSH
program using the prescribed template shall be considered approved upon submission
EXCEPT for Construction Safety and Health Program which shall need approval by DOLE
prior to construction.

OSH programs in the pre-approved template may be modified by DOLE as necessary
based on existing laws, rules and regulations, and other issuances or upon validation of the
program during inspection. If there is a modification made by the company, the company
shall submit a revised copy of the OSH program to DOLE.

The company shall review and evaluate the OSH program at least once a year or as

necessary, to ensure that its objectives are met towards an improved safety and health
performance.

Page 10 of 23

Section 13. Occupational Safety and Health Committee. — To ensure that the safety
and health program is observed and enforced, a safety and health committee shall be
organized in covered workplaces.

(a) For establishments with less than ten (10) workers and low risk establishments
with ten (10) to fifty (50) workers. - A SO! shall establish an OSH committee composed of
the following:

Company owner or manager

Chairperson
Secretary : Safety officer of the workplace
Member : At least one (1) worker, preferably a

union member if organized

The safety officer of the workplace may also be the owner, manager or his/her
designated representative.

The company owner, manager or one of the workers of the company shall undertake
first aid training from the Philippine Red Cross or any DOLE recognized organization.

(b) For medium to high risk establishments with ten (10) to fifty (50) workers and
low to high risk establishments with fifty-one (51) workers and above. - The OSH committee
of the covered workplace shall be composed of the following:

Ex-officio chairperson : Employer or his/her representative

Secretary : Safety officer of the workplace

Ex-officio members : Certified first-aider, OH nurse, OH dentist, and
OH physician, as applicable

Members : Safety officers representing the contractor or

subcontractor, as the case may be, and
representative/s of workers who shall come from
the union, if the workers are organized, or elected
workers through a simple vote of majority, if they
are unorganized

The OSH committee shall effectively plan, develop, oversee and monitor the
implementation of the OSH program.

(c) For two (2) or more establishments housed under one building or complex
including malls. — When two or more establishments are housed under one building or
complex, the health and safety committee organized in each workplace shall form themselves
into a Joint Coordinating Committee to plan and implement programs and activities
concerning all the establishments. The Joint Coordinating Committee shall be composed of
the following:

Chairperson : Building owner or his/her representative such as
the building administrator
Secretary : Safety officer of the building or complex

appointed by the Chairperson

Page 11 of 23

Members : At least two safety officers from any of the
establishment housed under one building or
complex
At least two workers’ representatives, one of
which must be from a union if organized, from
any of the establishment housed under one
building or complex

The building administrator shall ensure that the Joint OSH committee shall submit its
organizational plans and minutes to the DOLE Regional office, copy furnished the Bureau of
Working Conditions.

Section 14. Safety Officer. — In the implementation of OSH program, safety officers
shall be employed or designated with the following duties and responsibilities:

(a) Oversee the overall management of the OSH program in coordination with the
OSH committee;

(b) Frequently monitor and inspect any health or safety aspect of the operation being
undertaken with the participation of supervisors and workers;

(c) Assist government inspectors in the conduct of safety and health inspection at any
time whenever work is being performed or during the conduct of an accident
investigation by providing necessary information and OSH reports as required by
the OSH standards; and

(d) Issue Work Stoppage Order (WSO) when necessary based on the requirements
and procedures provided by the OSH standards.

Safety officer/s of all workplace must possess the necessary training and experience
requirement according to its category as contained herein. The respective qualifications of
safety officers are as follows:

Experience
(a) Mandatory eight (8)-hour OSH orientation
(SO1) course AND
b) Two (2)-hour trainers’ training

Safety Officer 2 | Mandatory forty (40)-hour basic OSH training

S02 course applicable to the indus’

Safety Officer 3 | (a) Mandatory forty (40)-hour basic OSH

(SO3) training course applicable to the industry;

(b) Additional forty-eight (48) hours of
advanced/specialized occupational safety
training course relevant to the industry;
AND

(c) Other requirements as prescribed by the

OSH standards.

(a) Mandatory forty (40)-hour OSH training
course applicable to the industry;

(b) Additional eighty (80) hours of

advanced/specialized occupational safety

training course relevant to the industry;

At least two (2) years
of experience in OSH

Safety Officer 4
(S04)

Actual experience as
SO3 for at least four
(4) years

Page 12 of 23

(c) An aggregate of three hundred twenty
(320) hours of OSH related training or
experience (additional training may be
converted to years of experience where
eighty [80] hours of training may equal to
one [1] year of experience and vice
versa.); AND

(d) Other requirements as prescribed by the

OSH standards.

The number and qualification of safety officers shall be proportionate to the total
number of workers and equipment, size of work area, classification of the workplace and
such other criteria as required by the OSH standards.

The safety officer shall be required to undergo the prescribed DOLE-BOSH training
orientation or course, advanced occupational safety training courses, and/or other OSH
related training or learning as necessary in the effective performance of its duties and
responsibilities.

Safety officers engaged in micro and small establishments, low to medium risk, shall
be engaged in safety programs including other tasks designated to him/her by his/her
employer.

In the case of a contractor or subcontractor, at least one (1) safety officer must be
deployed at each specific area of operations to oversee the management of the OSH program
of its own workforce.

Minimum classification and number of safety officer for all covered workplaces shall
be as follows:

Number of Workers | _ LowRisk | __— Medium Risk _| High Risk
llto9 =—si(s*é‘;‘;*~*édrT:SSCO ne (1) SO One (1) SO1 One (1) SO2
|10tosO—Citi‘iYSSSCOme (1) SQ | One (1) SO3_|
10 to 50 One (1) SO1 One (1) S02 One (1) SO3

[51to99
——

751 to 1000 Two (2) $03 Two (2) S03
Every additional 250 or Additional One (1)
fraction thereof S03 or SO4
Every additional 500 or | Additional One (1) | Additional One (1)
fraction thereof SO3 SO3 or SO4

Page 13 of 23

The engagement of the services of a certified OSH consultant (SO4) shall be allowed
for a period not longer than one (1) year for establishments whose designated safety officer
has to be trained or is in the process of completing the prescribed training courses and
relevant experience.

Section 15. Occupational Health Personnel and Facilities. - Covered workplaces
shall have qualified occupational health personnel such as certified first-aiders, nurses,
dentists, and physicians duly complemented with the required medical supplies, equipment
and facilities. The number of health personnel, which may be classified as full time (FT) or
part-time (PT), equipment and facilities, and the amount of supplies shall be proportionate to
the total number of workers and the risk or hazard involved in the workplace, the ideal ratio
of which shall be as follows:

Number of Low Risk Medium to High Risk

Workers

0-50 feet - feet -

FT
1 FT 1 FT 1FT

2000 >20 per and per 1 FT
shift shift

Every 100
workers or
a fraction
thereof
Every 250
workers or
a fraction
thereof
Every 500
workers or
a fraction
thereof
PT = 4h/d, 3d/w; FT = 8h/d, 6d/w

OH
Physician:

OH personnel shall be placed in the shift with the highest number of workers

*For OH dentists: Alternatively, establishments can enter into a Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) for dental services for workers; provided that the requirements for
dental facilities are met.

For OH physicians: If more than 1 PT physician is required, a physician must be present in
all work days of the establishment.

Page 14 of 23

Every employer covered by this Rules shall provide his/her workers medical services
and facilities and shall not be an excuse by employer from maintaining in his/her workplace a
first aid treatment room or clinic for workers which shall be as follows:

Low Risk Medium to High Risk

Nyaner of Firstaid | Clinic | Hospital | First Clinic | Hospital
treatment | (number of | (number of | treatment | (number of | (number of
room beds beds, room beds beds
| | |

[1-9
Additional Additional
1 for every 1 for every

751-1000 100 1 for every 50 worker | 1 for every

worker or 200 ora 100
a fraction | worker or fraction | worker or
1001-2000 thereof | a fraction thereof | a fraction
thereof 1 thereof 1
full time

The employer may not establish a hospital or dental clinic in the workplace where
there is a hospital or dental clinic which is located not more than five (5) kilometers away
from the workplace, accessible in not more than twenty-five (25) minutes travel time, and the
employer has facilities readily available for transporting workers to the hospital or dental
clinic in cases of emergency. For this purpose, the employer shall enter into a written contract
with the hospital for the use of such hospital for the treatment of workers in cases of
emergency.

Section 16. Safety and Health Training. —

(a) All safety and health personnel shall undergo the mandatory orientation or
training on OSH as prescribed by DOLE. Said training shall be evidenced by the issuance of
a certification by DOLE or a DOLE-Accredited Training Organization. Dispatch curriculum
for training covered under this Section shall be prescribed by DOLE. The following are the
minimum prescribed training or orientation for all safety and health personnel:

Safety Officer 1
(SO1)

1. Mandatory eight (8)-hour OSH orientation course
applicable to its industry such as:
¢ General Industry — Basic OSH Orientation Course,
e Construction Industry - Construction OSH
Orientation Course,
e Maritime Industry — Maritime OSH Orientation
Course, or
© Other industry specific course as may be prescribed;
AND
2. Two (2)- hour trainers’ training.

Page 15 of 23

Safety Officer 2 Mandatory forty (40)-hour OSH training course
(SO2) applicable to its industry such as:
© General Industry — Basic OSH Training Course,
e Construction Industry — Construction OSH Training
Course,
¢ Maritime Industry -— Maritime OSH Training
Course, or
¢ Other industry specific mandatory training as may
be prescribed.

Safety Officer 3 . Mandatory forty (40)-hour OSH training course
(S03) applicable to its industry such as:
¢ General Industry — Basic OSH Training Course,
¢ Construction Industry — Construction OSH Training
Course,
e Maritime Industry - Maritime OSH Training
Course, or
e Other industry specific mandatory training as may
be prescribed;

. Additional forty-eight (48) hours of
advanced/specialized occupational safety training
course relevant to the industry(e.g., industrial
hygiene, safety audit, accident investigation, OSH
programming, chemical safety, etc.); AND

. Other requirements as prescribed by the OSH
standards.

Safety Officer 4 . Mandatory forty (40)-hour OSH training course
(SO4) applicable to its industry such as:
¢ General Industry —- Basic OSH Training Course,
¢ Construction Industry — Construction OSH Training
Course,
e Maritime Industry - Maritime OSH Training
Course, or
© Other industry specific mandatory training as may
be prescribed;

. Additional eighty (80) hours of advanced/specialized
occupational safety training course relevant to the
industry, (e.g., industrial hygiene, safety audit,
accident investigation, OSH programming, chemical
safety, etc.);

. An aggregate of three hundred twenty (320) hours of
OSH related training or experience (additional
training may be converted to years of experience
where eighty [80] hours of training may equal to one
(1] year of experience and vice versa.); AND

. Other requirements as prescribed by the OSH
standards.

Page 16 of 23

[FirseAider ft Standard first aid training
OH Nurse At least forty (40)-hour Basic OSH training course for
OH Nurses

At least forty (40)-hour Basic OSH training course

OH Physician At least fifty-six (56)-hour Basic OSH training course for
OH Physicians

(b) All workers shall undergo the mandatory workers’ OSH seminar as prescribed by
DOLE which shall be jointly participated by workers and employers. Standardized training
module for safety and health personnel shall be implemented and updated regularly as
necessary. The mandatory workers’ OSH seminar may be conducted by the safety officer of
the establishment or any certified OSH practitioner or consultant.

The workers’ OSH seminar and other trainings/orientations as required by the
employer and by any law shall be at no cost on the worker and considered as compensable
working time.

(c) All personnel engaged in the operation, erection and dismantling of equipment
and scaffolds, structural erections, excavations, blasting operations, demolition, confined
spaces, hazardous chemicals, welding, and flame cutting shall undergo specialized instruction
and training on said activities. Such training shall include, among others, topics on safety and
specialized PPE requirements for said high-risk work activities, including the use, application
and handling of the same, which can be provided by DOLE, DOLE-Accredited Training
Organizations or the PPE manufacturers.

Section 17. Occupational Safety and Health Reports. — All employers, contractors
or subcontractors, if any, shall submit to DOLE all safety and health reports, and notifications
such as but not limited to annual medical report (AMR), OSH committee report, employer’s
work accident/injury report (WAIR), and annual work accident/injury exposure data report
(AEDR).

Section 18. Workers’ Competency Certification. -The PRC shall determine the
minimum and necessary competency on safety and health for OSH personnel and use the
same as equivalency in their application for Continuing Professional Development (CPD)
units. In order to professionalize, upgrade and update the level of competence of workers,
TESDA or PRC, as the case may be, shall establish national competency standards and
prepare guidelines on competency assessment and certification for critical occupations to
include requirements on safety and health. In this regard, all critical occupations shall
undergo the mandatory competency assessment and certification by TESDA.

An occupation shall be considered critical when:

(a) The performance of a job affects people’s lives and safety;

(b) The job involves the handling of complex tools, equipment and supplies;

(c) The job requires a relatively long period of education and training; and

(d) The performance of the job may compromise the safety, health and environmental
concems within the immediate vicinity of the establishments.

Page 17 of 23

Section 19. Workers’ Welfare Facilities. — All establishments, projects, sites and all
other places where work is being undertaken shall have the following free welfare facilities in
order to ensure humane working conditions:

(a) Adequate supply of safe drinking water;

(b) Adequate sanitary and washing facilities;

(c) Suitable living accommodation for workers, as may be applicable such as in
construction, shipping, fishing and nightworkers;

(d) Separate sanitary, washing, and sleeping facilities for all genders, as may be applicable;

(e) Lactation station except those establishments as provided for under DOLE
Department Order No. 143-15;

(f) Ramps, railings and the like; and

(g) Other workers’ welfare facilities as may be prescribed by the OSH standards and
other issuances.

Section 20. All Other Occupational Safety and Health Standards. - All
employers, contractors or subcontractors, if any, shall comply with other occupational safety
and health standards as provided for in the 1978 DOLE Occupational Safety and Health
Standards, as amended.

Section 21. Cost of Safety and Health Program. — The total cost of implementing a
duly approved OSH program shall be an integral part of the operations cost. It shall be
separate pay item in construction and in all contracting or subcontracting arrangements.

CHAPTER V
JOINT AND SOLIDARY LIABILITY

Section 22. Employer’s Responsibility and Liability. — The employer, project
owner, contractor, or subcontractor, if any, and any person who manages, controls or
supervises the work being undertaken shall be jointly and solidarily liable for compliance
with occupational safety and health standards including the penalties imposed for violation
thereof as provided for in this Rules.

CHAPTER VI
ENFORCEMENT OF OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS

Section 23. Visitorial and Enforcement Power of the Secretary of Labor and
Employment or his/her duly authorized representatives. — All matters arising from the
visitorial and enforcement power of the Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly
authorized representatives shall be governed by the applicable rules on the administration and
enforcement of labor laws pursuant to Article 128 of the Labor Code of the Philippines, as
renumbered, and other laws.

The Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly authorized representatives
with the appropriate inspection authority shall have the authority to enforce the mandatory

Page 18 of 23

OSH standards in all establishments and conduct an annual spot audit on its compliance for
the same.

The conduct of annual spot audit must be attended by a safety officer and
representative of the management and workers of the establishment. In the absence of the
establishment’s safety officer, his duly authorized representative may attend in his stead. The
Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly authorized representatives can enter
workplaces at any time of the day or night where work is being performed to examine records
and investigate facts, conditions or matters necessary to determine compliance of
establishments with the provisions of this Rules and other applicable laws.

Pursuant to Article 128 of the Labor Code of the Philippines, it shall be unlawful for
any person or entity to obstruct, impede, delay or otherwise render ineffective the orders of
the Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly authorized representatives issued
pursuant to the authority granted before him/her, and no lower court or entity shall issue
temporary or permanent injunction or restraining order or otherwise assume jurisdiction over
any case involving the orders of the Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly
authorized representatives.

The Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly authorized representatives
may order stoppage of work or suspension of operations of any unit or department of an
establishment when non-compliance to this Rules, OSH standards and other applicable laws
poses grave and imminent danger to the safety and health of workers in the workplace.

The labor inspector or person authorized by DOLE to enforce compliance with this
Rules, OSH standards and other applicable laws and regulations, shall present legitimate
authorized identification upon request, and he/she shall only act within the authority or
direction given by the Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly authorized
representatives.

The Secretary of Labor and Employment or his/her duly authorized representatives
shall inspect establishments and workplaces regardless of the size and nature of operation.
Any kind of self-assessment shall not take the place of labor inspection conducted by DOLE.
However, chartered cities may be allowed to conduct industrial safety inspection of
establishments within their jurisdiction in coordination with DOLE, provided that, they have
adequate facilities and competent personnel for the purpose as determined by DOLE, and
subject to national standards established by the latter.

Department Order No. 183, Series of 2017 and the manual on execution of judgments
shall govern the procedures in the conduct of inspection, mandatory conference, issuance of
order and execution thereof.

No person or entity shall obstruct, impede, delay or otherwise render ineffective the
orders of the Secretary of Labor and Employment or the Secretary’s duly authorized
representatives issued pursuant to the authority granted under Article 128 of the Labor Code
of the Philippines, and no lower court or entity shall issue temporary or permanent injunction
or restraining order or otherwise assume jurisdiction over any case involving the enforcement
orders.

Page 19 of 23

Section 24. Payment of Workers During Work Stoppage Due to Imminent
Danger. — If stoppage of work due to imminent danger occurs as a result of the employer’s
violation or fault, the employer shall pay the affected workers their corresponding wages
during the period of such stoppage of work or suspension of operations.

For purposes of payment of wages and any other liabilities arising from the WSO, the
employer is presumed a party at fault if the WSO was issued secondary to an imminent
danger situation which would imperil the lives of the workers. A mandatory conference not
later than seventy-two (72) hours shall be held to determine whether the WSO will be lifted
or not.

Section 25. Delegation of Authority. - The authority to enforce mandatory OSH
standards may be delegated by the Secretary of Labor and Employment to a competent
government authority. The said delegation of authority shall only cover the conduct of
industrial safety inspection.

In pursuance of the delegation of authority, the competent government authority shall
submit a monthly report to the DOLE-Regional Office having jurisdiction over its location, in
accordance with the provisions of the Revised Technical Safety Inspection Manual.

The delegation of authority may be revoked at any time as warranted by the circumstances.

Section 26. Standards Setting Power of the Secretary of Labor and Employment.
- The Secretary of Labor and Employment shall, in consultation with all concerned
government agencies and instrumentalities, and relevant stakeholders, set and enforce
mandatory OSH standards to eliminate or reduce OSH hazards depending on the number of
employees of the establishment, the nature of its business operations, and the risk or hazard
involved,

The Secretary of Labor and Employment shall institute new and updated programs to
ensure safe and healthy working conditions in all workplaces especially in hazardous
industries such as, but not limited to, mining, fishing, construction, and maritime.

Section 27. Employee’s Compensation Claim. — A worker may file claims for
compensation benefit arising out of work-related disability or death. Such claims shall be
processed independently of the finding of fault, gross negligence or bad faith of the employer
in a proceeding instituted for the purpose. The employer shall provide the necessary
assistance to employees applying for claims.

Section 28. Incentives to Employers and Workers. — There shall be established
package of incentives under such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the DOLE
to qualified employers and workers to recognize their efforts towards ensuring compliance
with OSH and general labor standards such as OSH training packages, additional protective
equipment, technical guidance, recognition awards and other similar incentives.

Section 29. Prohibited Acts and its Corresponding Penalties. — Any willful failure

or refusal of an employer, contractor or subcontractor to comply with the following OSH
standards below or with a compliance order issued by the Secretary of Labor and

Page 20 of 23

Employment or his/her authorized representative shall be penalized of the administrative
fines as follows:

Registration of establishment to DOLE P20,000.00

Provision of worker’s training (first aid, mandatory workers training,
mandatory OSH training for safety officers and health personnel

Submission of reportorial requirements as prescribed by OSH P30,000.00
standards

Provision of safety officer and/or OH personnel P40,000.00

Provision of certified personnel or professionals required by the OSH P40,000.00
standards

Establishment of a safety and health committee P40,000.00

Formulation and implementation of a comprehensive safety and health P40,000.00
program

Provision of information on hazards and risk (absence of chemical P40,000.00
safety data sheet, no written SOP in materials handling, lifting etc., no

permitting system for confined spaces/hot works, no lock-out/tag-out

system etc.

Failure or refusal to comply with OSH standards or compliance order shall be deemed
willful when done voluntarily, deliberately and intentionally.

An employer, contractor or subcontractor who is found to have repeatedly violated the
same prohibited act shall be penalized of the corresponding fine plus an additional fine
equivalent to fifty percent (50%) thereof for every instance of repeat violation.

If any of the following acts is present and there is non-compliance, the penalty of one
hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) administrative fine shall be imposed separate and in
addition to the daily administrative fine imposed above:

(1) Repeated obstruction, delay or refusal to provide the Secretary of Labor and
Employment or any of its authorized representatives access to the covered
workplace, or refusal to provide or allow access to relevant records and
documents or obstruct the conduct of investigation of any fact necessary in
determining compliance with OSH standards;

(2) Misrepresentation in relation to adherence to OSH standards, knowing such
Statement, report or record submitted to DOLE to be false in any material
aspect; or

Page 21 of 23

(3) Making retaliatory measures such as termination of employment, refusal to pay,
reducing wages and benefits or in any manner discriminates against any worker
who has given information relative to the inspection being conducted.

When the violation exposes the worker to death, serious injury or serious illness, the
imposable penalty shall be one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00).

Should there be two (2) or more be non-compliances, all penalties shall be imposed;
provided that the total daily penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand pesos (P

The penalties shall be computed on a per day basis until full compliance reckoned
from the date of the notice of violation or service of the compliance order to the employer
without prejudice to the filing of a criminal or civil case in the regular courts, as the case may
be. Fines herein imposed shall be without prejudice to the fines imposable by other
appropriate government agencies.

The Regional Director shall, after due notice and hearing, impose the appropriate
administrative fines taking into consideration the damage or injury caused and risk involved
including the severity and frequency of the OSH violations and size of the establishment.

Fines collected pursuant to this Rules shall be utilized for the operation of OSH
initiatives incentivizing qualified employers and workers in recognition of their efforts
towards ensuring compliance with OSH and general labor standards, including OSH training
and education as well other inter-governmental programs and activities.

CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 30. Updated DOLE Computerized Inspection System. —The Secretary of
Labor and Employment shall maintain an updated labor inspection system of computerized
gathering and generation of real time data on compliances, monitoring of enforcement, and a
system of notification on workplace accidents and injuries.

Section 31. Inter-Government Coordination and Cooperation. - The DOLE shall
be primarily responsible for the administration and enforcement of OSH laws, regulations
and standards in all establishments and workplaces to effectively implement the provisions of
RA 11058. There shall be established an Inter-government Coordination and Cooperation
Committee composed of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department
of Energy, Department of Transportation, Department of Agriculture, Department of Public
Works and Highways, Department of Trade and Industry, Department of the Interior and
Local Government, Department of Health, Department of Information and Communications
Technology, Philippine Economic Zone Authority and all other government agencies,
including local government units, within sixty (60) days from the issuance of this Rules. It
shall regularly convene at least once per quarter, to monitor the effective implementation of
this Rules as well as related programs and projects intended to prevent and eliminate the
incidence of injury, sickness or death in all workplaces including periodic review of this
Rules and all OSH standards.

Page 22 of 23

Workers and employers representatives from the National Tripartite Industrial Peace
Council shall be invited to the meetings and activities of the Inter-government Coordination
and Cooperation Committee.

There shall be developed an annual work plan and accomplishments to be submitted
to Secretary of Labor and Employment. The funds for the operation of the Inter-government
Coordination and Cooperation Committee shall be sourced from the fines collected under this
Rules.

Section 32. Separability Clause. — If any part, section or provision of this Rules
shall be held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected by such declaration
shall remain in full force and effect.

Nothing in this Rules shall repeal any issuances which have more stringent measures

issued by other regulatory agencies for the achievement of safe and health working
conditions for workers.

Section 33. Repealing Clause. — All rules and regulations or other issuances or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with this Rules are hereby modified or repealed.

Section 34. Effectivity. - This Rules shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

Manila, Philippines, © DECEMBER 2018.

Secretary

Dept. of Labor & Employment
Office of the Secretary

M000 NE

Page 23 of 23