Implementing Rules and Regulations
of Republic Act 11166
otherwise known as
“Philippine HIV and AIDS Policy Act”

Republic Act No. 11166
Implementing Rules and Regulations
PHILIPPINE NATIONAL AIDS COUNCIL
RESOLUTION
No.1
WHEREAS, Republic Act No.
11166, otherwise known as the “Philippine
HIV and AIDS Policy Act”, was
signed into law by the Presidentof the Republic of the Philippines on December 20, 2018;
WHEREAS, Section 55 of Republic Act No.
11166 expressly repealed
Republic Act No. 8504, otherwise
knownas the “Philippine AIDS Prevention and Control Act of 1998”;
WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 57 of Republic Act No. 11166, this Act took effect on January 25, 2019, or
fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette on January 10, 2019;
WHEREAS, Section 54 of Republic Act
No.
11166
mandates
that, the
Philippine
National AIDS Council
(PNAC)shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement the provisionsof this Act;
WHEREAS,the
PNACis the
multi-sectoral, central advisory,
planning and policy-making, and
implementing
body mandated by this Act to oversee a comprehensive and integrated national policy on the prevention and
control of HIV and AIDSin the Philippines;
BE IT RESOLVED ASIT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, onthis 12* "dayof July, 2019 that the PNAC adopts
and issues the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 11166.
. DuqueIll, MD, MSc
Secretary, Department of Health
Francisco
Chairperson, Philippine National AIDS Council
rEey
anne
Departmentof the interior and Local Government
Vice Chairperson, Philippine National AIDS Council
(Signature over printed name)

beftt
fgnes
ycé
G.
Bailey
Department of Budget and Management
(Signature over printed name)
R
MAPA
ONES
ecretaty
Department of Education
(Signature over printed name)
tobefo
employment
(Signature/over printed name
AIM. Met C.
neg- Way
Departmentof Social Welfare and Development
Vv
(Signature over printed name)
J, Prospero\e. De VeraIll, OPA
Chairman...
Commission on Higher Education
(Signature over printed name)
seal!nt
Philippine Information Agency
(Signature over printed name)
.narysecretouy
Position
Position
FEEC-
Position
UNDESrCIETY
Position
|Chronpercen
Position
Position
OFFICER -IN_CHARAE
Position
DIRECTOR ~ GENERAL
Position

ANGELINA
UV. TAN
fy: 0.
Chairperson, Committee on Health
Houseof Representatives
(Signature over printed name)
<
NoJePH
victoR
eQenCTo
Chairperson, Committee on Health
and Demographya
Senate of the Philippines
(Signature over printed name)
Pinoy Plus Advocacy Pilipinas,Inc.
(Signature over printed name)
LS
Rowan tana leah
Action for Health Initiative
(Signature over printed name)
CY
(Geagaboaha
Health Action Information Network
(Signature Over Printe
Philippi
Eley A. Oi
Philippine NGO Council o
Health and Welfare
(Signature over printed name)
opulation,
Position
Position
Ares \den}
Position
grxoOATIVE
DILEGOR
Position
Position
OFFICUL
AEP CMTAT OE
Position
Evtiulile LetevBe
Position

Anao
AD [
/MOA2-b Kae,
Ze
XE. Priechn
O
so
The Library Foundation
SHARE Collective
Position
(Signature over printed name)
Pwes | eer
|
ade Union Congressofthe Philippines
Position
(Signature over printed name)
-WITNESSES-
MkoMeg \-
lo
-fou
ADLOVSefer]
YY
Departmentof Justice
Position
(Signature over printed name)
%- PBrom
Ependolyn Amen U-Gana
_
.
Conmettonep. CHR
Commission on HumanRights
Position
(Signature over printed name)

IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT 11166 OTHERWISE KNOWN AS
“PHILIPPINE HIV AND AIDS POLICY ACT”
RULE1
Title and Application
Section
1
Title. This resolution shall be known as the “Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Philippine
HIV and
AIDSPolicy Act”.
Section 2 Purpose. The
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) shall prescribe guidelines, procedures
and standards for the implementation of the mandates and objectives of R.A. No. 11166, and to ensure and
facilitate complianceto its provisions.
Section 3 Declaration of Policies.
a) The Human
Immunodeficiency
Virus (HIV) and Acquired
Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) are
public health concerns that have wide-ranging
social, political, and economic repercussions. Responding
to the country's HIV and AIDS situation is therefore imbued with public interest and shall be anchored on
the principles of human rights upholding human dignity.
b)
Policies and practices that discriminate on the basis of perceived or actual HIV status, sex, gender,
sexual orientation, gender identity, age, economic status, disability, and ethnicity hamper the enjoyment
of basic humanrights and freedoms guaranteed
in the Constitution and are deemed inimical to national
interest.
c) The State shall respect, protect, and promote human
rights as the cornerstones
of an
effective
response to the country’s
HIV and AIDS situation.
Hence,
HIV and AIDS education and
information
dissemination shall form part of the right to health.
d) The
meaningful
inclusion and
participation
of persons
directly and indirectly affected by HIV and
AIDS, especially persons
living
with
HIV, are crucial
in
eliminating the virus. Thus, unless otherwise
provided
in this IRR, the confidentiality, and the non-compulsory nature of HIV testing and HIV-related
testing shall always be guaranteed and protected by the State.
e)
Towards this end, the State shall ensure the delivery of non-discriminatory HIV and AIDS services by
the government and private HIV and AIDS service providers and shall develop redress mechanismsfor
persons living with HIV to ensure that their civil, political, economic, and social rights are protected.

f)
Accordingly, the State shall:
1. Establish policies and programs to prevent the spread of HIV and deliver treatment, care, and
support services to Filipinos
living with HIV in accordance with evidence-based
strategies and
approaches
that
uphold
the
principles
of human
rights,
gender-responsiveness,
and
age-
appropriateness,
including
meaningful
participation
of communities affected by HIV and AIDS
situation;
2. Adopt a multi-sectoral approach in responding to the country's HIV and AIDS by ensuring that
the whole of government approach, local communities, civil society organizations, and persons
living with HIV are at the center of the process;
3. Ensure access to
HIV and
AlDS-related
services by eliminating the climate
of stigma and
discrimination that surrounds the country’s
HIV and
AIDSsituation and the people directly and
indirectly affected
byit; and
4. Positively address and seek to eradicate conditions that aggravate the spread of HIV infection,
which include poverty, genderinequality, marginalization, and ignorance.
Section 4 Definition of Terms. For the purposesof this IRR,the following terms shall be defined as follows:
a) Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)refers to a health condition wherethere is a deficiency
of the immune system that stems from infection with the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) making an
individual susceptible to opportunistic infections;
b) Act refers to Republic Act No. 11166;
c) Anti-retroviral
therapy
(ART) refers to the treatment that stops or suppresses viral
replication or
replications of a retrovirus,like HIV, thereby slowing down the progressionof infection:
d) Bullying refers to any severe or repeated use by one or more personsofa written, verbal or electronic
expression, or a physical act or gesture, or any combination thereof, directed at another person that has
the effect of actually causing or placing the latter in reasonable fear of physical or emotional harm or
damage to one’s property; creating a hostile environment for the other person; infringing on the rights of
another person; or
materially and substantially
disrupting the processes or orderly operation of an
institution or organization;

e) Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) refers to groups
of non-governmental
and
non-commercial
individuals or legal entities that are engaged in non-coerced
collective
action around shared interests,
purpose and values;
f) Community-based research refers to studies undertaken
in
community settings and which
involve
community membersin the design and implementation of research projects:
g) Comprehensive Health Intervention for Key Populations refers to evidence-based policies, programs
and approaches that aim to reduce transmission of HIV and its harmful consequences on health, social
relations and economic conditions;
h) Compulsory
HIV testing refers to HIV testing imposed upon
an individual characterized by lack of
consent, use of force or intimidation, the use of testing as a prerequisite for employment or other
purposes, and other circumstances when informed choice is absent;
i) Culture-sensitive refers to the quality of the
implementation
of HIV programs and services
being
compatible and appropriate to the culture,
beliefs, customs and
traditions,
indigenous systems and
practices;
j) Discrimination
refers to unfair or unjust treatment that distinguishes, excludes, restricts, or shows
preferences based on any ground such as sex, gender, age, sexual orientation, genderidentity and
expression, economic status, disability,
ethnicity, and HIV status, whether actual or perceived, and all
other similar or analogous cases, and which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the
recognition, enjoymentor exercise
byall persons similarly situated, or all rights and freedoms;
k) Evolving capacities of the child refers to the concept enshrinedin Article 5 of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child recognizing the developmental changes and the corresponding progress in cognitive
abilities and capacity for self-determination undergone
by children as they grow up, thus
requiring
parents and others charged with the responsibility for the child to provide varying degrees of protection
and to allow their participation in opportunities for autonomous decision-makingin different contexts and
across different areas of decision-making;
!) Gender expression refers to the way a person
communicates
gender
identity to others through
behavior, clothing, hairstyles, communication or speech pattern, or body characteristics;
m) Gender identity refers to the personal sense ofidentity as characterized, among others, by mannerof
clothing,
inclinations, and behavior in relation to masculine or feminine conventions. A person may have
a maleor female identity with the physiological characteristics of the opposite sex;

n) Gender-responsive refers to the ability to substantively address
genderissues
identified through
gender analysis of sex-disaggregated data and gender-related information;
0) Gender-sensitive refers to the ability to recognize and acknowledgethe differences in roles, needs,
and perspectives of women and men, possible asymmetries in their relationship, and the possibility that
actions or interventions will have different effects on, and results for, women and men based
ontheir
gender, but do not actively seek to address these issues;
p) Health Maintenance Organization
(HMO) refers to juridical entities legally organized to provide or
arrange for the provision of pre-agreed or designated health care servicesto its enrolled membersfor a
fixed pre-paid fee for a specified period
oftime;
q) High-risk behavior refers to a person's
involvement
in certain
activities that increase the risk of
transmitting or acquiring HIV;
tr) Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) refers to the virus, of the type called
retrovirus, which infects
cells of the human immune system, and destroys or impairs the cells’ function. Infection with HIV results
in the progressive deterioration of the immune system, leading to immune deficiency;
s) HIV counseling refers to the interpersonal and dynamic communication process betweena
client and
a trained counselor, who is bound by a code of ethics and practice, to resolve personal,
social, or
psychological problems and
difficulties,
whose objective
in counseling,
in the context of an
HIV
diagnosis, is to encourage the client to explore important personal issues, identify ways of coping with
anxiety and stress, and plan for the future (keeping
healthy, adhering to treatment, and preventing
transmission); and in the context of a negative
HIV test
result,
to encourage the client to explore
motivations,
options, and skills to stay HIV-negative;
t) HIV and AIDS counselor refers to any individual trained by
an institution or organization accredited by
the Department of Health (DOH) to provide counseling services on HIV and AIDS with emphasis on
behavior modification,
u) HIV and AIDS monitoring refers to the documentation and analysis of the number of HIV and AIDS
infections and the pattern ofits spread:
v) HIV and AIDS prevention and control refers to measures aimed at protecting non-infected persons
from contracting HIV and minimizing the impact of the condition of persons living with HIV;
w) H/V-Negative refers to the absenceof HIV or HIV antibodies upon HIV testing;

x) HIV-Positive refers to the presence of HIV infection as documented by the presence of HIV or HIV
antibodies in the sample being tested;
y) HIV Testing refers to any facility-based,
mobile
medical procedure, or community-based screening
modalities that are conducted to determine the presence or absence of HIV in a person's body.
HIV
testing is confidential,
voluntary
in nature, and must be accompanied by counseling prior to and after the
testing, and conducted only with the informed consentof the person;
z) HIV-related Testing refers to any laboratory testing or procedure done on an individual in relation to a
person's HIV condition;
aa) HIV Testing Facility refers to any DOH-accredited on-site or mobile testing center, hospital, clinic,
laboratory, and other facility that has the capacity to conduct voluntary HIV counseling and HIV testing;
bb) HIV Transmission refers to the transfer of HIV from one infected person to an uninfected individual,
through unprotected sexual intercourse, blood transfusion, sharing of contaminated intravenous needles,
or which may occur during pregnancy, delivery, and breastfeeding;
cc) Informed Consentrefers to the voluntary agreement of a person to undergo or be subjected to a
procedure based
onfull information, whether such permission is written or conveyed verbally;
dd) Indigent refers to a condition when a person does not have the financial means to pay for their
medical expenses and/or practical support as determined
bya
licensed social worker through a needs
based assessment;
ee) Key Affected Populations or Key Population refers to those groups or personsat higher risk of HIV
exposure, or affected populations whose behavior make them
morelikely to be exposed to HIV or to
transmit the virus;
ff} Laboratory refers to an area or place,
including community-based settings, where research studies
are being undertaken to develop local evidence for effective HIV response;
gg) Mature minor doctrine refers to the legal principle that recognizes the capacity of some minors to
consent
independently
to
medical
procedures,
if they have
been
assessed
by
qualified
health
professionals to understand the nature of procedures and their consequences and to make a decision on
their own;
hh) Medical confidentiality refers to the core duty of medical practice where the information
provided by
the patient to health practitioners and his/her health status is kept private and is not divulgedto third

10
parties. The patient's health status can, however, be shared with other medical practitioners involved
in
the professional care
of the
patient,
who
will also be
bound
by
medical
confidentiality.
Medical
confidentiality
applies
to
the
attending
physician,
consulting
medical
specialist,
nurse,
medical
technologist, and all other health workers or personnel involved in any counseling, testing or professional
care of the patient.
It also applies to any person who,in any official capacity, has acquired or may have
acquired such confidential
information;
ii)
Opportunistic infections referto illnesses caused by various organisms many of which do not cause
diseases in persons with healthy immune system;
jj) Outpatient HIV and AIDS Treatment (OHAT) refers to the benefit package for outpatient treatment of
HIV and AIDS offered by PhilHealth;
kk) Partner notification refers to the process by which the “index client’, “source”, or “patient”, who has a
sexually transmitted
infection (STI), including
HIV, is given support in order to notify and advise the
partners that have been exposedto infection. Support includes giving the index client a mechanism to
encourage the client's partner to attend counseling, testing and other prevention and treatment services.
Confidentiality shall be observed in the entire process;
I!) Person Living with HIV (PLHIV) refers to any individual diagnosed to be infected with HIV;
mm) Persons with Disabilities refers to those
whoare suffering from restriction or different abilities, as a
result of a mental,
physical, or sensory
impairment,
to perform an activity in the manner or within the
range considered
normal for a human being as defined in
Republic Act No. 7277, as amended
by
Republic Act No. 9442, otherwise known as the “Magna Carta for Disabled Persons’;
nn) Pre-exposure prophylaxis refers to the use of prescription drugs as a strategy for the prevention of
HIV infection by people who do not have HIV and AIDS.It is an optional treatment which may be taken
by people who are
HIV-negative
but who have substantial, higher-than-average risk of contracting an
HIV infection;
00) Pre-test
counseling refers to the
process
of
providing
an
individual
with
information
on the
biomedical aspects of
HIV and AIDS and emotional support to any
psychological
implications
of
undergoing HIV testing and the test result itself before the individual is subjected to thetest;
pp) Post-exposure
prophylaxis refers to a preventive
medical
treatment
started
immediately
after
exposure to a pathogen (HIV) in order to preventinfection by the pathogen and the development of the
disease;

11
qq) Post-test counseling refers to the process of providing
risk-reduction
information and emotional
support to a person who has submitted to HIV testing at the time the result is released;
rr) Private
sector
refers
to
groups,
associations,
schools,
colleges,
and
universities,
business
enterprises
owned and
operated
by
private
individuals
or groups,
and
other
organizations
and
establishments,
including individuals, which are not part of the government and CSOsas defined
in this
IRR;
ss) Prophylactic refers to any agent or device used to prevent the transmission of
an infection;
tt) Provider-initiated counseling and testing refers to a health care
provider initiating
HIV testing to a
person
practicing
high-risk behavior or vulnerable to HIV after conducting HIV pre-test counseling. A
person mayelect to decline or defer testing such that consentis conditional;
uu) Redressrefers to an act of compensation for unfairness, grievance, and reparation;
vw) Safer sex practices refer to choices made and behaviors adopted by a person to reduce or minimize
the risk of HIV transmission. These may include postponing sexual debut, non-penetrative sex, correct
and consistent use of male or female condoms, and reducing the numberof sexual partners;
ww) Sexually Transmitted Infections
(STIs) refers to infections that are spread through the transfer of
organisms from one person to another as a result of sexual contact;
xx) Sexual orientation refers to the direction
of emotional and sexual attraction or conduct towards
people of the same sex (homosexual orientation) or towards people of both sexes (bisexual orientation)
or towards people of the opposite sex (heterosexual orientation),
or to the absence of sexual attraction
(asexual orientation);
yy) Social protection refers to a set of
policies
and
programs
designed
to
reduce
poverty
and
vulnerability by promoting efficient labor markets, diminishing people’s exposureto risks, and enhancing
their capacity to protect themselves against hazards and interruptions
onor loss of income;
22) Stigma refers to the dynamic devaluation and dehumanization of an individual in the eyesof others,
which may be based
on attributes that are arbitrarily defined by others as discreditable or unworthy and
which results in discrimination when acted upon;
aaa) Treatment hubsrefers to private and public hospitals or medical establishments accredited by DOH
to have the capacity and facility to provide treatment and care services to PLHIV;

bbb) Voluntary HIV testing refers to HIV testing done on an individual who, after having undergonepre-
test counseling, willingly submits to suchtest;
cec)
Vulnerable communities refer to communities and groups suffering from
vulnerabilities,
such as
unequal opportunities,
social
exclusion,
poverty, unemployment, and other similar
social, economic,
cultural and political conditions,
making them more susceptible to HIV infection and to developing AIDS:
and
ddd)
Workplace refers to the office, premise or work site where workers are habitually employed and
shall include the office or place where workers, with no fixed or definite work site,
regularly report for
assignment in the course
oftheir employment.
RULE 2
The Philippine National AIDS Council
Section 5 Philippine National AIDS Council (PNAC).
a) The
PNAC shall ensure the implementation of the country’s responseto the HIV and AIDS situation.
b) The PNAC shall be an agency attached to the DOH
with a separate budget under the General
Appropriations Act (GAA).
It shall have its own Secretariat and staffing
pattern, and shall be headed by
an Executive Director.
Section 5.1 Functions.
a) The PNACshall perform the following functions:
1. Develop and regularly review an AIDS Medium Term Plan (AMTP)in collaboration with relevant
government agencies, LGUs, CSOs, the
PLHIV
community, and other stakeholders. The AMTP
shall include the following:
i. The country’s targets and strategies in addressing the HIV and AIDS situation;
ii. The prevention, treatment, care and support, and other components of the
country’s
response;
ii. The operationalization of the program
and identification of the government agencies that
shall
implement the
program,
including
the
designated
office
within
each
agency
12

13
responsible for overseeing,
coordinating,
facilitating and monitoring the implementation of
its HIV and AIDS program from the national level to the local level; and
iv. The budgetary requirements and a corollary investment plan of each government agency
and
CSOs specified
in the
AMTP, and
shall
identify the
sources
of funds for its
implementation.
2. Ensure the operationalization and implementation of the AMTP;
3. Strengthen
the
collaboration
between
government
agencies
and
CSOs
involved
in the
implementation of the national
HIV and AIDS response, including the delivery of HIV and AIDS
related services;
4. Develop and ensure the implementation of the guidelines and
policies
provided
in this
Act,
including other policies that may be necessary to implement the AMTP;
5. Monitor the progress of the response to the country’s HIV and AIDS situation and actively seek
good practices from all stakeholders;
6. Monitor the implementation of the AMTP, which includes the AMTP investment plan, undertake
mid-term assessments, and evaluateits impact;
7. Mobilize sources of funds for the AMTP;
8. Direct and require its members to conduct monitoring and evaluation in all of the HIV-related
programs, policies, and services undertaken within their respective mandates, and to submit an
annual
report.
In
relation
to
this,
other
government
agencies,
LGUs,
CSOs,
the
PLHIV
community, and other stakeholders are enjoined to submit similar reports to the appropriate PNAC
member,
9. Coordinate, organize, and work
in partnership with foreign
and
international
organizations
regarding funding, data collection, research, and prevention and treatment modalities on HIV and
AIDS, and ensure that foreign-funded programs arealigned to the national plan and response;
10. Advocate for policy reforms to Congress and other government agencies to strengthen the
country’s responseto the HIV and
AIDS situation;
11. Submit an annual accomplishment/progress report on the accomplishments under the AMTP
to the Office of the President, Congress and membersofthe Council;

12. Identify gaps in the national
response on the part of government agencies
andits partners
from the civil society and international organizations in order to develop and implementthe initial
interventions required in these situations; and
13. Recommend
policies and programs that
will
institutionalize
or continue the interventions
required in addressing the gaps identified
in the national response to the HIV and
AIDS situation
of the country.
b) In addition to the powers and functions enumerated under the preceding paragraph, the members of
the PNAC shall also develop and
implement
individual
action plans which shall be anchored to and
integrated
in the AMTP. Such action plans shall be based on the duties, powers, and functions of the
individual agencies
as identified in Rule 4 to Rule 10 of this IRR.
Section 6 Membership and Composition.
a) The following shall be represented
in the PNAC:
1. Department of Health (DOH) - Secretary of Health as permanent Chairperson
2. Department of Education (DepEd);
3. Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE);
4. Departmentof Social Welfare and Development (DSWD):
5. Departmentof the Interior and Local Government (DILG);
6. Department of Budget and Management (DBM);
7. Civil Service Commission (CSC);
8. Commission on Higher Education (CHED):
9. National Youth Commission (NYC);
10. Philippine Information Agency (PIA);
14

11. Chairperson of the Committee on Health and Demography of the Senate of the Philippines or
his/her representative;
12. Chairperson
of the Committee
on
Health
of the
House
of
Representatives
or his/her
representative;
13. Two (2) representatives from organizations of Persons Living with HIV and AIDS (PLHIV);
14. One (1) representative from the private organization with expertise
in standard setting and
service delivery; and
15. Six (6) representatives from NGOs working for the welfare of identified key populations.
b) The Vice Chairperson shall be elected from among the government agency membersof the PNAC.
c} The
PNAC
may, as deemed
necessary,
invite to
its meetings and
activities
other government
agencies, NGOs, and experts, who have relevant expertise that may be useful to accomplish its mandate
and mission under this IRR.
Section 6.1 Selection Criteria.
a) The selection and appointment of the members of PNAC shall be based on the following general
criteria:
1. Government agencies or CSOswith direct contribution to the performanceof the core functions
of the
PNAC (oversight,
direction-setting and policy-making);
2. Government agencies or CSOs with existing programs, services and
activities that directly
contribute to the achievement of the AMTP;
3. Government agencies or CSOs with existing constituencies that are targeted by the AMTPs
objectives and activities.
b) The heads of government agencies may designate
an official representative to the PNAC whose rank
shall not be lower than Assistant Secretary
orits equivalent.
15

Section 6.2 Meetings and Quorum.
a) The PNAC shall meet at least once every quarter at any venue, the notice of the meeting, including
the agenda for the meeting, shall be sent to the PNAC members at least one (1) month before the
scheduled meeting, except on emergency basis, in which case a forty-eight (48) hour notice shall be
sufficient.
The presence of the Chairperson or the Vice Chairperson of the PNAC, andat least ten (10) other PNAC
members and/or permanent representative shall constitute a quorum to do business, and a majority vote
of those present shall be sufficient to pass resolutions or render decisions.
b) Decisions made and resolutions passed by the PNAC shall be signed by majority of members of the
PNAC, and attested by the Executive Director of the PNAC Secretariat.
Section 6.3 Terms of Office.
a) The Vice Chairperson shall serve for a term of three (3) years.
b) Members representing the CSOs shall serve for a term of three (3) years, renewable
upon the
recommendation of the Council for a maximum
oftwo (2) consecutive terms.
Section 6.4 Committees.
16
a) The PNACshall establish committees to conductits work based on the AMTP.
b) The PNAC shall determinethe role, functions, and membership of each committee and shall allocate
the respective agenda and topic of their coverage based on the provisions of this IRR and the AMTP.
Each committee
shall
have
representatives
from the CSO and a CSO
representative as a co-
chairperson.
c) The
PNAC
may, as deemed
necessary,
invite to
its
meetings and
activities
other government
agencies, CSOs, and stakeholders, who have relevant expertise that may be useful
in accomplishingits
mandate and work.

RULE 3
Secretariat
Section 7 PNAC Secretariat.
a) The PNACshall be supported by a secretariat consisting of personnel with the necessary technical
expertise and capability whose appointments shall be issued subject to Civil Service law and rules. The
Secretariat shall be headed by the Executive Director.
b) The PNAC Secretariat shall perform the following functions:
1. Coordinate and manage the day-to-dayaffairs of the PNAC;
2. Assist in the formulation,
monitoring, and evaluation of policies and the AMTP;
3. Provide technical assistance,
support, and advisory services
to the PNAC
andits external
partners;
4. Assist the PNACin identifying and building internal and external networks and partnerships;
5. Coordinate and support the efforts of the PNAC and its members to mobilize resources;
6. Serve as the repository of relevant information and data in relation to HIV and AIDS;
7. Disseminate updated, accurate, relevant, and comprehensive information to the members
ofthe
PNAC,the policy-makers, and the media on the situation of HIV and AIDSin the country;
8. Provide administrative support to the PNAC; and
9. Coordinate, fund and
implement, as directed by the PNAC,the interventions required for the
identified gaps in the implementation of the AMTP,in cooperation with the CSOs and the PLHIV
community.
Section 8 Executive Director. The Executive
Director shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines
and under the direct supervision of the Chairperson of the PNAC.
17

Section 9 The Role of DOH.
a) The
NASPCP,
which
shall be composed
of qualified
medical
officers
or
medical
specialists and
support personnel with permanent appointments and with adequate yearly budget, shall coordinate with
the
PNACfor the implementation of the health sector’s HIV and AIDS and STI response,as identified
in
the AMTP.
b) The
Epidemiology Bureau shail maintain a comprehensive HIV and AIDS monitoring and evaluation
program that shall serve the following purposes:
1.
Determine and monitor the magnitude and progression of HIV and AIDSin the Philippines to
help the PNAC evaluate the adequacy and
efficacy of HIV prevention and treatment programs
being employed;
2.
Receive, collate, process, and evaluate all medical reports related to HIV and AIDS, including
HlV-related
deaths and relevant data, from public and
private hospitals, various databanks or
information systems:
Provided,
Thatit shall adopt a coding system that ensures
anonymity and
confidentiality; and
3.
Submit, through the PNAC Secretariat, quarterly and annual reports to the PNAC containing
the findings of its monitoring and evaluation activities in compliance with this mandate.
Section 10 Protection of Human Rights.
18
a) The country’s response to the HIV and
AIDS situation shall be anchored
onthe principles of human
rights and human dignity. Public health concerns shall be aligned
with internationally-recognized human
rights instruments and standards.
b) The members of the PNAC, in cooperation with the CSOs, and in collaboration with the Departmentof
Justice
(DOJ)
and the Commission
on
Human
Rights
(CHR),
shall
ensure the
delivery
of non-
discriminatory
HIV and AIDS services by government and private HIV and AIDS service providers.
c) The DOJ and CHR,in coordination with the PNAC and other relevant government agencies, shall take
the lead in developing redress mechanisms for PLHIV, and any person who experience discrimination on
the basis of perceived or suspected
HIV status to ensure that their civil, political, economic, and social
rights are protected.

d) The PNAC,in coordination with the DILG, shall collaborate and cooperate with local government units
(LGUs) to strengthen
existing
mediation and
reconciliation
mechanisms at the local level through the
Local AIDS Councils
orits equivalent entity.
RULE 4
Information, Education and Communication
Section 11 Prevention Program.
a) The
PNAC shail develop an HIV and AIDS prevention program to educate the public on HIV and AIDS
and other STls, with the goal of reducing
risky
behavior,
lowering
vulnerabilities,
and
promoting the
humanrights of PLHIV and eliminating stigma and discrimination.
b) The PNAC shail promote and adopt a range of measures and interventions, in partnership with CSOs
that aim to prevent, halt, or control the spread of HIV in the general population, especially among the key
populations and vulnerable communities. These measures shall likewise promote the rights, welfare, and
participation of PLHIV and the affected children, young people, families, and partners of PLHIV.
c) The HIV and AIDS education and prevention programs based on up-to-date evidence and scientific
strategies, as recommended by the DOHshall be conducted by concerned
implementing
agencies in an
age-appropriate,
culture-sensitive and
gender-responsive
manner. The HIV and AIDS education and
prevention programsshall actively promote:
1. Safer sex practices among the general population,
including sexual abstinence, sexual fidelity,
and consistent and correct use of condom especially among key populations;
2. Other practices that reduce risk of HIV infection;
3. Universal awareness of and access to evidence-based and relevant information and education,
and medically safe, legally affordable,
effective and quality treatment; and
4. Knowledge
ofthe health, civil, political, economic and social rights of PLHIV and their families.
Section 12 Education in Learning Institutions.
a) Using
standardized
information and data from the PNAC, the
DepEd,
CHED, and the Technical
Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) shall integrate basic and age-appropriate,
culture-
sensitive and
gender-responsive
instruction
on the causes,
modes
of transmission
and ways
of
preventing the spread of HIV and AIDS and other STIs in their respective curricula taught in public and
19

private
learning
institutions, alternative and indigenous learning
systems, including training
institutions
catering to Persons with Disability. The learning
modules shall include human rights-based principles and
information on treatment, care and support to promote stigma reduction and prevent discrimination.
b) The learning modules to be developed to implement this provision shall be done in coordination with
the PNAC and stakeholders in the education sector. Referral mechanisms,
including but not limited to,
the
DSWD
Referral
System,
shall
be
included
in the modules for key populations and vulnerable
communities.
c) The DepEd, CHED, and TESDA shall ensure the development and provision of psychosocial support
and counseling
in learning
institutions, for the development of positive health, and promotion of values
and behavior pertaining to reproductive health,
in
coordination
with the DOH.For this purpose, funds
shall be allocated by the concerned government agencies for the training
and certification of teachers
and school counselorsfor the effective implementationof this provision.
Section
13
Education
for
Parents
and
Guardians.
The
DepEd,
in coordination
with
parent-teacher
organizations
in schools and communities, shall conduct awareness-building
seminars in order to provide
parents and guardians with a gender-responsive and age-sensitive HIV and AIDS education.
Section 14 Education as a Right to
Health and
Information.
HIV and AIDS education and
information
dissemination shall form part of the constitutional right to health.
Section 15 HIV and AIDS information as a Health Service.
20
a) HIV and AIDS education and
information
dissemination
shall form part of the
delivery
of health
services by health practitioners, workers and personnel. The knowledge and capabilities of all public
health workers shall be enhanced to include skills for proper information dissemination and education on
HIV and AIDS.
b) It shall be the civic duty of health providers in the private sector to provide the public with necessary
information to prevent and control the spread of HIV and AIDS
andto correct common misconceptions
about the disease.
c) The
training
of health workers such
as doctors,
nurses,
barangay
health workers and other
practitioners
shall
include,
but
not
limited
to,
ethical
issues
related
to
HIV
and
AIDS,
such
as
confidentiality,
informed consent, and the duty to provide treatment.

Section 16 Education in the Workplace.
a) The PNACshall develop standardized and key messages on the prevention and control of HIV and
AIDS based on current and updated information
onthe disease.
b) All public and
private employers and employees,
including
members of the Armed Forces of the
Philippines (AFP) and the Philippine National Police (PNP), shall be regularly provided with standardized
basic information and instruction on HIV and AIDS, including topics on confidentiality
in the workplace
and reduction
orelimination of stigma and discrimination.
The
DOLE forthe private sector, the CSC for
the public sector, and the AFP and PNPfor the uniformed service shall implementthis provision.
c) The standardized basic information and instruction
shall be conducted by the
DOLE for the private
sectorat no cost to the employers and employees.
Section 17 Education for Filipinos Going Abroad.
a) The State shall ensure that all overseas Filipino workers and diplomatic, military, trade, labor, tourism
and other government officials and personnel to be assigned overseas shall attend a seminar on the
causes,
mannerof prevention, and
impact of HIV and AIDS before being granted a certification
for
overseas assignment:
Provided, That the seminar shall be conducted at no cost to the overseas Filipino
workersorto the officials concerned.
b) The
DOLE,
including the
Philippine
Overseas
Employment Agency
(POEA)
and the
Overseas
Workers
Welfare
Administration
(OWWA), the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), the Commission on
Filipino Overseas (CFO), and other relevant government agencies, in collaboration
with the DOH, shall
require
all
departing
personnel
prior
to
deployment
or
assignment
abroad
to
undergo
seminar,
orientation, or training on the causes, mannerof prevention, and impact of HIV and AIDS.
Section 18 information for Tourists and Transients.
21
a) Educational materials on the causes,
modesof transmission, prevention, and consequences of HIV
infection and list of HIV and AIDS counseling and testing facilities shall be adequately
provided
atail
international and local ports of entry and exit in the Philippines.
b) The PIA, together with Department of Tourism (DOT), the Department of Transportation (DOTr), and
other relevant government agencies,
in coordination with the PNAC and stakeholders
in the tourism
industry, shall lead the implementation
ofthis section.

Section 19 Education in Communities.
a) The DILG, the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines (ULAP), the League of Provinces of the
Philippines
(LPP), the League of Cities of the
Philippines
(LCP), the League of Municipalities of the
Philippines (LMP), and Liga ng mga Barangaysa Pilipinas through the Local AIDS Councils
(LAC)
orthe
local health boards, Local Council for the Protection of Children (LCPC)
in coordination with the PNAC,
shall implement a locally-based,
multi-sectoral
community
response to HIV and AIDS through various
channels
on
evidence-based,
culture-sensitive and
gender-responsive,
age-appropriate,
and human
rights-oriented prevention tools to stop the spread of HIV and AIDS. The community response shall also
give due focus to Indigenous Peoples (IP) communities, geographically isolated and disadvantaged
areas (GIDA), as well as individuals who are not employed and not enrolled in any learning
or training
institutions.
Other formal organizations such as Sangguniang Kabataan and Association of Barangay Captains, are
enjoined to likewise implement a similar community response to HIV and AIDS.
Gender and Development (GAD)fundsof the implementing agencies and other sources
maybe utilized
for this purpose.
b) The
DILG and the
DSWD,in coordination
with the
National Commission on Indigenous People
(NCIP), shall establish a plan for a locally-based
multi-sectoral
community response to HIV and AIDSin
iP communities and GIDA.
c) The DILG, in coordination with the DSWD and the NYC,shall also conduct age-appropriate
HIV and
AIDS education for persons who are “Not in Education, Employment, or Training” (NEET).
d) The Komisyon ng Wikang Pilipino
in coordination with DepED,
DILG, CHED, and NCIP, and other
relevant government agencies, the academe, and local government units (LGUs), shall be in charge of
the translation of educational materials to local languagesin IP and GIDA communities.
e) The National Council on Disability Affairs (NCDA), shall ensure the promotion and
provision of and
coordination for technical assistance
in the
production
of educational materials
in various accessible
formats for persons
with various types
ofdisabilities,
with different concerned institutions (government
andprivate).
Section 20 Education for Key Populations and Vulnerable
Communities.
a) To ensure that HIV services reach key populations at higher risk, the PNAC,in collaboration
with the
LGUs and CSOs engaged
in HIV and AIDS programs and projects, shall support and provide funding for
22

HIV and AIDS education programs, such as peer education, support groups, outreach
activities, and
community based research that target these populations and other vulnerable communities.
b) The DOH,in
coordination
with appropriate agencies and the
PNAC, shall craft the guidelines and
standardized information messages for peer education, support group, and outreach activities.
Section 21
Information on Prophylactics. The DOH, through the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), shall
establish guidelines in printing or attaching appropriate
information to every prophylactic offered for sale or
given as a donation. Such information shall be legibly printed in English and Filipino, and contain literature on
the properuseofthe prophylactic device or agent andits efficacy and adverse effects against HIV and STI.
Section 22 Misinformation on HIV and AIDS. Any misinformation on HIV and AIDS shall be strictly prohibited.
Misinformation includes false and misleading
advertising and claims in any form of media, including traditional
media, internet and social platforms, and mobile applications; or the promotional
marketing of drugs, devices,
agents or procedures, without prior approval from the DOH through the FDA and without the requisite medical
and scientific basis, including markings and indications
in drugs and devices or agents, claiming to be a cure
or a fail-safe
prophylactic for HIV infection.
RULE 5
Preventive Measures, Safe Practices and Procedures
Section 23 HIV Prevention Measures.
a) The PNAC,in
coordination
with the DOH, LGUs, and other relevant government agencies,
private
sector, CSOs, faith-based organizations, and PLHIVs, shall implement preventive measures,
including
but notlimited to the following:
1. Creation of rights-based and
community-led
behavior
modification
programs that seek to
encourage HIV risk reduction behavior among PLHIVs and Key Populations;
2. Establishment
and
enforcement
of rights-based
mechanisms,
which
include
psychosocial
counseling: A. to promote HIV status disclosure to partners; and B. to strongly encourage newly
tested HIV-positive individuals to conductpartner notification;
3. Establishment of standard precautionary measuresin public and private health facilities;
4. Accessibility of ART, prophylactics and age-appropriate managementof opportunistic infections;
23

5. Mobilization of communities of PLHIVs
andtheir families for public awareness campaigns and
stigma and discrimination
reduction activities; and
6. Establishment of comprehensive human rights and evidence-based
policies, programs, and
approaches that aim to reduce transmission of HIV and its harmful consequences to membersof
key affected populations.
b) The enforcement ofthis section shal! not lead to or result in the discrimination or violation of the rights
of PLHIV andof the service provider implementing the program including peer educators and community-
based testing providers.
Section 24 Comprehensive Health Intervention for Key Populations.
a) The
DILG and DOH,in partnership
with CHR, the key populations, which may be represented
by
CSOs
and
youth-led
organizations,
shall establish a human rights-based and
evidence-based
HIV
prevention
policy and
program
for people
who
have higher risk of
HIV
infection
and other
key
populations.
b) The presence of used or unused prophylactics shall not be used as basis to conduct raids or similar
police
operations
in sites and
venues
of
HIV prevention interventions. The
DILG
and
DOH,in
coordination with LGUs shall establish a national policy and develop necessary guidelines.
Section 25 Preventing Mother-to-Child HIV Transmission (PMTCT).
a) The
DOH
shall
establish a
program
to prevent
mother-to-child
HIV transmission that
shall be
integrated in its maternal and child health services.
b) The PMTCT program shall include
universal
voluntary
HIV testing, counseling, and referrals to HIV
treatment and care.
c) The
PLHIV pregnant women shail have access to prenatal care, correct information on the mode of
delivery and newborn feeding to be provided
by the attending
physician and other health workers to
prevent mother-to-child transmission.
Section 26 Standard Precaution on the Donation of Blood,
Tissue, or Organ. The
DOH shall enforce the
following guidelines on the donation of blood, tissue, or organ:
a)
Donation of tissue or organ, whether gratuitous or onerous, shall be accepted by a laboratory or
institution only after a sample from the donor has been tested negative for HIV;
24

b)
All donated blood shall be subjected to HIV testing;
c)
All donors whose blood, organ or tissue has
been tested positive shall be deferred from donation,
notified of their
HIV status, counselled, and referred for care and clinical
management as soon as
possible;
d)
Donationsof blood, tissue, or organ testing positive for HIV may be accepted for research purposes
only and shall be subjectto strict sanitary disposal requirements; and
e) A second testing may be demanded as a matter of right by the blood, tissue, or organ recipient or
his/her immediate relatives before transfusion
or transplant,
except
during
emergency cases.
For
transfusion, a second testing must only be done
in selected designated
DOH-licensed
Blood Service
Facilities.
Section 27 Testing of Organ Donation. Lawful consent to HIV testing of a donated human bodyorgan, tissue,
or blood shall be considered as having been given when:
a) A person
volunteers or freely
agrees
to donate one’s
blood,
organ, or tissue
for transfusion,
transplantation, or research; and
b) A legacy or donation is executed
in accordance with Sections 3 and 4 respectively, of Republic Act
No. 7170, otherwise knownas the “Organ Donation Actof 1991”.
Section 28 Guidelines on Medical Management, Surgical, and Other Related Procedures.
25
a) The DOH,in consultation with concerned professional organizations and
hospital associations, shall
issue guidelines on medical managementof PLHIV and protocol on precautions against HIV transmission
during surgical, dental, embalming, body painting or tattooing that require the use of needlesor similar
procedures.
b) The necessary protective equipment, such as gloves, goggles, gowns, and post exposure prophylaxis
shall be prescribed and required, and made available to all physicians and health care providers, tattoo
artists, embalmers, undertakers and high risk personnel similarly exposed personnel atall times.
c) The DOH shall issue guidelines on the handling and disposal of cadavers,
body fluids, or wastes of
persons
knownor believed to be HIV-positive.

RULE 6
Screening, Testing and Counselling
Section 29 HIV Testing.
26
a) The State shall encourage voluntary HIV testing as a matter of policy. Written consent as evidenced
by the signature or a thumbmark as the case may be from the person taking the test must be obtained
before HIV testing.
1. In keeping with the principle of the evolving capacities of the child as defined in Section 4 (k) of
this IRR, if the personis fifteen (15) to below eighteen (18) years of age, consent to voluntary HIV
testing shall be obtained from the child without the need for the consent of a parent or guardian.
2. In keeping with the mature minor doctrine as defined in Section 4 (gg) of this IRR, any young
person age
below fifteen (15) years, who is pregnant or engagedin high risk behavior,
shall be
eligible for HIV testing and counseling with the assistance
of licensed social
worker or health
worker. Consent to voluntary HIV testing shall be obtained from the child without the need for the
consent of a parent or guardian.
3. In all other cases not covered by paragraph (b) of this section, consent to voluntary HIV testing
shall be obtained from
the child’s parents or legal guardian if the personis
below fifteen (15) years
of age or is mentally incapacitated.
In cases when thechild's parents or legal guardian cannot be
located despite reasonable efforts,
orif the child’s parents or legal guardian refuse to give consent,
it shall be obtained from the licensed social workeror health worker. To protect the bestinterest of
the child, the assent of the minor shall also be required prior to the
HIVtesting.
b)
In every circumstance, proper counseling shall be conducted by a social worker, health care provider,
or health care professional accredited by the DOH or the DSWD.
c) The HIV testing guidelines issued by the DOH shall include guidance for testing minors
andfor the
involvement of parents or guardians
in the HIV testing of minors. The guidelines shall be developedin
coordination with NYC, DSWD and Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC), including CSOs and other
relevant stakeholders within 60 days from the effectivity of this IRR.
d) The DOH,in coordination with other relevant government agencies and CSOs andother stakeholders
shall
continually
review and revise, as appropriate, the
HIV diagnostic
algorithm
based
on current
available laboratory technology and evidence.

Section 30 Compulsory HIV Testing. Compulsory HIV testing shall be allowed only in the following instances:
a) Whenit is necessary to test a person who is charged
with any of the offenses punishable under
Articles 263 (serious physicalinjuries), 264 (administering
injurious substances or beverages), 265 (less
serious physical injuries) and 266 (slight physical injuries), or Article 338 (simple seduction) of Act No.
3815, or the “The Revised Penal Code (RPC)”, as amended, or under Art. 266-A (rape) of the RPC, as
amended by R.A. 8353, otherwise known as “The Anti-Rape Law of 1997”;
b) Whenit is necessary to resolve relevant issues under Executive Order No. 209, otherwise known as
“The Family Codeof the Philippines’; and
c) As a prerequisite in the donation of blood in compliance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 7170,
otherwise known as the “Organ Donation Act of 1991”, and Republic Act No. 7719, otherwise known as
the “National Blood Services Actof 1994”.
Section 31 Mechanisms and Standards on Routine Provider-Iinitiated and Client-Initiated
HIV Counseling and
Testing.
27
a) The DOH shall establish mechanisms and standards on routine
provider-initiated and client-initiated
HIV counseling and testing.
b) To implementthis section, the DOH shall:
1. Accredit public and
private HIV testing facilities based on capacity to deliver testing services
including HIV and AIDS counseling: Provided, that only DOH-accredited HIV testing facilities shall
be allowed to conduct HIV testing;
2. Develop the guidelines within 60 days from the effectivity of this IRR for HIV counseling and
testing, including mobile HIV counseling and testing and routine
provider-initiated
HIV counseling
and testing, that shall ensure, among others, that HIV testing is based on informed consent,
is
voluntary and confidential,
is available at all times, and is provided by qualified persons and DOH-
accredited providers;
3. Accredit institutions or organizations thattrain HIV and AIDS counselorsin coordination with the
DSWD;
4. Accredit competent
HIV and AIDS counselors for persons with disabilities,
including,
but not
limited to, translators, the hearing-impaired, Braille for the visually-impaired
clients, in coordination
with the National Council for Disability Affairs (NCDA);

5. Set the standards for HIV counseling, and shall work closely with HIV and AIDS CSOsthattrain
HIV and AIDS counselors and peer educators,
in coordination with and
participation
of NGOs,
government organizations (GOs), and Civil Society Organizations of PLHIV (CSO-PLHIV); and
6. Ensure access to routine
provider-initiated counseling and testing as part of clinical care in all
healthcaresettings for the public.
c) All HIV testing facilities shall provide free pre-test and post-test HIV counseling to individuals who wish
to avail
HIV testing, which shail
likewise be
confidential.
No
HIV testing shall be conducted
without
informed consent.
d) The DOH,in coordination with relevant government agencies and CSOs, shail ensure that specific
approaches to HIV counseling
andtesting are adopted based on the nature and extent of HIV and AIDS
incidencein the country.
e) Pre-test counseling and post-test counseling shall be done by the HIV and AIDS counselor, licensed
social worker,licensed health service provider, or a DOH-accredited health service provider:
Provided,
that for the government HIVtesting facilities, pre-test and post-test HIV counseling shall be provided for
free.
Section 32 HIV Testing for Pregnant Women.
A health care provider who offers pre-natal medical care shall
offer
provider-initiated
HIV testing for pregnant women:
Provided, that any pregnant woman
who refuses to
avail of HIV testing shall not be denied pre- or ante-natal services. The DOH shail provide the necessary
guidelines for healthcare providers in the conductof the screening procedure.
RULE 7
Health and Support Services
Section 33 Treatment of Persons Living with HIV and AIDS.
The DOHshail establish a program to provide
free and accessible ART and
medication
for opportunistic infections to all
PLHIV,
who are enrolled
in the
program.
It shall
likewise designate
public and private hospitals to become treatment hubs. A manual of
procedures for management of PLHIV shall be developed by the DOH.
Section 34 Access to Medical Services by Indigents.
Indigent personsliving with HIV shall not be deprived
accessto health and nutrition services. The DOH and DSWDshali establish a program that will support better
access to ART and
medication
for opportunistic
infections to all
indigent
PLHIV,
which includes financial
support for necessary health and nutrition services related to the person's HIV condition.
28

Section 35 Economic Empowerment and Support.
PLHIV shall not be deprived
of any employment,
livelihood,
micro-finance,
self-help, and cooperative programs by reasonoftheir HIV status. The DSWD,in
coordination with
DILG, DOLE, and
TESDA, shall develop enabling policies and guidelines within 60 days
from the effectivity of this IRR to ensure economic empowerment and independence designed for PLHIV.
Section 36 Care and Support for Persons Living with
HIV. The
DSWD,in coordination with DOH, shall
develop care and support programs for PLHIV, which shall include peer-led counseling and support, social
protection, welfare assistance, and mechanisms for case management. These programs shall include care
and support for the affected children, families, partners, and support groups of PLHIV.
For PLHIVs below eighteen (18) years old/minors or those with mental
incapacity, the CWC shall develop a
protocolthat will include case managementand provision of support system.
Section
37 Care and Support for Overseas
Workers
Living
with
HIV. The Overseas Workers
Welfare
Administration
(OWWA), in coordination with DOH, DSWD, DFA, CFO, CSOsand the Bureau of Quarantine
and
International
Health Surveillance,
shall develop a program to
provide a stigma-free
comprehensive
reintegration, care, and support program,
including economic,
social, and
medical support, for overseas
workersliving with HIV, regardless of employment status and stage in the migration process.
Section 38 Care and Support for Affected Families,
Intimate Partners,
Significant Others and Children of
People Living with HIV. The DSWD, DOH, and LGUs,
in consultation with CSOs and affected families of
PLHIV,
shall develop care and support programs for affected families,
intimate partners,
significant others,
and children of PLHIV, which shall include the following:
a) Education programs that reduce
HIV-related stigma,
including counseling, to prevent
HIV-related
discrimination within the family;
b) Educational assistancefor children infected with HIV and children orphaned by HIV and AIDS; and
c) HIV treatment and management of opportunistic infections for minors
living
with
HIV, who are not
eligible under the Outpatient HIV and AIDS Treatment (OHAT) package of Philippine
Health Insurance
Corporation
(PhilHealth).
Section 39 Care and Support Program in Prisons and Others Closed-Setting Institutions.
a) All prisons, rehabilitation centers, and other closed-setting
institutions shall have comprehensive STI,
HIV and AIDS
prevention
and
control
program
that includes
HIV education and
information.
HIV
counseling and testing, and access to HIV treatment and care services. The
DOHin coordination with
DILG, DOJ, DSWD, and
CHR shall develop HIV and AIDS comprehensive programs and policies, which
29

include the HIV counseling and testing procedures in prisons,
rehabilitation centers, and other closed-
setting institutions.
b) PLHIV in prisons,
rehabilitation
centers, and other closed-setting
institutions
shall be provided
HIV
treatment, which includes ART, care, and support, in accordance with the national guidelines. Efforts
should be undertaken to ensure the continuity of care at all stages, from admission or imprisonmentto
release.
The
provision
on
informed
consent and
confidentiality
shall
also
apply
in
closed-setting
institutions.
c) In pursuit of the objectives of this IRR and within reasonable
conditions,
representatives from CHR,
DOJ, DOH, and other relevant agencies
shall be accorded unimpeded access to PLHIV in prisons,
rehabilitation centers, and closed-setting institutions.
Section 40
Non-discriminatory HIV and AIDS Services. The membersof the PNAC,in cooperation with CSOs
and in collaboration
with DOJ and CHR, shall ensure the delivery of non-discriminatory HIV and AIDSservices
by government and private HIV and AIDS service providers.
Section 41 Protection of HIV Educators, Licensed Social Workers, Health Workers, and Other HIV and AIDS
Service Providers from Harassment. Any person involved in the provision of HIV and AIDS services, including
peer educators, shall be protected from suit, arrest or prosecution, and from civil, criminal or administrative
liability, on the basis of their delivery of such services in HIV prevention.
This protection does not cover acts
which are committed
in violation of this IRR.
Section 42 Health Insurance and Similar Health Services.
The PhilHealth shall:
a) Develop a benefit package for PLHIV that shall include coveragefor inpatient and outpatient medical
and diagnostic services, including medication and treatment;
b) Develop a benefit package for the unborn,
newborn, and minor child of infected mothers;
c) Set a referenceprice for HIV services in government hospitals;
d) Conduct programs to educate the human resources units of companies on the PhilHealth package on
HIV and AIDS;
e) Develop a mechanism for orphans including abandoned and neglected children and foundling
living
with HIV to accessall essential benefit packagesthat they need; and
30

f) Ensure that
OHAT
reimbursements
paid
to the
treatment
facilities
are
utilized
for
HIV-related
expenditures.
The PHIC shall enforce confidentiality in the provision of these packages to PLHIV.
The Insurance Commission (IC) shall:
a) Ensure that no person shall be deniedlife insuranceclaimsif the cause of death is HIV or AIDS under
a valid and subsisting life insurance policy.
b) Guarantee that no
PLHIV shall be denied or deprived of private health insurance under a Health
Maintenance Organization (HMO) and privatelife insurance coverage
ofanylife insurance company on
the basis of HIV status.
The Insurance Commission (IC) shall implement this provision and shall develop the necessary
policies to
ensure compliance from the effectivity of this IRR.
Section 43 HIV and AIDS Monitoring and Evaluation. The DOH shall
maintain a comprehensive
HIV and
AIDS monitoring and evaluation programs that shall serve the following purposes:
a) Determine and monitor the magnitude and progression of HIV and AIDSin the Philippines to help the
national government evaluate the adequacy
and
efficacy of HIV
prevention
and treatment programs
being employed;
b) Receive, collate, process, and evaluate all medical reports related to HIV and AIDS from all hospitals,
clinics, laboratories and testing centers, including
HIV-related deaths and relevant data from public and
private hospitals, various databanksor information systems: Provided, thatit shall adopt a coding system
that ensures anonymity and confidentiality;
c) Monitor performance commitment of accredited treatment hubs, and ensure provisionofall services as
stipulated in the treatment guidelines; and
d) Submit to PNAC, through the PNAC Secretariat,
an annual report
containing
the
findings
ofits
monitoring and evaluation activities in compliance with this mandate.
31

RULE 8
Confidentiality
Section 44 Confidentiality. The confidentiality and privacy of any individual, who has been tested for HIV, has
been exposed to HIV, has HIV infection or HIV-AIDS related illnesses, or was treated for HIV related illnesses
shall be guaranteed. The following acts violate confidentiality and privacy:
a) Disclosure of Confidential HIV and AIDS Information
1. Unless otherwise provided
in Section 45 of this
IRR,it shall be unlawful to disclose, without
written consent, information that a person has HIV and AIDS,has undergone
HIV-related test, has
HIV infection or HIV-related illnesses, or has been exposedto HIV.
2. The prohibition shall apply to any person, natural or juridical,
including those whose work or
function
involves the implementation of this IRR or the delivery of HIV-related
services, including
those who handle or have access to personal data or information
in the workplace, and who,
pursuant to the receipt of the required written consent from the subject of confidential
HIV and
AIDS information, have been subsequently granted access to the same confidential
information.
b) Media Disclosure
—
It shall be unlawful for any editor,
publisher,
reporter or columnist in case of
printed materials, or any announcer or producerin case of television and radio broadcasting, or any
produceror director offilms in case of the movie industry, or any other individual or organization in case
of social media, to disclose the name, picture, or any information that would reasonably identify persons
living with HIV and AIDS or any confidential HIV and AIDS information without the prior written consentof
their subjects except when the persons waive said confidentiality through their own acts and omissions
under Section 4 (a) of R. A. No. 10175, otherwise known as the “Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012”,
and Section 25 of R. A. No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy Actof 2012”.
Section 45 Exceptions.
Confidential
HIV and AIDS
information may be released by HIV testing facilities
without consentin the following instances:
32
a) When complying with reportorial requirements of the national active and passive surveillance system,
including reports of death, of the DOH: Provided, that the information related to a person’s identity shall
remain confidential;
b) When informing other health workers directly involved
in the treatment or care of a PLHIV:
Provided,
that such workers shall be required to perform the duty of shared medical confidentiality; and

c) When responding to a subpoena duces tecum and subpoena
ad testificandum issued by a court with
jurisdiction over a legal proceeding where the main issue is the HIV status of an individual: Provided, that
the
confidential medical record, after having been verified for accuracy by the head of the office or
department, shall remain anonymous and unlinked and shall be properly sealed by its lawful custodian,
hand-delivered to the court, and personally opened by the judge: Provided,
further, That the judicial or
administrative proceedings shall be held in executive session.
Section 46 Disclosure of HIV-Related Test Results.
The result of any test related to HIV shall be disclosed by the trained service provider who conducts pre-test
and post-test counseling only to the individual who submitted to the test.
If the patient is below the age of
fifteen (15) years, an orphan, or suffering from mental
incapacity, or in comatose state, the result of the test
may be disclosedto eitherof the patient’s parents, next of kin, legal guardian, or to a duly assigned licensed
social
worker or health worker, whichever is applicable considering the best interest of the said
patient:
Provided, That when a person below the age of fifteen (15) years, who is not suffering from any mental
incapacity, has given voluntary and informed consent to the procedure in accordance with Section 29(a}(2) of
this IRR, the result of the test shall be disclosed to the child: Provided, further, That the child should be given
age-appropriate counseling and access to necessary health care and sufficient support services.
The DSWD and
CWCshall include in its protocol to be developed the case
management of these children,
including the provision of an immediate support system for children or persons below eighteen (18) who are
living with HIV.
It shall also
include
in the
protocol the preventive measures for children
identified to be
engagedin risky behavior and children who are pregnant and tested non-reactive after HIV test.
The result of any test related to HIV and AIDS may also be disclosed to a person authorized to receive such
results in conjunction with the DOH Monitoring Bodyas provided in Section 43
ofthis IRR.
Section 47 Disclosure to Persons with Potential Exposure to HIV.
a) Any person who,after having been tested is found to be infected with HIV, is strongly encouragedto
disclose this health condition to the spouse, sexual partners, and/or any person
prior to engaging
in
penetrative sex or any potential exposure to HIV.
b) A person living with HIV may seek help from qualified professionals, including
medical professionals,
health workers, peer educators, or social workers for disclosing this health condition to one’s partner or
spouse.
Confidentiality shall likewise be observed.
c) Further, the
DOH through the
PNAC, shall establish an enabling environment to encourage
newly
tested HIV-positive individuals to disclose their status to partners.
33

Section 48
Duty of Employers,
Heads of Government Offices,
Heads of Public and Private Schools or
Training Institutions, and Local Chief Executives.
a) It shall be the duty of private employers, heads of government offices, heads of public and private
schools
and training
institutions and local chief executives,
overall
private
establishments within their
territorial jurisdiction to prevent or deter acts of discrimination against
PLHIV and to provide procedures
for the resolution, settlement, or prosecution of acts of discrimination.
Confidentiality should likewise be
observed.
b) Towards this end, the private employer, head
ofoffice, or local chief executive shall:
1. Promulgate
rules
and
regulations,
prescribing
the
procedure
for
the
investigation
of
discrimination cases and the administrative sanctions therefor; and
2. Create an ad hoc committee on the investigation of discrimination cases.
The committee shall conduct meetings to increase the member's knowledge and understanding of HIV and
AIDS, and to prevent incidents of
discrimination.
It shall also conduct the administrative investigation of
alleged casesof discrimination.
RULE 9
Discriminatory Acts and Practices and Corresponding Penalties
Section 49
Discriminatory
Acts and Practices. The following
discriminatory
acts and practices
shall
be
prohibited:
34
a) Discrimination
in the Workplace - Rejection of job
application,
termination
of employment, or other
discriminatory
policies
in
hiring,
provision
of employment and other related benefits,
promotion
or
assignment of an individual solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived, or suspected HIV status;
b) Discrimination
in
Learning
Institutions
— Refusal of admission, segregation,
imposition
of harsher
disciplinary actions, or denial of benefits or services of a student or a prospective student solely or
partially on the basis of on actual, perceived, or suspected
HIV status;
c) Restriction on Travel and
Habitation
— Restrictions on travel within the
Philippines, refusal of lawful
entry into Philippine territory, deportation from the Philippines, or the quarantine or enforced isolation of
travelers solely or partially on account of actual, perceived, or suspected HIV statusis discriminatory. The

same standard of protection shall be accorded to migrants,
visitors, and residents, who are not Filipino
citizens;
d) Restrictions on Shelter
— Restrictions on housing or lodging, whether permanent or temporary, solely
or partially on the basis of actual, perceived, or suspected HIV status;
e) Prohibition from Seeking or Holding Public Office - Prohibition on the right to seek an elective or
appointive public office solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived, or suspected HIV status;
f) Exclusion from Credit and Insurance Services
— Exclusion from health, accident
orlife insurance, or
credit and loan services, including the extension of such
loanor insurance facilities of an individual solely
or partially on the basis of actual, perceived, or suspected HIV status: Provided, That the PLHIV has not
concealed or misrepresented the fact to the insurance
company or loan or credit service provider upon
application;
g) Discrimination in Hospitals and Health Institutions ~ Denial of health services, or being charged with a
higher fee, on the basis of actual, perceived or suspected
HIV status is a
discriminatory act
andit is
prohibited:
h) Denial of Burial Services
— Denial of embalming and burial services for a deceased person who had
HIV and AIDS or who was known, suspected, or perceived to be HIV-positive;
i) Act of Bullying — Bullying in all forms including name-calling, upon a person based on actual, perceived,
of suspected HIV status, including bullying in social media and otheronline portals; and
j) Other similar or analogous discriminatory acts.
Section 50 Penalties.
35
a) Any person who commits the prohibited act under Section 22 of this IRR on misinformation on HIV and
AIDS shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment ranging from one (1) year but not more
than ten (10) years, a fine of not less than
Fifty Thousand pesos (P50,000) but not more than Five
Hundred
Thousand pesos (P500,000), or both, at the discretion of the Court:
Provided, That
if the
offender is a manufacturer,
importer
or
distributor
of any drugs, devices, agents, and other
health
products, the penaltyofatleastfive (5) years imprisonment but not more than ten (10) years anda fine of
at least Five Hundred Thousand pesos (P500,000) but not more than Five Million pesos (P5,000,000)
shall be imposed:
Provided,
further, That drugs, devices, agents, and other health products found
in
violation of Section
22 of this IRR may be seized and held in custody when the FDA Director-General

36
has reasonable causeto believe facts found by him/her or an authorized officer or employee of the FDA
that such health products may cause injury or prejudice to the consuming public;
b) Any person who violates Section 24 (b) of this IRR on police operations
vis-a-vis
comprehensive
health intervention for key populations shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment of one
(1) year to five (5) years anda fine of not less than One Hundred Thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not
more than Five Hundred Thousand pesos (P500,000.00):
Provided, That the law enforcement agents
found guilty shall be removed from public service;
c) Any person who knowingly or negligently causes another to get infected with HIV in the course of the
practice of profession through unsafe and unsanitary practice and procedure, or who compelled any
person to undergo HIV testing without his or her consent shall, upon
conviction,
suffer the penalty of
imprisonment of six (6) years to twelve (12) years,
without prejudice to the
imposition
of fines and
administrative sanctions, such as suspension or revocation of professional license. The permit
orlicense
of the business entity and the accreditation of the HIV testing centers may be cancelled or withdrawnif
these establishments fail to maintain safe practices and procedures as may be required by the guidelines
formulated
in compliance
with Section 26, on blood, tissue, or organ donation, and Section 28, on
medical management, surgical, and other related proceduresofthis IRR;
d) Any person who violates Section 41 of this IRR, on the protection of HIV educators, licensed social
workers, health workers, and other
HIV and AIDS service providers from
harassment
shall, upon
conviction,
suffer the penalty of imprisonment of six (6) months to five (5) years and a fine of not less
than One Hundred Thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than Five Hundred Thousand pesos
(P500,000.00):
Provided,
Thatif the person who violates this provision is a law enforcement agent or a
public official, administrative sanctions may be imposedin addition to imprisonment and/or fine, at the
discretion of the Court;
e) Any person, natural or juridical,
who violates the
provisions
of Section 42 of this IRR on health
insurance
and similar services shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment ofsix (6) months
to five (5) years and/ora fine of not less than Fifty Thousand pesos (P50,000.00), at the discretion of the
Court, and without prejudice to the imposition of administrative sanctions such as fines, suspensions or
revocation of business permit, business license or accreditation, and professional license;
f} Any person
who violates the
provisions
of Section 44 of this IRR on
Confidentiality
shall, upon
conviction, suffer the following penalties:
1. Six (6) months to two (2) years of imprisonment for any person who breaches
confidentiality
and/ora fine of not less than Fifty Thousand pesos (P50,000.00), but not more than One Hundred
Fifty Thousand pesos (P150,000.00), at the discretion of the Court;

2. Two (2) years and one (1) dayto five (5) years of imprisonment for any person who causesthe
mass dissemination of the HIV status of a person, including spreading the information online or
making statements to the media and/ora fine of not less than One Hundred
Fifty Thousand pesos
(P150,000.00) but not more than Three
Hundred
Fifty Thousand pesos (P350,000.00), at the
discretion of the Court; and
3. Five (5) years and one (1) day to seven (7) years of imprisonment for any health professional,
medical instructor, worker, employer, recruitment agency, insurance company, data encoder, and
other custodian of any medical record, file, data, or test result who breaches confidentiality, and/or
a fine of not less than Three Hundred
Fifty Thousand pesos (P350,000.00) but not more than Five
Hundred Thousand pesos (P500,000.00), at the discretion of the Court.
These penalties are without prejudice to any administrative sanction
or civil suit that may be brought against
persons who violate confidentiality
under this IRR.
g) Any person whoshall violate any of the provisions in Section 49 of this IRR on discriminatory acts and
practices shall, upon conviction,
suffer the penalty of imprisonmentof six (6)
monthsto five (5) years
and/or a fine of not less than
Fifty Thousand pesos (P50,000.00) but not more than Five
Hundred
Thousand pesos (P500,000.00), at the discretion of the Court, and without prejudice to the imposition of
administrative sanctions such as fines, suspension or revocation of business permit, business license or
accreditation, and professional license:
h) Any person who has obtained knowledge of confidential
HIV and AIDS information and uses such
information to malign or cause damage, injury, or loss to another person shall face liability under Articles
19, 20, 21, and 26 of the New Civil Code of the Philippines and relevant provisions of Republic Act No.
10173, otherwise known
asthe “Data Privacy Act of 2012”; and
i) If the offender is a corporation, association, partnership or any other juridical person, the penalty of
imprisonment shall be imposed upon the responsible officers and employees, as the case may be, who
participated in, or allowed by their gross negligence, the commission of the crime, and the fine shall be
imposed
jointly
and
severally
on
the
juridical
person
and
the
responsible
officers/employees.
Furthermore, the Court may suspendor revokeits license or business permit.
If the offender is an alien, he/she shall, in addition to the penalties prescribed herein, be deported without
further proceedings after serving penalties herein prescribed.
37

If the offenderis a public official or employee, he/she shall, in addition to the penalties herein, suffer perpetual
or temporary absolute disqualification from office, as the case may be.
Section 51 Penalties
Collected. The penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be put into a special
fund to be administered by the PNAC and shall be used
for initial interventions required to address gapsin
the national response on the part of government agencies
andits partners from civil society and international
organizations in accordance with Section 5.1 (I) of this IRR.
RULE 10
Final Provisions
Section 52 Appropriations.
38
a) The
amount
needed
for the
initial
implementation
of
this
IRR
shall
be
charged
against the
appropriations
for the
DOH.
Thereafter,
such
sums as
may
be
necessary
for the
continued
implementation of this IRR shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act (GAA).
b) The
DBM,
in
coordination
with the
Department
of Finance
(DOF),
DOH, and
other relevant
government agencies, shall consider the incidence of HIV and AIDSin accordance with the AMTP.
c) LGUs shall allocate a separate budget item for HIV and AIDS
program
in their respective annual
appropriations for the LGU action plans mandated and specified in this IRR.
d) The funding requirement needed to provide for the health insurance package and other servicesfor
PLHIV
asstated in Section 42 of this IRR shall be charged against the PhilHealth’s corporate funds.
e) The
funding
needed to upgrade or construct government-administered
HIV testing and treatment
centers shall be funded from the revenuesof the sin tax under Republic Act No. 8424, otherwise known
as the “National Internal Revenue Code’, as amended by Republic Act No. 10351 and shall be prioritized
under the Health Facilities Enhancement Program (HFEP) of the DOH.
f) The funds to be appropriated for the operations of the PNAC shall be a distinct and separate budget
item from the regular appropriation for DOH and shall be administered by the Secretary of Health.
In no
circumstance shall the appropriations, savings, and other resources of the PNAC be realigned to the
programs and projects of DOH or any other government agency, unless such program
or project
is
related to the implementation of the provisions under this IRR.

Section 53
Transitory Provisions. The personnel designated by the DOH as Secretariat of the PNAC under
Section 7. of this IRR shall be absorbed as permanent
personnel tofill the positions of the Secretariat as
providedin this Act.
Section 54 Amendments.
These
Implementing
Rules and Regulations
may be amended,
modified
or
supplemented when necessary for effective
implementation and enforcement of RA 11166.
Section 55 Separability Clause.
If any provision
or part of this IRR is declared unconstitutional, the remaining
parts or provisions not affected shall remain
in full force and effect.
Section 56 Effectivity. This IRR takes effect fifteen (15) days after its complete
publication
in the national
newspaper ofgeneral circulation and the U.P. Law Center.
39