IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11494, “AN ACT PROVIDING
FOR COVID-19 RESPONSE AND RECOVERY INTERVENTIONS AND PROVIDING
MECHANISMS TO ACCELERATE THE RECOVERY AND BOLSTER THE
RESILIENCY OF THE PHILIPPINE ECONOMY, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES”

1. PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

1.1.

1.2.

1.3.

These guidelines (“Guidelines”) shall be known and cited as the
Implementing Guidelines of Republic Act (RA) No. 11494, “An Act Providing
for COVID-19 Response and Recovery Interventions and Providing
Mechanisms to Accelerate the Recovery and Bolster the Resiliency of the
Philippine Economy, Providing Funds therefor, and for Other Purposes”
otherwise known and cited as “Bayanihan to Recover As One Act”.

Purpose and coverage — The program-specific implementing rules and
regulations for each program and other technical guidelines may be issued
by the appropriate department or agency pursuant to their respective
mandates, following the general principles under these Guidelines. Please
see Annex “A” for the indicative list of the supplementary Implementing
Rules and Regulations (IRRs).

General principles of recovery interventions — The interpretation of
these Guidelines and the implementation of the recovery interventions
provided in RA No. 11494 shall be guided by the following principles:

1.3.1. Affordability and long-term fiscal sustainability. the fiscal
requiremeni of the provisions enumerated in RA No. 11494 shall
be within a reasonable financial limit that will ensure long-term
fiscal sustainability and future gross domestic product (GDP)
growth;

4.3.2. Targeted: critically impacted sectors shall be prioritized in the
relief measures while the appropriate government interventions
shall be utilized in order to ensure efficient outcomes;

1.3.3. Time-bound: government subsidies and incentives shall be
granted within a definite period of time to help stabilize the
economy while minimizing distortions therein;

1.3.4. Continuity. the relief to critically impacted sectors of society shall
be for purposes of mitigating the effects of a possible economic
slow-down; and

1.3.5. Capacity-building: assistance to the various sectors or entities in
the economy to increase their capacity to adjust to post-
quarantine conditions and achieve structural resilience to
counter future shocks.

Bayanihan II implementing Guidelines
Page 1 of 35

2.

FUNDING FOR THE COVID-19 RESPONSE AND RECOVERY
INTERVENTIONS

2.1. The release of the fiscal stimulus package of One Hundred Forty Billion
Pesos (PhP140,000,000,000.00) will be prioritized to support the needs of
the health sector, provide appropriate cash-for-work programs, and infuse
capital to Government Financial Institutions (GFlIs), so that they may
support the productive sectors of the economy.

2.1.1. Release of funds to the implementing agency shall be based on
implementation-ready work programs and supporting budget
documentary requirements.

2.2. Municipal Development Fund (MDF) — The Department of Finance (DOF),
in coordination with the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr), shall conduct an
inventory of all existing balances in the MDF, which shall be considered to
have their purpose abandoned. For this purpose, the Municipal
Development Fund Office (MDFO) shall submit to the DOF and the BTr
comprehensive reports on all balances in the MDF, including cash balance
reports, and shall authorize its depository banks to release pertinent
information to the DOF and the BTr.

2.2.1. The MDF shall cover the following:
(1) Cash and cash equivalents held in bank(s);

(2) Investments in government securities (GS) or with private
institutions, if any;

(3) Unutilized and unreleased balances of obligated amounts to
ongoing local government unit (LGU) subprojects covered by
loan agreements or Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with
Certificate of Availability of Funds (CAF);

(4) Loan repayment receivables under executed loan
agreements; and

(5) All other unutilized or unreleased balances in the MDF.

2.2.2. The BTr, as the registry of GS, shall transfer Ten Billion Pesos (PhP
10,000,000,000.00) worth of investments in GS from the name of
the MDFO to the name of the BTr. The BTr shall then liquidate said
investments and receive the proceeds from the sale of these
investments.

2.2.2.1. All such proceeds shall form part of the General Fund,
and shall be automatically appropriated for measures to
address the COVID-19 situation and accomplish the
declared national policy in the Act.

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 2 of 35

The BTr shall issue a Certification on the cash proceeds
to serve as funding source for such measures to address
the COVID-19 situation and accomplish the declared
national policy under RA No. 11494.

The MDFO shall execute the transfer to the GFls of the remaining
balances in the MDF after deducting the Ten Billion Pesos (PhP
10,000,000,000.00) referred to in Section 2.2.2 hereof.

Unless otherwise instructed by the Secretary of Finance,
these items shall be transferred to the Land Bank of the
Philippines (LBP).

Any of the GFls receiving any balances under Section
2.2.3 hereof shall put all such balances in a separate
trust account for the exclusive use of lending to LGUs at
preferential rates. For this purpose, the GFls_ will
maintain separate books of accounts.

Loans to be executed by GFls to LGUs shall be on the
same terms and conditions offered by the MDFO prior to
the effectivity of the Act. The GFis may charge
administrative fees to cover incidental costs.

The GFls shall ensure that the amounts identified under
Section 10 (v) of the Act shall be utilized to subsidize the
payment of interest until 2022 on new and existing loans
secured by the LGUs for COVID-19 related projects.

The MDFO, through its Executive Director or any of its
Deputy Executive Directors, shall execute the
appropriate Deed of Assignment for the transfer io the
GFls. The GFls shall issue the appropriate Board
resolution, if necessary.

The MDFO shall assign to the GFls all existing loan agreements
executed with LGUs. The Deed of Assignment shall include
provisions stating that the assigned funds shall be accessed and
utilized exclusively by the LGUs and that all approved loans and
undisbursed balances for committed LGU loans and borrowings
shall continue to be disbursed and will be administered by the GFls.

Unless otherwise instructed by the Secretary of Finance,
these loan agreements shall be assigned to the LBP.

Assignee GFls shall henceforth have ail the rights and
obligations of the MDFO under the assigned contracts.

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
: Page 3 of 35

2.3.

2.2.4.3. All approved loans and undisbursed balances for
committed LGU loans and borrowings shall continue to
be disbursed and will be administered by the GFls.

2.2.4.4. Any of the assignee GFls shall put in the same trust
account referred to in Section 2.2.3.2 all its future
collections of loan repayments from the LGUs under the
assigned contracts.

2.2.4.5. The MDFO, through its Executive Director or any of its
Deputy Executive Directors, shall execute the
appropriate Deed of Assignment for the assignment of
these loan agreemenis to the GFls. The GFls shall issue
the appropriate Board resolution, if necessary.

2.2.4.6. The MDFO shall send to the concerned LGUs a written
notice of the assignment of their loan agreements to the
GFI.

2.2.4.7. Within a period of fourteen (14) days reckoned from the
date of execution of the Deed of Assignment, the MDFO
shall transmit to the assignee GFls originals of all
records and other documents pertinent to the assigned
loan agreements which shall be necessary for the
assignee GFls to exercise their rights and perform their
obligations under the assigned loan agreements.

2.2.4.8. MDFO officials, employees and consultants shall assist
the GFls in the transition of the administration of the
assigned loans from the MDFO to the GFls.

The MDFO, on the 15th and last calendar day of each month, shall
submit to the Secretary of Finance a report on the implementation
status of these Guidelines.

Offshore gaming — Taxes earned from the non-gaming operations of
offshore gaming licensees, gaming operators, gaming agents, service
providers, and gaming support providers.

Amounts derived from the five percent (5%) franchise tax on the
gross bets or turnovers or the agreed predetermined minimum
monthly revenues from gaming operations, whichever is higher,
earned by offshore gaming licensees, including gaming operators,
gaming agents, service providers, and gaming support providers.

To augment government resources, after two (2) years or upon
determination that the COVID-19 threat has been successfully
contained or abated, whichever comes first, taxes earned from the
gaming and non-gaming operations of offshore gaming licensees,
gaming operators, gaming agents, service providers, and gaming

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 4 of 35

2.4.

support providers, shall continue to accrue to the General Fund of the National Government (NG).

Funding provisions ~ The Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), in coordination with the relevant agencies, shall issue the specific
guidelines on the discontinuance, realignment, and on the availability, use,
and release of funds, such as, but not limited to the following:

2.4.1. Excess revenue collections in any one of the identified tax or non-
tax revenue sources from its corresponding revenue collection
target, as provided in the Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Budget of
Expenditures and Sources of Financing (BESF).

2.4.2. New revenue collections or those arising from new tax or non-tax
sources which are not part of nor included in the original sources
included in the FY 2020 BESF.

2.4.3. All amounts derived from the cash, funds, and investments held by
any government-owned or -controlled corporation (GOCC) or
national government agency.

2.4.4. Unutilized automatic appropriations for debt service and available
appropriations for redemption of maturing government securities.

2.4.5. Discontinued appropriated programs, activities or projects (P/A/Ps)
of any GOCC or national government agency in the FY 2019 and
2020 General Appropriations Act (GAA) that do not support the
objectives of economic stimulus and recovery for having low labor
intensity or low multiplier effects.

2.4.5.1. Infrastructure having the highest multiplier effect can
only be discontinued when all other funds, including
unobligated allotments and unreleased appropriations
have been exhausted.

2.4.6. Any unutilized or unreleased balance in special purpose funds
(SPFs).

2.4.7. Unused balance of the Department of Education (DepEd) FY 2020
“New School Personnel Positions” and “Basic Education Facilities”
appropriations.

COVID-19 CREDIT PROGRAMS AND PROVISIONS AFFECTING THE
FINANCIAL SECTOR

3.1.

3.2.

The allocation of funds to the GFls shall be prioritized to increase liquidity
in the economy.

Loan interest rate subsidy by National Government Agencies (NGAs)
through GFis — All national government credit programs should be

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 5 of 35

3.3.

3.4.

3.5.

implemented directly and exclusively by the GFls that have the mandate,
technical capacity, expertise, and experience to implement such programs
effectively.

3.2.1. The national government agencies shall provide loan interest rate
subsidies to support the sectors critically-impacted by the COVID-
19 pandemic.

3.2.2. The mechanics on the provision of loan interest rate subsidy shall
be covered by a MOA between the implementing national agency
and the GFI, provided that credit accommodation to the Micro,
Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and cooperatives, as well
as those who are self-employed, shall be imposed a low interest,
payable within three (3) years and shall not require any collateral if
the loan does not exceed Three Million Pesos (PhP 3,000,000.00).

Loan interest rate subsidy for LGU loans and borrowings through GFIs
— The appropriate interest rate subsidy for loans and borrowings availed by
LGUs shall be approved by the Secretary of Finance, based on the
recommendation of GFls. In all cases, the GFls shall consult with the LGUs
on the recommended uniform interest rate subsidy.

The expanded government guarantee program under Philippine Guarantee
Corporation (PhilGuarantee) shall be available to non-essential businesses
or those directly impacted by COVID-19.

Guidelines for GFls and private banks — Consistent with the rules and
regulations issued by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), the following
guidelines shall govern the implementation of all national government credit
programs under RA No. 11494 by GFls and private banks:

3.5.1. Credit decisions shall be based on well-defined credit granting
criteria and sound underwriting standards. Credit shall be granted
based on the assessment of the financial capacity of the borrowers
to repay the credit, distinguishing borrowers who are only facing
temporary cash flow or liquidity pressures from those with solvency
issues.

3.5.2. The terms and conditions of the credit, as agreed upon with the
borrowers, should be suited to the amount and timing of cash flows
and considering the specific circumstances of the borrowers.

3.5.3. Relief measures granted to borrowers in the form of restructuring
the account, condoning interests, providing less than market
interest rates, or subsidizing interest payments shall be properly
recognized in the books of the GFis and private banks in
accordance with the applicable accounting standards and BSP rules
and regulations in recognizing allowance for credit losses.

3.5.4. Guarantees issued by the PhilGuarantee shall be considered as

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 6 of 35

3.6.

3.7.

3.8.

3.9.

direct guarantees of the NG, and the amount of credit covered by
the said guarantee shall be assigned with a risk weight of zero
percent (0%).

Financial relief for Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries — Condonation of
interests, penalties, and surcharges of loans taken by Agrarian Reform
Beneficiaries (ARB) for land acquisition shall be granted upon approval of
the loan restructuring application.

3.6.1. The loans may be restructured for a maximum period of five (5) years.

3.6.2. The interest payments made as of the date of Declaration of a State
of Public Health Emergency on 08 March 2020 shall be credited
prospectively against the outstanding principal payment of the
ARBs.

3.6.3. The condonation of interest, penalties and surcharges from these
loans shall be in conformity with the applicable general banking laws
and regulations of the BSP.

Reallocation of unutilized loanable funds — Loans granted to individuals
for housing loans upon effectivity of the Act may be used as compliance
with the mandatory credit allocation to the agrarian reform and agricultural
sector under RA No. 10000 until 31 December 2020.

Availment of regulatory relief measures — GFls and private banks may
avail of the regulatory relief measures of the BSP to enable them to grant
equivalent financial relief to their borrowers as well as to promote the
sustained safety and soundness of banks and the financial system. These
relief measures include, among others, the non-recognition of eligible
accounts as past due and non-performing, and, with prior approval of the
BSP, the staggered booking of allowance for credit losses.

Price stability — \n line with the mandate of the BSP to promote price
stability, it shall continuously review policy rates and reserve requirement
ratios and undertake evidence and data-based decisions to support
domestic liquidity and guide the movement of effective lending rates of
interests.

TAXATION INTERVENTIONS

4.1.

Incentives — The provision of incentives under RA No. 11494 shall be time-
bound and targeted, as applied to the following interventions:

(1) Provide fiscal assistance to relevant producers or suppliers engaged
in enhancing the supply of critical goods, such as personal protective
equipment (PPEs), necessary to contain and mitigate the impact of
the pandemic;

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 7 of 35

4.2.

4.3.

4.4.

(2) Ensure the unhampered importation of donated health products, as

well as its acceptance and distribution;

(3) Allow for greater access to learning devices, such as computers,

laptops and tablets, that can be utilized by public schools regardless
of Jevel, including state universities and colleges (SUCs) and
vocational institutions under Technical Education and_ Skills
Development Authority (TESDA);

(4) Support retirees who have applied within the period of 05 June 2020

to 31 December 2020, subject to the prohibition on re-employment
as specifically stated in RA No. 11494;

(5) Ensure that debtors are not unnecessarily burdened with

documentary stamp tax (DST) on availed loan extension and
restructuring; and

(6) Provide meaningful compensation for health workers afflicted with

COVID-19 in the line of duty, as well as hazard pay to health workers
hired temporarily, that is undiminished by taxes.

Safeguards — |n order to minimize market distortion and leakage in the
grant of tax incentives, the following safeguards will be required:

(1) Equipment for waste management, including but not limited to waste

segregation, storage, collection, sorting, treatment and disposal
service are approved by the Department of Environment and Natural
(DENR), DOH or other concerned regulatory agencies;

(2) Inputs, raw materials and equipment necessary for the manufacture

or production of essential goods related to the containment or
mitigation of COVID-19; and

(3) The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) shall certify the non-

availability or insufficiency of the goods that will be imported for the
purpose of qualifying for exemption from import duties, taxes, and
other fees and ensuring supply of PPE at competitive prices.
Preference is given to products, materials and supplies produced,
made or manufactured in the Philippines.

Initial Public Offering (IPO) tax repeal — To reinvigorate the stock market,
the provisions imposing taxes on shares of stock sold or exchanged through
an IPO have been repealed from the National Internal Revenue Code
(NIRC) of 1997, as amended.

Net Operating Loss Carry-Over (NOLCO) — To ensure recovery of losses,
notwithstanding the provision of existing laws to the contrary, the net
operating losses of a business or enterprise for taxable years 2020 and
2021 shall be carried over as a deduction from its gross income for the next
five (5) consecutive taxable years immediately following the year of such

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 8 of 35

4.5.

4.6.

losses.

BIR and BOC to determine tax exemption and incentives — The tax
exemption and other incentives provided, its coverage, and the period of
deferment of tax filing and payment shall be determined by the Bureau of
Internal Revenue (BIR) and Bureau of Customs (BOC) pursuant to the
provisions of RA No. 11494 and with the primary purpose of providing relief
to taxpayers, taking into account the need for the government to be
continuously fiscally capable of providing resources to fund the program
requirements related to the pandemic.

Closure orders — \|n order to protect government revenues from cross-
border tax evasion schemes of offshore gaming entities, the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue shall implement closure orders against offshore gaming
licensees, gaming operators, gaming agents, service providers and gaming
support providers, who fail to pay taxes due, and such entities shall cease
to operate.

INTERVENTIONS FOR THE HEALTHCARE SECTOR

5.1.

5.2.

5.3.

5.4.

DOH to strengthen human resources — To support the healthcare
system, strengthening and reinforcing its human resource shall be
prioritized by the government. In view of this, the DOH shall:

5.1.1. Compensate public and private health workers who contract
COVID-19 in the line of duty; and

5.1.2. Aggressively hire temporary human resources for health, who shall
serve as the primary augmentation to the workforce in health
facilities in regions, provinces, or cities that are managing COVID-
19 cases.

Human Resource for Health (HRH) — The HRH to be hired by the DOH on
a temporary basis shall receive the appropriate compensation and
allowances, and actual hazard duty pay from the national government in
addition to the hazard pay granted under RA No. 7305 and the COVID-19
special risk allowance granted under RA No. 11494. The active hazard duty
pay received by all HRH serving in the front line during the state of national
emergency as declared by the President shall be exempt from income tax.

Priority deployment — Priority in assignment or deployment shail be given
to health professionals who signed up as volunteers for the COVID-19
response, as well as, returning Overseas Filipino Workers (OFW)-health
workers, or those whose deployments were suspended due to COVID-19,
through the close coordination of the DOH and the Department of Labor
and Employment (DOLE).

Benefits for healthcare workers (HCWs) — The DOH and other concerned
agencies and instrumentalities shall facilitate and operationalize the
provision of life insurance, accommodation, transportation, and meals to all

Bayanihan Il Implementing Guidelines
Page 9 of 35

5.5.

5.6.

5.7.

public and private health workers during the state of national emergency as
declared by the President, regardless of the community quarantine (CQ),
subject to a separate issuance from the DOH in coordination with the DBM
and the DOLE.

Mandatory testing and treatment coverage for HCWs — The DOH and
the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) shall provide for
other interventions to ensure the welfare and safety of the HCWs, such as
the implementation of mandatory COVID-19 testing of public and private
HCWs every fifteen (15) days and the coverage of treatment and medical
expenses of public and private HCWs in case of exposure to COVID-19 or
any work-related injury or disease during the state of national emergency.

5.5.1. The PhilHealth is directed to cover all expenses on mandatory
testing and treatment and medical costs incurred by public and
private HCWs. Further, PhilHealth shall provide for clear and
streamlined guidelines in implementing this provision, ensuring the
availability and access of such coverage for all public and private
HCWs.

Compensation for HCWs who have contracted COVID-19 — Public and
private HCWs who have contracted COVID-19 in the line of duty shall be
provided by DOH with the prescribed compensation under RA No. 11494:

(1) In case of death of the health worker, One Million Pesos (PhP
1,000,000.00) shall be provided to the heirs of the HCW;

(2) In case of sickness, for a severe or critical case, One Hundred
Thousand Pesos (PhP 100,000.00) shall be provided to the HCW;
and

(3) In case of sickness, for a mild or moderate case, Fifteen Thousand
Pesos (PhP 15,000.00) shall be provided to the HCW.

5.6.1. The DOH shall provide the necessary mechanics and specific
guidelines to expedite the compensation provided herein.
Compensation shall be given to the beneficiaries not later than three
(3) months after the date of confinement or death.

5.6.2. The provision of compensation under this rule following Section 4
(k) of RA No. 11494 shall have retroactive application to 01
February 2020 and shall survive the expiration of RA No. 11494 for
as long as within the state of national emergency, as declared by
the President.

Procurement and distribution of PPEs and related supplies — The DOH
shall undertake the immediate procurement of face masks, PPEs, shoe
covers, and face shields to all local health workers, barangay officials, and
indigent persons that need protection to prevent the spread of COVID-19.

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 10 of 35

5.8.

5.9.

5.7.1. In the procurement of PPEs and related supplies, preference shall
be given to products manufactured, produced, or made in the
Philippines, subject to the procurement rules set by the Government
Procurement Policy Board (GPPB).

5.7.2. Distribution mechanics and guidelines shall be issued by the DOH
in coordination with the Inter-Agency Task Force for the
Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF-EID), the
National Task Force (NTF) on COVID-19, the Office of Civil Defense
(OCD), and the Department of the Interior and Local Government
(DILG).

Construction and management of temporary COVID-19 facilities — The
DOH, together with the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
and the DILG, shall facilitate the construction of temporary medical isolation
and quarantine facilities, field hospitals, and dormitories for frontliners, and
the expansion of government hospital capacity across the country.

5.8.1. The infrastructure projects shall be identified by the concerned
agencies, prioritized according to the demand and need for
augmentation. The construction and management of the identified
infrastructure for the health sector shall be subject to a separate
issuance from the DOH.

Hiring of contact tracers — The DILG, in coordination with the DOH, shall
facilitate the hiring of at least fifty thousand (50,000) contact tracers, which
shall include, but not be limited to, recruitment, training, compensation,
monitoring, logistics, and operational expenses. The hiring of contact
tracers may include, but not be limited to, the hiring of displaced workers
both in the formal and informal sectors, from existing networks of barangay
health workers, parent-leaders from the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino
Program (4Ps), and members of duly accredited civil society organizations
(CSOs) by national government agencies, subject to a separate issuance
from the DILG.

Immunization programs of DOH — The DOH shall deliver an uninterrupted
immunization program against vaccine-preventable diseases, especially for
children, amidst the pandemic. Once the COVID-19 vaccine is available,
the DOH, in coordination with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
shall facilitate the immunization program for COVID-19.

Additional research funding for COVID-19 — The DOH — Health
Technology Assessment Council (DOH-HTAC) shall utilize the additional
research fund provided under the Act to the commissioning of more COVID-
19 research projects and to enhance its internal capacity of evidence
generation.

Unified and consistent reporting standards — A uniform and consistent
reporting standard shall be adopted by the DOH, in coordination with LGUs,
in a language understandable by the general public.

Bayanihan li tmplementing Guidelines
Page 11 of 35

PhilHealth reimbursement to hospitals — The PhilHealth shall provide for
the necessary mechanisms to expedite and immediately release and/or
reimburse funds due to the district, provincial, and city hospitals.

COVID-19 drugs and vaccines — The DOH, together with the FDA and the
HTAC and other relevant agencies, shall facilitate the accreditation,
registration, and procurement of COVID-19 drugs and vaccines, subject to
Section 12 of RA No. 11494. The procurement of such drugs and vaccines
may be undertaken through the expedited procurement process under
Section 4(u) of the Act as may be determined by the DOH or the relevant
procuring agency.

The DOH and other concerned agencies or instrumentalities shall issue
program-specific implementing rules and regulations for the interventions
for the healthcare sector prescribed in RA No. 11494, in accordance with
these Guidelines.

6. PAYMENT MORATORIUM AND OTHER REGULATORY RELIEF

6.1.

One-time sixty (60)-day mandatory moratorium on loans — A non-
extendible, one-time 60-day mandatory grace period shall be granted by
banks, quasi-banks, non-stock savings and loan association, pawnshops,
cooperatives, financing companies, lending companies, credit card
companies, real estate developers, insurance companies providing life
insurance policies, pre-need companies, entities providing in-house
financing for goods and properties purchased, asset and_ liabilities
management companies, and other financial institutions, public or private,
including the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), the Social
Security System (SSS), and the Home Development Mutual Fund (HDMF)
or Pag-IBIG Fund (“covered institutions”) for the payment of all existing,
current, and outstanding loans falling due, or any part thereof, on or before
31 December 2020, without incurring interest on interests, penalties, fees,
or other charges.

6.1.1. The implementation of the 60-day grace period will effectively
extend the maturity of the loans, including amortizations, falling due
on or before 31 December 2020.

6.1.2. The mandatory one-time 60-day grace period shall apply to multiple
loans of individuals and entities, with principal and/or interest,
including amortizations, falling due on or before 31 December 2020.
The grace period shail apply to each loan.

6.1.3. All loans may be settled on a staggered basis without interest on
interests, penalties, fees, or other charges until 31 December 2020,
or as may be agreed upon by the parties.

6.1.4. The mandatory one-time 60-day grace period shall be subject to
rules and regulations to be issued by the corresponding regulators.

Bayanihan It implementing Guidelines
Page 12 of 35

6.2.

6.3.

6.4.

Thirty (30)-day grace period for payment of utilities — A minimum 30-
day grace period shall be granted by electric, water, telecommunications,
and other similar utilities (“covered institutions”) to individual households,
MSMEs, cooperatives, and corporate clients for the payment of dues falling
within the period of the enhanced community quarantine (ECQ) or the
modified enhanced community quarantine (MECQ), without incurring
interests, penalties, and other charges.

6.2.1. The minimum 30-day grace period without interests, penalties, and
other charges shall apply to all payments due within the period of
the CQ in the entire electric power value chain, which includes
generation companies, transmission utility, and distribution utilities.

6.2.2. Covered institutions are prohibited from requiring their clients to
waive the application of the provisions of the Act, including among
others, the 30-day grace period.

6.2.3. The grant of the grace period by the covered institutions shall not
preclude the clients from paying their obligations as they fall due
during the period of ECQ or MECQ should they so desire.

6.2.4. Unpaid residential, MSME, and cooperatives utility bills may be
settled on a staggered basis payable in not less than three (3)
monthly installments after the grace period, subject to the
procedural requirements of the concerned regulatory agencies
without incurring interests, penalties, and other charges.

6.2.5. Covered institutions may offer less onerous payment terms, with the
consent of their clients, subject to the approval of their respective
regulators.

6.2.6. The mandatory minimum 30-day grace period shall be subject to
rules and regulations to be issued by the corresponding regulators.

Thirty (30)-day grace period on payment of rents - There shall be a
minimum 30-day grace period on residential rents and commercial rents of
lessees not permitted to work and MSMEs and cooperatives ordered to
temporarily cease operations, falling due within the period of the CQ,
without incurring interests, penalties, fees, and other charges. All amounts
due within the period of CQ shall be amortized in equal monthly installments
until 31 December 2020 without any interests, penalties, and other charges.
The minimum 30-day grace period shall reckon from the date of the lifting
of the ECQ or MECQ.

6.3.1. The mandatory minimum 30-day grace period shall be subject to
rules and regulations to be issued by the DTI.

Seven (7) working days to process applications — All government
agencies and LGUs shall act on all pending and new applications for permit,

Bayanihan I Implementing Guidelines
Page 13 of 35

6.5.

6.6.

6.7.

6.8.

license, certificate; clearance, authorization, and resolutions within a non-
extendible period of 7 working days, in order to support business continuity
and encourage resumption of all economic activities.

6.4.1. This shall not apply to regulatory processes involving administrative
investigations or enforcement activities by government regulators
exercising quasi-judicial functions.

Exemption from compulsory notification for mergers and acquisitions
— The Philippine Competition Commission (PCC) shall promote business
continuity and capacity building; as such, all mergers and acquisitions with
transaction values below the prescribed threshold of Fifty Billion Pesos
(PhP 50,000,000,000.00) shall be exempt from compulsory notification
under Section 17 of RA No. 10667 or the Philippine Competition Act if
entered into within a period of two (2) years from the effectivity of RA No.
411494 and further, shall be exempt from the PCC’s power to review mergers
and acquisitions motu proprio provided in Section 12 of RA No. 10667 for a
period of one (1) year from the effectivity of RA No. 11494.

Foreign donation of medical goods — Foreign donation of face masks
including N95 masks, shoe covers, gloves, head covers, and gowns,
ventilators, respirators, and their respective accessories, shall no longer
require clearance from the FDA prior to customs release.

Declaration of goods — The provisional declaration of goods for relief
consignment shall be allowed for foreign donations to a national
government agency, subject to rules and regulations to be issued by the
Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner of
Customs.

Information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure —
The Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT)
shall ensure the accelerated deployment of critical ICT infrastructure,
particularly additional cell towers, equipment, software, and wireless
technologies, throughout the country to address the need for digital
connectivity, higher internet speed and stability, and cybersecurity in e-
Commerce, e-Government, online learning, and telecommuting, in order to
sufficiently meet the significant additional shift of the general public to online
services and platforms and to home and mobile communication units for
doing work from home, for completing commercial and other transactions,
for convening meetings and conducting conferences, seminars, and
webinars, and for obtaining educational instruction during the COVID-19
pandemic. Further, the DICT shall:

6.8.1. Undertake measures in partnership with appropriate internet and
communication service providers;

6.8.2. Temporarily suspend requirements to secure permits and
clearances for the construction of telecommunications and internet
infrastructure, except for the building permit issued by the Office of

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 14 of 35

6.9.

the Building Official pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1096 or the
“National Building Code of the Philippines,” as amended, and the
height clearance permit from the Civil Aviation Authority of the
Philippines (CAAP);

No national or local permit or clearance shall be required in the
construction, installation, repair, operation, and maintenance of
telecommunications and internet infrastructure by independent
tower companies registered with the DICT, or holders of certificates
of public convenience and necessity or provisional authority granted
by the National Telecommunications Commission (NTC) to public
telecommunication entities, for a period of three (3) years from the
effectivity of RA No. 11494.

Streamline the regulatory processes and procedures for the
development and improvement of digital, internet, and satellite
technology infrastructure and, notwithstanding Section 4 (eee) of
RA No. 11494, approve or disapprove all pending and new
applications for the construction of cell sites, cell towers, roll out of
fiber, installation of poles, ground terminals and other transmission
or similar telecommunications and internet structure and facilities,
within a non-extendible period of seven (7) working days from the
date the application was received. An application not acted upon
within such period shall be deemed approved;

The temporary suspension of requirements and streamlining of
regulatory processes shall also apply to other value added service
providers and internet service providers in the establishment and
operation of necessary equipment and facilities, and use of
necessary technologies in order to expand the coverage of
broadband internet networks and provide connectivity to unserved
and underserved communities.

No court, except the Supreme Court, shall issue any temporary
restraining order, preliminary injunction or preliminary mandatory
injunction against the construction of telecommunications
infrastructure, including cell sites and cell towers.

The foregoing shall be subject to rules and regulations to be issued
by the corresponding implementing agencies.

Housing loans and programs — The Department of Human Settlements
and Urban Development (DHSUD) and its key shelter agencies shall
implement a program to expedite and streamline applications of all pending
and new housing loans, permits and licenses; and accommodate and
prioritize critically impacted home buyers who may want to shift from private
bank financing to Pag-IB!IG home financing with streamlined requirements.

Regulatory relief — The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and
other regulatory agencies shall desist from imposing fines and other

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 15 of 35

monetary penalties for non-filing, late filing, failure to comply with
compulsory notification and other reportorial requirements relating to
business activities and transactions that promote continuity and capacity-
building in all sectors of the economy during the CQ. The foregoing shall be
subject to rules and regulations to be issued by the corresponding
regulatory agencies.

Regulatory relief measures for infrastructure programs and projects —
In expediting the implementation of infrastructure programs and projects
under the DPWH and other government agencies, regulatory relief shall be
granted by the agencies and the LGUs through the following:

6.11.1. All applications for such permits, licenses, clearances and
registration requirements during the aforementioned period, shall be
deemed waived for a period of one (1) year from the effectivity of
the Act, reckoned from the time the LGU received the application.

6.11.2. Permit requirements relating to environmental laws, health, and
occupational safety shall continue to be applicable and subject to a
processing time of seven (7) working days.

7. GENERAL GUIDELINES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SOCIAL
PROTECTION PROGRAMS AND INTERVENTIONS

7.1.

7.2.

Social protection programs delivered using digital technologies — Any
social protection program shall be implemented using digital technologies,
with the aim of expeditiously providing assistance to affected low-income
households in areas under granular lockdown, low-income households with
recently returned OFWs, displaced workers, and low-income households
who are qualified under Section 4(c) of RA No. 11469, but were not granted
such subsidy.

7.1.1. The service delivery system must include secure and privacy-
preserving registration, verification, deduplication, payroll
generation, grievance, and payout capabilities using a management
information system to orchestrate the end-to-end process.

Identification of beneficiaries — The implementing agencies shall clearly
define the target beneficiaries of the program and how the beneficiaries will
be identified.

7.2.1. Low income households shall not include households with the
following characteristics:

7.2.1.1. Households living in gated condominium, communities,
and subdivisions;

7.2.1.2. Households with at least one (1) four-wheel vehicle,
except Public Utility Vehicles (PUVs) granted with
franchise by the Land Transportation Franchising and

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 16 of 35

7.3.

TA.

Regulatory Board (LTFRB);

7.2.1.3. Households with at least one (1) member working in
government (national or local) under an employment
contract, whether occupying a plantilla position or under
service contracts.

Validation and deduplication — The subsidies or benefits received from
existing subsidy or benefit programs shall be taken into consideration in the
computation of the subsidy or benefit to be received under RA No. 11494
to prevent double dipping or unauthorized receipt of multiple subsidies.

7.3.1. The implementing agencies shall enter into data sharing
agreements to facilitate validation and deduplication.

Appropriate cash-for-work — Any “cash-for-work” program shall be
directed toward employment generation directly related to the government’s
efforts towards managing the pandemic and in the provision of public
services, such as healthcare, education, and livelihood generation in their
localities.

SECTORAL RECOVERY INTERVENTIONS

8.1.

Interventions for the transportation sector — The Department of
Transportation (DOTr) and other concerned agencies or instrumentalities
are authorized under the RA No. 11494 to extend the following assistance
to critically-impacted businesses in the transportation industry:

8.1.1. Transport sector database — The DOTr shall be responsible for the
production of a master list, in a machine-readable data format, of all
displaced and critically impacted transport workers under the road,
rail, air, and maritime sectors, prior to the actual implementation of
the interventions for the transport sector under RA No. 11494.

8.1.2. PUV service contracting — The DOTr and the LTFRB, in
coordination with the LGUs, shall provide safe public transport and
provide livelihood to displaced transport workers through the
partially subsidized service contracting of public utility jeepneys
(PUJs) and other modes of PUVs in areas identified by the
concerned agencies, subject to a reasonable fare margin, fleet
management mechanism, and working arrangements for drivers
and operators. Further, the DOTr and the LTFRB shall provide
mechanisms for monitoring, data gathering, assessment, and
evaluation of the PUV service contracting program.

8.1.3. Accessible sidewalks, protected bicycle lanes, and promotion of
active transport — The DOTr, in coordination with the DPWH, the
DILG, the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA), and
the LGUs, shall establish necessary infrastructure, such as, but not
limited to, sidewalk improvements and retrofitting and protected

Bayanihan Il Implementing Guidelines
Page 17 of 35

8.2.

bicycle lanés in major thoroughfares and roads in Metro Manila.
Further, the-DOTr shall develop programs on the promotion of safe
and active transport such as bicycle sharing schemes and pop-up
bike lanes, as well as the procurement of bicycles, bicycle racks,
and related safety equipment.

Other interventions — The DOTr and other agencies and
instrumentalities may provide, for the transport sector, other
programs, such as but not limited to: grants for applicable regulatory
fees; substitution of refund option to travel vouchers; grants for fuel
subsidy and/or digital fare vouchers; grants for training, equipment,
facilities, test kits, and necessary personnel, subject to availability
of funds.

. Within fifteen (15) days from the effectivity of RA No. 11494, the

DOTr and other concerned agencies or instrumentalities shall issue
program-specific implementing rules and regulations that will
prescribe the eligibility and other terms and conditions of the
interventions for the sector, in accordance with these Guidelines.

Interventions for the agriculture sector — The Department of Agriculture
(DA) and other concerned agencies or instrumentalities are authorized
under the Act to extend the following assistance to the agriculture industry
through the Plant, Plant, Plant program to ensure food security and
continuous productivity in the sector. Wherever possible, the DA shall
advance the digitalization of agriculture systems while implementing the
following projects:

Productivity enhancement projects — The DA shall provide
interventions that will increase agri-fishery productivity, including but
not limited to: the Rice Resiliency Project (RRP) for the Dry Season;
promotion and development of Urban Agriculture; High Value Crops
projects; Pests and Diseases Management; Hatcheries; funding the
Center for Transboundary Animal Diseases; and rehabilitation of
Regional Integrated Agricultural Research Centers (RIARCs).

Income enhancement projects — The DA shall provide the following
interventions under this component, including but not limited to: the
development of agri-industrial business corridors (ABCs), provincial
trading centers, packing houses for fruit tree corridors, and cutting
facilities for poultry; programs for digital agriculture, Strategic and
Development Communications, Agribusiness, Business Incubation
in Agriculture, and Social Entrepreneur Support.

Social protection and social amelioration — The DA, through the
Agricultural Credit Policy Council (ACPC) and the GFls, shall fund
the Expanded SURE Aid Recovery Project or SURE COVID-19
financing program for qualified agri-fishery enterprises, farmers, and
fisherfolk registered under the Registry System for Basic Sectors in
Agriculture (RSBSA).

Bayanihan I! Implementing Guidelines
Page 18 of 35

8.3.

Appropriate cash-for-work program for the agriculture sector — The
DA shall provide programs to provide temporary employment to
agri-fishery workers in relation to the implementation and execution
of necessary interventions identified under the Plant, Plant, Plant
program.

The DA and other concerned agencies or instrumentalities shall
issue program-specific implementing rules and regulations for these
interventions in accordance with these Guidelines.

interventions for the tourism sector—The Department of Tourism (DOT),
together with other concerned agencies or instrumentalities, are authorized
under the Act to provide the necessary interventions for the tourism
industry:

Tourism Road Infrastructure Project (TRIP) — The DPWH, in
coordination with the DOT shall continue to work on the
convergence program for infrastructure leading to tourist
destinations, prioritizing projects with high multiplier effects on the
economy.

Appropriate cash-for-work program for the tourism sector — The
DOLE, in coordination with the DOT, shall provide unemployment
assistance and appropriate cash-for-work program for involuntarily
displaced workers and employees in the sector.

Training and subsidies for tourist guides - The DOT shall provide
for the necessary training, upskilling, and subsidies for tourist guides
as they temporarily transition to other employment opportunities
while demand in the sector is subdued due to the pandemic.

The DOT, in partnership with the DOH, the DILG, and LGUs, may
establish COVID-19 testing centers in tourist destinations, as
identified by the DOT, to stimulate tourism and generate
employment. Terms and conditions, as well as the specific
guidelines for the establishment and management, including
protocols, for these testing centers shall be provided by the DOT,
the DOH, and the DILG through a separate issuance.

The DOT may provide other programs for the tourism sector, such
as, but not limited to: marketing and product developmeni,
promotions, and programs; grants for the education, and training
and alternative livelihood programs for tourism stakeholders for the
new normal; utilization of information technology for the
improvement of tourism services; and other relevant programs to
mitigate the economic effects of COVID-19 on the tourism industry,
subject to availability of funds.

The DOT and other concerned agencies or instrumentalities shall

Bayanihan I! Implementing Guidelines
Page 19 of 35

8.4,

8.5.

issue program-specific implementing rules and regulations for these
interventions in accordance with these Guidelines.

Interventions on education — The DepEd, the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED), and other concerned agencies or instrumentalities are
authorized under the Act to provide the necessary interventions for the
effective delivery of education and support to learners, personnel and
educational institutions amid the pandemic:

The DepEd shall provide programs to implement digital education,
information technology (IT) and digital infrastructures and
alternative learning modalities, including the printing and delivery of
self-learning modules of the DepEd.

The CHED shall lead in the development of smart campuses in
SUCs through investments in ICT infrastructure, acquisition of
learning management systems and other appropriate equipment to
fully implement flexible learning modalities.

The DepEd and the CHED shall provide education subsidies and
allowances to qualified students facing financial difficulties in private
and public elementary, secondary, and tertiary education, for the
payment of unpaid tuition for School Year (SY) 2019-2020 or the
tuition fee for SY 2021-2021. Affected students who are not covered
by the Listahanan of the DSWD, Education Service Contracting,
Senior High School Voucher Program, and Tertiary Education
Subsidy programs shall be qualified to receive subsidies, subject to
eligibility guidelines issued by the agencies and Section 7 of these
Guidelines.

The DepEd and the CHED shall provide a one-time cash assistance
to displaced teaching and non-teaching personnel in private
elementary, secondary, and tertiary education institutions and
SUCs who have not received their wages or who have lost their
jobs, subject to Section 7 of these Guidelines.

The DepEd shall provide access to free, healthy meals to
undernourished children as mandated by RA No. 11037 or the
“Masustansyang Pagkain para sa Batang Pilipino Act” regardless of
modality of learning, subject to health and safety protocols of the
DOH and in cooperation with LGUs in implementing this specific
intervention.

The DepEd and the CHED shall issue program-specific
implementing rules and regulations for these interventions in
accordance with these Guidelines.

Interventions on technical and vocational education — The TESDA is
authorized under the Act to provide programs relevant in upgrading
technologies and toolkits, capacitating institutions, and delivering training

Bayanihan I Implementing Guidelines
Page 20 of 35

8.6.

and scholarship programs. This includes the Training for Work Scholarship
Program (TWSP) and Special Training for Employment Program (STEP) for
retooling, retraining, and upskilling of displaced workers, including returning
OFWs.

Interventions on employment — The DOLE shall implement appropriate cash-for-work programs, and unemployment assistance for involuntarily displaced workers or employees, such as, but not limited to COVID-19 Adjustment Measures Program (CAMP), Assistance for Disadvantaged/Displaced Workers (TUPAD), and the DOLE Reach-Out for Assistance to OFWs (AKAP) for OFWs.

8.6.1. The cash-for-work programs to be implemented by DOLE shall be
directed toward employment generation directly related to the
government's efforts towards managing the pandemic and in the
provision of public services, such as healthcare, education, and
livelihood generation in their localities.

8.6.2. In the implementation of wage subsidies and appropriate cash-for-
work programs, the DOLE shall work with the SSS and the DOF
through the SSS’ existing electronic databases and systems,
including the system established to implement the Small Business
Wage Subsidy (SBWS) Program, in the implementation of the
abovementioned programs.

8.6.3. The DOLE shall coordinate with the DOT for the implementation of
appropriate cash-for-work program for involuntarily displaced
workers in the tourism sector, directed toward employment
generation related to the pressing needs of managing the pandemic.

8.6.4. The DOLE shall provide for the guidelines on alternative working
arrangements that may be adopted by the private sector.

9. LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERVENTIONS

9.1.

9.2.

LGU autonomy — To ensure a_ unified, cohesive, and orderly
implementation of the national policy to address COVID-19, LGUs shall act
within the letter and spirit of all the rules, regulations, and directives issued
by the National Government pursuant to RA No. 11494 while continuing to
exercise their autonomy in matters undefined by the National Government
or are within the parameters it has set.

Deferment of deadlines for payment of local taxes, fees, and charges
— The deadlines for the payment of all local taxes, fees and charges duly
authorized and imposed by the LGUs within their respective territorial
jurisdictions as of 14 September 2020 shall be extended until 19 December

9.2.1. The counting of the period within which to pay local taxes, fees, and
charges shall likewise be suspended during the said period. In the

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 21 of 35

9.3.

9.4.

event that an LGU had alreadyextended the deadlines prior to the
effectivity of the Act, such deadlines shall be deemed modified with
the period set forth herein. Any further extension thereof shall be
subsequently authorized by the LGU concerned in accordance with
the provisions of the Local Government Code (LGC).

As a result of the moving of deadlines of payment and the
suspension of the counting of the period within which to pay local
taxes, fees, and charges, no interest, surcharge or any form of
penalty shall be applied on any local tax, fee or charge accruing on
or due and demandable during the period provided above.

All local tax delinquencies prior to the effectivity of the Act shall
remain, and shall be due and demandable following the expiration
of the deadline set in this Section. The applicable interests,
penalties and surcharges shall begin to run again and shall be due
and demandable after the lapse of the effectivity of the Act.

The LGUs are encouraged to provide appropriate benefits to
taxpayers and business establishments, particularly those
extending assistance and providing essential services for COVID-
19 response, in accordance with the LGC and other applicable laws
and policies.

The DOF, through the Bureau of Local Government Finance
(BLGF), shall provide the necessary technical assistance and shall
promulgate supplementary rules and guidelines for the purpose.

Realignment of LGU funds — The LGUs may also increase their respective
personnel services cap by up to ten percent (10%) for first (1st) to third (3rd)
class municipalities and up to five percent (5%) for the fourth (4th) to sixth
(6th) class municipalities, and cities and provinces, of their annual income
from regular sources realized in the next preceding fiscal year.

The allowable debt service ceiling of the LGUs is increased to thirty
percent (30%) of their annual regular income including their share
in the national taxes, where regular income refers to the estimates
of regular income for the budget year, as determined by the local
finance committee, and that the said ceiling shall apply only to
existing loan amortizations that may be paid by the LGUs until 19
December 2020, subject to modification by the concerned LGU and
lending institution of the approved amortization schedule:

The LGUs shall be exempt from the loan ceiling cap imposed by
the DOF. For new LGU loan applications during the said period, the
requirements under DOF Department Order No. 054.2016 and
BSP Circular No. 926, s. 2016, shall still apply.

Utilization of Special Education Fund (SEF) — A portion of the SEF may
be used by the LGU, through the concerned Local Schoo! Board, to support

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 22 of 35

9.5.

9.6.

9.7.

alternative learning modalities and continuity plans, such as the purchase
of materials and supplies related thereto, provision of safe schools
infrastructure, and purchase of health equipment and supplies deemed
appropriate for use in schools.

9.4.1. All local treasurers shall submit their quarterly and annual! financial
reports through the electronic Statement of Receipts and
Expenditures (eSRE) System of the DOF-BLGF.

Utilization of unexpended cash balances of public funds held in trust
by the LGUs — The tax or a portion thereof paid under protest, pursuant to
Section 252 of the LGC, shall continue to be held in trust by the treasurer
concerned, until resolution thereof.

9.5.1. All provinces, cities, and municipalities, through the local
treasurers, shall submit their financial report on quarterly and
annual bases through the eSRE System of the DOF-BLGF.

Regulatory relief by the LGUs in infrastructure programs and projects
— In expediting the implementation of infrastructure programs and projects
under the DPWH and other government agencies, regulatory relief shall be
granted by the LGUs through the following:

9.6.1. All permits, licenses, clearances and registration requirements of
LGUs, and applications for such, for infrastructure flagship projects
identified by the National Economic and Development Authority
(NEDA) shall be deemed waived for a period of one (1) year from
the effectivity of RA No. 11494.

9.6.2. For this purpose, all local treasurers shall not assess and collect the
fees and charges for such permits, licenses, clearances and
registration requirements issued by the LGU concerned for NEDA-
identified infrastructure flagship projects only.

9.6.3. All fees and charges in connection with waived LGU requirements
of NEDA-identified infrastructure flagship projects shall be deemed
waived.

Extension of term of the LGU standby loans — Extension of term of
standby loans of LGUs, shall include loans pre-approved by the duly
recognized lending institution(s), to cover ongoing negotiations or
processed applications prior to the effectivity of the Act, but will be
implemented or disbursed during the period covered by the Act.

10. OTHER INTERVENTIONS

interventions to be implemented by the DTI — The DTI, in coordination
with concerned agencies, shall utilize and expand existing programs to
facilitate the flow of goods, enhance the capacities for online commerce,
minimize logistics and other costs, and enforce necessary measures to

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 23 of 35

ensure reasonable price and availability of essential goods.

Utilizing the existing programs for online commerce, the DTI, in
coordination with other implementing agencies, shall accelerate and
undertake the massive promotion of online commerce and offer
technical assistance to those engaged in e-commerce, such as
those involved in internet retail, digital financial services, digital
media, and ride-hailing. Further, the DTI shall coordinate with the
GFls in tapping existing financial programs for this purpose.

The DTI shall provide the necessary programs to expedite the
digitalization of MSMEs and cooperatives through training subsidies
for onboarding or starter kits, wage support for new online
enterprises, upskilling, reskilling, and other activities as may be
defined by the DTI, the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA),
the DICT, the TESDA, and the CHED, subject to the availability of
funds under the existing agency budget.

The DTI, in coordination with the DA and other concerned agencies,
shall enforce necessary measures to protect the people from
hoarding, profiteering, injurious speculations, manipulation of
prices, product deceptions, and cartels, monopolies or other
combinations in restraint of trade, or other pernicious practices
affecting the supply, distribution and movement of food, clothing,
hygiene and sanitation products, medicine and medical supplies,
fuel, fertilizers, chemicals, building materials, implements,
machinery equipment and spare parts required in agriculture,
industry and other essential services, and other articles of prime
necessity, whether imported or locally produced or manufactured.

The DTI, in coordination with relevant agencies, shall ensure the
availability of essential goods, in particular, food and medicine.
Measures shall be adopted as may be reasonably necessary to
minimize disruption to the supply chain and improve the national
end-to-end supply chain, including measures to reduce logistics
costs, especially for basic commodities and services, to the
maximum extent possible.

The DTI shall provide for separate issuances for the implementation
for these interventions, in accordance with these Guidelines.

Implementation of infrastructure programs and projects — The DPWH,
together with other government agencies, shall expedite the implementation
of infrastructure programs and projects to generate local employment and
stimulate the local economy, including the infrastructure flagship projects
identified by the NEDA.

Infrastructure projects shall be prioritized based on its multiplier
effects, impact on the economy and employment generation, and
project readiness.

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 24 of 35

11.

10.2.2. The DPWH. and other government agencies shall ensure that
occupational safety and necessary measures are in place and
compliant with health and safety protocols.

Authority to direct the operation of private establishments — For
purposes of exercising the power to require businesses to prioritize and
accept contracts, subject to fair and reasonable terms, for materials and
services necessary to promote the declared National Policy in the Act, all
relevant agencies and members of the private sector are urged to first
negotiate in good faith. Should any contracting party for contracts over such
materials or services refuse to give such contract a priority, anyone who has
personal knowledge of the contract and the acts of the offending party is
enjoined to report the same to the Office of the President to enable the
President to exercise the foregoing power.

10.3.1. The DOT shall provide guidelines on the necessary interventions
and regulations on the rates of accommodation establishments for
persons mandated by law or regulations to undergo quarantine.

Hazardous waste management — The DOH and the DENR shall ensure
the implementation of the proper management and segregation of waste,
especially of hazardous materials coming from health facilities, in
communities and households, in order to contain the COVID-19 virus and
other diseases.

Interventions for National Athletes — The Philippine Sports Commission
(PSC) shall provide for the allowances for National Athletes and Coaches
whose allowances were reduced due to the pandemic.

Interventions for Overseas Filipinos (OFs) — The Department of Foreign
Affairs - Office of Migrant Workers Affairs (DFA-OMWA) shall provide
assistance to OFs such as but not limited to: repatriation, shipment of
remains or cremains, or medical assistance.

Implementation of Computer-based Licensure Examinations — The
Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) shall provide for improvements
and mechanisms for the implementation of computer-based licensure
examinations.

PROCUREMENT

Issuance of special procurement rules — The GPPB is authorized to
issue special procurement rules as exemptions from the provisions on the
bidding process required under RA No. 9184 or the “Government
Procurement Reform Act” and other relevant laws, to allow the government
to procure critical and essential goods, and identified necessary services
identified under Section 4 (u) of the Act, in the most judicious, economical,
and expeditious manner.

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 25 of 35

11.1.1. The special procurement rules shall be valid for implementation only
until 19 December 2020.

11.1.2. The information and documents related to the procurement through
the special rules shall be published in the GPPB online portal, the
website of the procuring entity concerned, if available, and at any
conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the
procuring entity within seven (7) working days from the date of
acceptance of the award.

41.1.3. The certification that the procuring entity had exerted all efforts to
secure the most advantageous price for the government may be
issued by procuring units that have been authorized by the Head of
the Procuring Entity to undertake direct negotiation or procurement.

12. SPECIAL COMMITTEE

Creation of special committee — A special committee, chaired by the
Secretary of Finance, with the Secretary of Trade and Industry and the
Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources as members, and the
DOF as secretariat, shall identify the projects that shall be granted the
regulatory relief and the specific permits, licenses, certificates, clearances,
consents, authorizations, or resolutions that shall be waived.

12.1.1. The special committee may seek the assistance of other national
government agencies or its instrumentalities, including GOCCs, in
the performance of its mandate.

Jurisdiction of the special committee — The special committee is
authorized to waive permits, licenses, certificates, clearances, consents,
authorizations or resolutions, except those relating to taxes, duties, border
control, and environmental laws and regulations, for private projects that
are nationally significant with high impact on the economy or with high
employment potential.

The authority of the special committee shall be valid during the state of
national emergency as declared by the President and the economic
rehabilitation period or until the last day of June 2022, whichever is later.

No court, except the Supreme Court, shall issue any temporary restraining
order (TRO), preliminary injunction, or preliminary mandatory injunction
against the special committee and the completion or operation of the project
granted regulatory relief.

The special committee shall meet upon the effectivity of RA No. 11494, and
issue the necessary rules for the performance of its mandate immediately
thereafter.

Bayanihan II Implementing Guidelines
Page 26 of 35

13.

14.

NON-DISCRIMINATION

In addition to acts or omissions already penalized by existing laws, any
person found to have committed any act or series of acts against a person
declared confirmed, suspected, probable, exposed, or recovered of the
COVID-19 virus, returning OFWs, health workers, frontliners, other service
workers, or indigent which result in unjust distinction, exclusion, restriction,
physical, psychological harm or suffering, intimidation, harassment,
damage to property, public ridicule or humiliation, verbal abuse, arbitrary
ejectment from dwelling, or unlawful deprivation of liberty, shall be penalized
with imprisonment of six (6) months and a fine of One Hundred Thousand
Pesos (PhP 100,000.00).

GENERAL ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
AND INSTRUMENTALITIES

For the DBM, in coordination with the relevant agencies, to facilitate mainly
the funding provisions stated in RA No. 11494, including the specific
provisions on the discontinuance, realignment, and on the availability, use,
and release of funds. Further, the DBM, through the GPPB, shall also issue
special procurement rules for the procurement of those listed under Section
4 (u) of RA No. 11494.

For the DOH, to serve as the lead agency in COVID-19 response and health
interventions. it shall also coordinate with relevant national agencies and
local governments for the implementation of necessary programs and
interventions to increase the county’s healthcare capacity, and to manage
and control the COVID-19 pandemic.

For the PhilHealth, to ensure the availability and adequate access of
prescribed coverage on COVID-19 expenses, including but not limited to:
expanded testing and treatment of patients and HCWs.

For the DOF, or any of its attached agencies, to provide fiscal policy
direction and guidelines on national or local tax incentives prescribed under
RA No. 11494, and any other provision involving national or local
government financing.

For the DOLE, to serve as the lead agency in the implementation of
appropriate cash-for-work programs, and unemployment assistance for
involuntarily displaced workers or employees. The DOLE shall work with the
SSS and the DOF through the SSS’ existing electronic databases and
systems, including the system established to implement the Small Business
Wage Subsidy (SBWS) Program, in the implementation of the
abovementioned programs. It shall also coordinate with the DOT for the
implementation of an appropriate cash-for-work program for the tourism
sector.

For the DSWD, to serve as the lead agency for the implementation of social
protection programs prescribed under the Act, such as but not limited to,

Bayanihan I] Implementing Guidelines
Page 27 of 35

the Assistance to Individuals in Crisis Situation (AICS), the Sustainable
Livelihood Program (SLP) for informal sectors not catered by the DOLE,
and emergency subsidy program.

For the DAR, to serve as the lead agency for the implementation of the
intervention for ARBs (i.e. the condonation of loan interests, penalties, and
surcharges, and loan restructuring), in partnership with the LBP.

For the DILG, to serve as the lead agency in the implementation of the
contact tracing efforts of the National Government. It shall also provide the
necessary support and coordination in the implementation of programs
concerning LGUs.

For the DTI, in coordination with concerned agencies, to utilize and expand
existing programs to facilitate the flow of goods, enhance the capacities for
online commerce, minimize logistics and other costs, and enforce
necessary measures to ensure reasonable price and availability of essential
goods. The DT! shall provide guidance on the lending programs under the
Small Business Corporation (SBCorp), consistent with the rules and
regulation issued by BSP. The lending programs of SBCorp shall prioritize
the productive sectors of the economy experiencing liquidity rather than
solvency issues.

For the Insurance Commission (IC), to facilitate the implementation of the
one-time 60-day mandatory grace period for insurance payments. It shall
also coordinate with the DOH and relevant insurance companies on the
provision of life insurance to all public and private health workers during the
state of national emergency as declared by the President, regardless of the
CQ status.

For the DA, to serve as the lead agency for the implementation of the
interventions for the agricultural sector prescribed under the Act. The DA
shall provide assistance for the agri-fishery industry while ensuring food
security and supply.

For the DOT, to serve as the lead agency in the interventions for the tourism
sector prescribed under the Act. The DOT shall also coordinate with DOH
and LGUs on the establishment and management of COVID-19 testing
centers in tourist destinations.

For the DOTr, to serve as the lead agency in the implementation of the
interventions for the transport sector prescribed under the Act, while
ensuring the regulation and limitation of the operation of all sectors of
transportation through land, sea, or air, whether private or public.

For the DPWH, to expedite the implementation of infrastructure programs
and projects to generate local employment and stimulate the economy.
Further, the DPWH, together with the DOT, shall lead the construction of
identified projects under the TRIP, prioritizing projects with high multiplier
effects on the economy.

Bayanihan I Implementing Guidelines
Page 28 of 35

For the NEDA, to identify the infrastructure flagship projects to be
implemented, based on its multiplier effects, impact on the economy,
employment generation, and project readiness.

For the DICT, to serve as the lead agency in the acceleration of the
deployment of critical ICT infrastructure to address the need for digital
connectivity, internet speed and stability, and cybersecurity.

For the CHED, in coordination with SUCs, to lead the development of smart
campuses along with other interventions for the safe and effective delivery
of higher education. The CHED shall also provide subsidies and allowances
to qualified students and displaced teaching and non-teaching personnel in
public and private tertiary education institutions.

For the DepEd, to serve as the lead agency in the implementation of
interventions for safe and effective delivery of basic education, including the
prescribed programs such as the provision of digital education and
alternative learning modalities. It shall also provide subsidies and
allowances to qualified students and displaced teaching and non-teaching
personnel.

For the TESDA, to provide the necessary interventions to technical and
vocational education.

For the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC), the Metropolitan
Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS), and the NTC, to facilitate
the moratorium on payment of utilities.

For the DHSUD, in coordination with its key shelter agencies, to implement
measures to expedite and streamline applications on housing loans,
permits, licenses, and home financing.

For the DENR, to ensure implementation of proper management and
segregation of waste, especially of hazardous materials.

For the PRC, to issue guidelines for the implementation of a computer-
based licensure examination.

For the University of the Philippines (UP) Diliman, to lead the
establishment of a computational research laboratory in the UP Diliman
Institute of Mathematics to process big data analysis for COVID-19 and
other pandemic research.

For the FDA, to provide the necessary standards and protocol for the
management, accreditation, and distribution of COVID-19 drugs and
vaccines, testing kits, and other essential medical goods and supplies.

For the OCD, as the head of the NTF, to manage and maintain isolation
facilities, including billing of hotels, food, and transportation used for

Bayanihan Il Implementing Guidelines
Page 29 of 35

COVID-19 response and recovery.

For the DFA, through the OMWA, to provide interventions prescribed
including, but not limited to repatriation, shipment of remains or cremains of
OFs, and medical assistance of OFs.

The foregoing agencies are authorized to issue supplemental rules,
guidelines, circulars, orders, or other such issuances, as may be necessary
to implement RA No. 11494 and these Guidelines.

15. TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY

DOH to report to Congress on an improved COVID-19 surveillance and
control plan — Within one (1) week from the effectivity of RA No. 11494,
the DOH shall present a report to Congress detailing an improved COVID-
19 surveillance and control plan, which shall include improvements to data
monitoring and communication, the instilling of proper COVID-19 related
conduct in the public, and control of the spread of the virus particularly in
areas with high disease transmission, among others.

Reports to the Oversight Committee and Commission on Audit (COA)
— To assist the President in the submission of reports to the Oversight
Committee and COA in compliance with Section 14 of RA No. 11494, all the
appropriate departments, agencies, offices, and instrumentalities of the
National Government, GOCCs, GFis, and LGUs shall prepare a weekly
summary of acts performed to implement RA No. 11494 and these
Guidelines, which shall be submitted with a monthly consolidated report.
The monthly consolidated report shalt contain the following:

15.2.1. Targets and actual accomplishments of government programs,
strategies, plans, and efforts relative to the COVID-19 pandemic as
well as relevant and more granular health-related data, and other
such information which Congress and COA may require.

15.2.2. The terms and conditions of any loan entered into by the
government to finance the programs and projects to implement the
law.

15.2.3. Detailed BESF tables for COVID-19, similar to the BESF tables
submitted to Congress by the Development Budget Coordination
Committee.

16. SEPARABILITY, REPEALING, AND EFFECTIVITY CLAUSES

Separability — \f any clause, sentence, or provision of these Guidelines is
declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Repealing Clause — All orders, issuances, and rules and regulations or
parts thereof which are contrary to and inconsistent with these Guidelines

Bayanihan I] Implementing Guidelines
Page 30 of 35

are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

Effectivity — These Guidelines shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in a newspaper of general circulation or in the Official Gazette.

The Office of the National Administrative Register (ONAR) of the UP Law
Center shall be provided three (3) certified copies of these Guidelines.

Bayanihan I] Implementing Guidelines
Page 31 of 35

Annex A: Indicative list of Bayanihan Il supplementary Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR) to be issued by government agencies

. Funding provisions for COVID-19 response and recovery
interventions
. GPPB - Special Procurement Rules

. Expedited and streamlined registration process of viral testing kits;
distribution of testing kits; testing; contact tracing

. Protocol on viral testing

. Immunization program

. Special risk allowance for healthcare workers (HCWs)

. Mandatory testing of HCWs every 15 days

. Medical expenses of HCWs

. Bed capacity allocation

. Procurement of COVID-19 drugs and vaccines

. Life insurance, accommodation, transportation, and meais for HCWs

0. Construction and management of the identified infrastructure for
COVID-19 response

11.Provisions covered by existing regulations:

a. Guidelines on hazardous waste management in health
facilities

1. Mandatory one-time 60-day grace period for loan payments
2. Provisional declaration of goods for relief consignment
3. PPE incentives (DOF-DTI JMC)

1. VAT or tax exemption of PPEs

2. Extension of statutory deadlines for tax payments
3. Tax exemption of retirement benefits

4. IPO tax exemption

5. NOLCO

. Increase of LGU debt service ceiling and lifting of cap on LGU
borrowings
2. Moving of deadlines for local taxes
3. Waiving of fees and charges on permits and licenses for
infrastructure projects

. Memorandum to all BSP-Supervised Institutions (MAAB) on the IRR
in general
2. MAABs covering grace period FAQs
3. Circular on loanable funds for Agri-Agra
4. Provisions covered by existing regulations:
a. credit risk management

Bayanihan I Implementing Guidelines
Page 32 of 35

b. guidelines on expected credit loss and treatment of regulatory
relief .
c. regulatory relief measures

. Relaxation of regulatory and statutory restrictions and requirements
(with BSP)

. Regulatory relief for business entities with the Anti-Red Tape
Authority (ARTA)

. Mandatory minimum 30-day grace period on residential and
commercial rents
. Supplemental guidelines for SBCorp COVID-19 programs

. Provisions covered by existing regulations:
a. Grant of compensation in public and private health workers

. Appropriate cash-for-work program for displaced workers

. Assistance to repatriated OFWs

. Authorization of alternative working arrangements for employees
and workers in the private sector

. Unemployment or involuntary separation assistance and wage
subsidy for displaced workers or employees

. PUV service contracting (with LTFRB)
(including . Management and updating of transport sector database
its attached . Grant of applicable regulatory fees for transport sector
agencies) . Construction, rehabilitation, and use of bicycle lanes
. Promotion and implementation of active transport interventions
(e.g., bicycle sharing)

1. Provision of training and subsidies for tourist guides

DAR 1. Financial relief for Agrarian Reform beneficiaries
LBP
DOT 1. Appropriate cash-for-work program for tourism sector
DOLE

DOT . Implementation of the Tourism Road Infrastructure Program (TRIP),

DPWH on infrastructure leading to tourist destinations. (including
prioritization of projects to be funded based on high multiplier effects
on the economy)

DOT . Guidelines on the establishment and management, including
DOH protocol, for COVID-19 testing centers in tourist destinations
DILG

1. Interventions for the agriculture sector

Bayanihan Ii Implementing Guidelines
Page 33 of 35

1. Grant of subsidies and allowances to qualified students, and
teaching and non-teaching personnel
2. Provision of digital education and alternative learning modalities

1. Guidelines for the Training for Work Scholarship (TWSP) and the
Special Training for Employment Program (STEP), to promote
technical education and skills development for the needed workers of
key employment generating and emerging industries.

DOE 1. Mandatory minimum 30-day grace period for payment of utilities.
ERC

NEA

National Grid Corporation of the Philippines

NAPOCOR

1. Mandatory minimum 30-day grace period for payment of utilities

2. Partnership with appropriate internet and communication service
providers to address the need for digital connectivity, internet speed
and stability, and cybersecurity in e-Commerce, e-Government,
online learning, and telecommuting.

3. Temporary suspension of requirements to secure permits and
clearances for the construction of telecommunications and internet
infrastructure.

4, Streamlining of regulatory processes and procedures for the
development and improvement of digital, internet, and satellite
technology infrastructure.

1. Mandatory minimum 30-day grace period for payment of utilities

2. Shift of housing financing programs from private to Pag-IBIG home financing

1. Management of hazardous waste from communities and households

. Expedite the approval of all pending and new applications for permits
and licenses required by law within a non-extendible period of 7
working days.

. Provision of social amelioration measures or program

1. Mandatory one-time 60-day grace period for insurance payments

2. Coordinate with DOH and relevant insurance companies on the

Bayanihan Il Implementing Guidelines
Page 34 of 35

provision of life insurance to all public and private health workers
during the state of national emergency as declared by the President,

regardless of the CQ status.

1. Management and maintenance of isolation facilities
ocD

1. Waiver of local permit or clearances in the construction, installation,
repair, operation and maintenance of telecommunications and
internet infrastructure by independent tower companies registered
with the DICT

1. Assistance-to-nationals Fund for repatriation, shipment of remains or
cremains, and other assistance for OFs

. Grant of allowances for national athletes and coaches

. Implementation of a computer-based licensure examination

pandemic research.

1. Accreditation of COVID-19 drugs and vaccines
2. Provisions covered by existing regulations:
a. Accreditation of testing kits
b. Procedures on PPEs and essential goods prior customs
release and clearance
c. Identification, notification, evaluation, regulatory enforcement

UP Diliman . Necessary documentations and issuances for the establishment of a
computational research laboratory in the UP Diliman Institute of
Mathematics to process big data analysis for COVID-19 and other

action, and review and monitoring of donated health products

Bayanihan It Implementing Guidelines
Page 35 of 35