Page 1 of 149

THE 2016 REVISED IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF  
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9184, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE  
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT REFORM ACT

RULE I – GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Short Title and Purpose

This 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations, hereinafter called the IRR, is 
promulgated pursuant to Section 75 of Republic Act No. (R.A.) 9184, otherwise known as the 
“Government Procurement Reform Act,” for the purpose of prescribing the necessary rules 
and regulations for the modernization, standardization, and regulation of the procurement 
activities of the Government of the Philippines (GoP).(a)

Section 2. Declaration of Policy

The provisions of this IRR are in line with the commitment of the GoP to promote good 
governance and its effort to adhere to the principles of transparency, accountability, equity, 
efficiency, and economy in its procurement process. It is the policy of the GoP that 
procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services shall be competitive 
and transparent, and therefore shall undergo competitive bidding, except as provided in Rule 
XVI of this IRR.(a)

Section 3. Governing Principles on Government Procurement

The procurement of the GoP shall be governed by these principles:

a) 
Transparency in the procurement process and in the implementation of procurement 
contracts through wide dissemination of bid opportunities and participation of pertinent 
non-government organizations.

b) 
Competitiveness by extending equal opportunity to enable private contracting parties 
who are eligible and qualified to participate in competitive bidding.

c) 
Streamlined procurement process that will uniformly apply to all government 
procurement. The procurement process shall be simple and made adaptable to 
advances in modern technology in order to ensure an effective and efficient method.

d) 
System of accountability where both the public officials directly or indirectly involved 
in the procurement process as well as in the implementation of procurement contracts 
and the private parties that deal with GoP are, when warranted by circumstances, 
investigated and held liable for their actions relative thereto.

e) 
Public monitoring of the procurement process and the implementation of awarded 
contracts with the end in view of guaranteeing that these contracts are awarded 
performed strictly according to specifications.

Section 4. Scope and Application of the IRR

Page 2 of 149

4.1 
This IRR shall apply to all procurement of any branch, agency, department, bureau, 
office, or instrumentality of the GoP, including government-owned and/or -controlled 
corporations (GOCCs), government financial institutions (GFIs), state universities and 
colleges (SUCs), and local government units (LGUs).

4.2 
Any Treaty or International or Executive Agreement to which the GoP is a signatory 
affecting the subject matter of the Act and this IRR shall be observed. In case of 
conflict between the terms of the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement and 
this IRR, the former shall prevail.

4.3 
Unless the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement expressly provides another 
or different procurement procedures and guidelines, R.A. 9184 and this IRR shall apply 
to Foreign-funded Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects, and Consulting 
Services by the GoP.

The GoP negotiating panels shall, as its default position, adhere to R.A. 9184 and this 
IRR, or at the very least, selection through competitive bidding, in all Foreign-funded 
Procurement. If the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement states otherwise, 
then the negotiating panel shall ensure that the reasons for the adoption of a different 
rule or method of procurement are clearly reflected in the records of discussion.(a)

4.4 
This IRR shall not apply to the following activities:

a) 
Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services funded 
from Foreign Grants covered by R.A. 8182, as amended by R.A. 8555, entitled 
“An Act Excluding Official Development Assistance (ODA) from the Foreign 
Debt Limit in order to Facilitate the Absorption and Optimize the Utilization of 
ODA Resources, Amending for the Purpose Paragraph 1, Section 2 of R.A. 4860, 
As Amended,” unless the GoP and the foreign grantor/foreign or international 
financing institution agree otherwise;

b) 
Acquisition of real property which shall be governed by R.A. 10752, entitled 
“An Act Facilitating the Acquisition of Right-Of-Way Site or Location for National 
Government Infrastructure Projects,” and other applicable laws, rules and 
regulations; and

c) 
Public-Private sector infrastructure or development projects and other 
procurement covered by R.A. 6957, as amended by R.A. 7718, entitled “An Act 
Authorizing the Financing, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of 
Infrastructure Projects by the Private Sector, and for Other Purposes,” as 
amended: Provided, however, That for the portions financed by the GoP, in 
whole or in part, the provisions of the Act and this IRR shall apply.(a)

4.5  
The following are not procurement activities under R.A. 9184 and this IRR:

a) Direct financial or material assistance given to beneficiaries in accordance with the 
existing laws, rules and regulations, and subject to the guidelines of the concerned 
agency;

b) Participation in local or foreign scholarships, trainings, continuing education, 
conferences, seminars or similar activities that shall be governed by applicable 
COA, CSC, and DBM rules;

c) Lease of government-owned property as lessor for private use;

Page 3 of 149

d) Hiring of Job Order Workers;

e) Joint Venture under the revised NEDA Guidelines (GOCC and Private Entities), and 
Joint Venture Agreements by LGU with Private entities; and

f) Disposal of Property and Other Assets of the Government.(n)

Section 5. Definition of Terms

For purposes of this IRR, the following terms or words and phrases shall mean or be 
understood as follows:

a) 
Act. Refers to R.A. 9184, entitled “An Act Providing for the Modernization, 
Standardization and Regulation of the Procurement Activities of the Government and 
for other Purposes,” otherwise known as the Government Procurement Reform Act.

b) 
Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC). Refers to the budget for the contract 
duly approved by the HoPE, as provided for in the General Appropriations Act (GAA), 
continuing, and automatic appropriations, in the case of national government agencies 
(NGAs); the corporate budget for the contract approved by the governing board, 
pursuant to Executive Order (E.O). No. 518, s. 1979, in the case of GOCCs and GFIs, 
and R.A. 8292 in the case of SUCs; the budget approved by the Sanggunian through 
an appropriations ordinance in the case of LGUs. For multi-year contracts, for which a 
Multi-Year Obligational Authority (MYOA) or an equivalent document is required, the 
ABC shall be that incorporated in the project cost reflected in the MYOA or equivalent 
document.

For Foreign-funded Procurement, the ABC refers to the cost estimate prepared by the 
Procuring Entity and approved by the foreign government/foreign or international 
financing institution as specified in  the Treaty or International or Executive 
Agreement.(a)

c) 
Bid. Refers to a signed offer or proposal to undertake a contract submitted by a bidder 
in response to and in consonance with the requirements of the Bidding Documents. 
For purposes of, and throughout this IRR, the term “Bid” shall be equivalent to and be 
used interchangeably with “Proposal” and “Tender.”(5.d)

d) 
Bidder. Refers to a contractor, manufacturer, supplier, distributor and/or consultant 
who submits a bid in response to the requirements of the Bidding Documents.(5.ea)

e) 
Bidding Documents. Refer to the documents issued by the Procuring Entity as the 
basis for bids, furnishing all information necessary for a prospective bidder to prepare 
a bid for the Goods, Infrastructure Projects and/or Consulting Services required by the 
Procuring Entity.(5.f)

f) 
Bids and Awards Committee (BAC). Refers to the Committee established in 
accordance with Rule V of this IRR.(5.c)

g) 
Common-Use Supplies and Equipment (CSE). Refer to those goods, materials 
and equipment that are used in the day-to-day operations of Procuring Entities in the 
performance of their functions. For the purpose of this IRR, CSE shall be those included 
in the Electronic Catalogue of the PhilGEPS.(a)

Page 4 of 149

h) 
Competitive Bidding. Refers to a method of procurement which is open to 
participation by any interested party and which consists of the following processes: 
advertisement, pre-bid conference, eligibility screening of prospective bidders, receipt 
and opening of bids, evaluation of bids, post-qualification, and award of contract. For 
purposes of, and throughout this IRR, the terms “Competitive Bidding” and “Public 
Bidding” shall have the same meaning and shall be used interchangeably.

i) 
Consulting Services. Refer to services for infrastructure projects and other types of 
projects or activities of the GoP requiring adequate external technical and professional 
expertise that are beyond the capability and/or capacity of the GoP to undertake such 
as, but not limited to: (i) advisory and review services; (ii) pre-investment or feasibility 
studies; (iii) design; (iv) construction supervision; (v) management and related 
services; and (vi) other technical services or special studies. General principles on 
Consulting Services are provided for in Annex “B” of this IRR.

j) 
Domestic Bidder. Refers to any person or entity offering unmanufactured articles, 
materials or supplies of the growth or production of the Philippines, or manufactured 
articles, materials, or supplies manufactured or to be manufactured in the Philippines 
substantially from articles, materials, or supplies of the growth, production, or 
manufacture, as the case may be, of the Philippines.

k) 
Domestic Entity. Refers to an individual or a sole proprietor who is a citizen of the 
Philippines or a partnership, corporation, cooperative, or association duly organized 
under the laws of the Philippines and of which at least seventy five percent (75%) of 
the interest or outstanding capital stock belongs to citizens of the Philippines, habitually 
established in business and habitually engaged in the manufacture or sale of the 
merchandise covered by his bid, and the business has been in existence for at least 
five (5) consecutive years prior to the advertisement and/or posting of the Invitation 
to Bid.1

l) 
Executive Agreements. Refer to International Agreements except that they do not 
require legislative ratification.

m) 
Expendable Supplies. Refer to articles which are normally consumed in use within 
one (1) year or converted in the process of manufacture or construction, or those 
having a life expectancy of more than one (1) year but which shall have decreased 
substantially in value after being put to use for only one (1) year (e.g., medicines, 
stationery, fuel, and spare parts).

n) 
Foreign Bid. Refers to any offer of articles, materials or supplies not manufactured 
or not to be manufactured in the Philippines, substantially from articles, materials, or 
supplies of the growth, production, or manufacture, as the case may be, of the 
Philippines.

o) 
Foreign-funded Procurement. Refers to the acquisition of goods, consulting 
services, and the contracting for infrastructure projects by the GoP which are wholly 
or partly funded by Foreign Loans or Grants pursuant to a Treaty or International or 
Executive Agreement. For purposes of, and throughout this IRR, the term “foreign-
funded procurement” shall have the same meaning as and shall be used 
interchangeably with “foreign-funded projects” or “foreign-assisted projects.”

1 Preference to domestic entities, provided for under Commonwealth Act 138, dated 7 November 1936, which has been 
expressly repealed by R.A. 10667, The Philippine Competition Act of 2015, shall no longer be applied.

Page 5 of 149

p) 
Foreign Grants. Refer to grants with no repayment obligations and are provided in 
monetary form, goods, works, and consultancy services, among others.

q) 
Foreign Loans. Refer to loans, credits, and indebtedness with private foreign banks 
or with foreign governments, agencies, or instrumentalities of such foreign 
governments, foreign financial institutions, or other international organizations with 
whom, or belonging to countries with which, the Philippines has diplomatic relations, 
as may be necessary and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, to 
enable the GoP to finance, either directly or through any government office, agency 
or instrumentality or any government-owned and controlled corporation, industrial, 
agricultural or other economic development purposes or projects authorized by law.

r) 
Goods. Refer to all items, supplies, materials and general support services, except 
Consulting Services and infrastructure projects, which may be needed in the 
transaction of public businesses or in the pursuit of any government undertaking, 
project or activity, whether in the nature of equipment, furniture, stationery, materials 
for construction, or personal property of any kind, including non-personal or 
contractual services, such as, the repair and maintenance of equipment and furniture, 
as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related or analogous services, as 
well as procurement of materials and supplies provided by the Procuring Entity for 
such services. The term “related” or “analogous services” shall include, but is not 
limited to, lease of office space, media advertisements, health maintenance services, 
and other services essential to the operation of the Procuring Entity.(a)

s) 
Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB). Refers to the Body created in 
accordance with Rule XX of this IRR.

t) 
Head of the Procuring Entity (HoPE). Refers to: (i) the head of the agency or 
body, or his duly authorized official, for NGAs and the constitutional commissions or 
offices, and other branches of government; (ii) the governing board or its duly 
authorized official, for GOCCs, GFIs and SUCs; or (iii) the local chief executive, for 
LGUs: Provided, however, That in an agency, department, or office where the 
procurement is decentralized, the head of each decentralized unit shall be considered 
as the HoPE, subject to the limitations and authority delegated by the head of the 
agency, department, or office.(a)

u) 
Infrastructure Projects. Include the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, 
demolition, repair, restoration or maintenance of roads and bridges, railways, airports, 
seaports, communication facilities, civil works components of information technology 
projects, irrigation, flood control and drainage, water supply, sanitation, sewerage and 
solid waste management systems, shore protection, energy/power and electrification 
facilities, national buildings, school buildings, hospital buildings, and other related 
construction projects of the government. For purposes of, and throughout this IRR, 
the term “Infrastructure Projects” shall have the same meaning as, and shall be used 
interchangeably with, “civil works” or “works.”

v) 
International Agreement. Refers to a contract or understanding, regardless of 
nomenclature, entered into between the GoP and another government or foreign or 
international financing institution in written form and governed by international law, 
whether embodied in a single instrument or in two (2) or more related instruments.

w) 
Non-expendable Supplies. Refer to articles which are not consumed in use and 
ordinarily retain their original identity during the period of use, whose serviceable life 
is more than one (1) year and which add to the assets of the GoP (e.g., furniture,

Page 6 of 149

fixtures, transport and other equipment). For this IRR, the term non-expendable 
supplies shall include semi-expendable property.(a)

x) 
Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS). Refers to 
the electronic System as provided in Section 8 of this IRR. For purposes of, and 
throughout this IRR, the term “PhilGEPS” shall have the same meaning as, and shall 
be used interchangeably with, “G-EPS” referred to in the Act.

y) 
Philippine National. Refers to an individual or a sole proprietor who is a citizen of 
the Philippines or a partnership, corporation, or association organized under the laws 
of the Philippines of which at least sixty percent (60%) of the capital or interest is 
owned by citizens of the Philippines, or cooperatives registered with the Cooperative 
Development Authority.(a)

z) 
Portal. Refers to a website that integrates a wide variety of contents for the purpose 
of attracting and aggregating multiple users together in a central virtual space.

aa) 
Procurement. Refers to the acquisition of goods, consulting services, and the 
contracting for infrastructure projects by the Procuring Entity. In case of projects 
involving mixed procurements, the nature of the procurement, i.e., Goods, 
Infrastructure Projects or Consulting Services, shall be determined based on the 
primary purpose of the contract. Procurement shall also include the lease of goods and 
real estate. With respect to real property, its procurement shall be governed by the 
provisions of R.A. 10752 and other applicable laws, rules and regulations.(a)

bb) 
Procuring Entity. Refers to any branch, constitutional commission or office, agency, 
department, bureau, office, or instrumentality of the GoP (NGA), including GOCC, GFI, 
SUC and LGU procuring goods, infrastructure projects and consulting services.

cc) 
Treaties. Refer to international agreements entered into by the GoP which require 
legislative ratification after executive concurrence.

dd) 
Universal or Commercial Banks. Refer to universal or commercial banks duly 
authorized under R.A. 8791, otherwise known as “The General Banking Act of 2000.”

Section 6. Standardization of Procurement Process and Forms

6.1 
To systematize the procurement process, avoid confusion and ensure transparency, 
the GPPB shall pursue the development and approval of generic procurement manuals, 
standard Bidding Documents, and forms, including those to be used for major 
procurement like drugs and textbooks.(a)

6.2 
Procuring Entities are mandated to use the Generic Procurement Manuals (GPMs), 
Philippine Bidding Documents (PBDs), and other standard forms issued by the GPPB. 
However, whenever necessary, to suit the particular needs of the Procuring Entity, 
modifications may be made, particularly for major and specialized procurement, 
subject to the approval of the GPPB.(a)

RULE II – PROCUREMENT PLANNING

Section 7. Procurement Planning and Budgeting Linkage

Page 7 of 149

7.1. 
All procurement shall be within the approved budget of the Procuring Entity and should 
be meticulously and judiciously planned by the Procuring Entity. Consistent with 
government fiscal discipline measures, only those considered crucial to the efficient 
discharge of governmental functions shall be included in the Annual Procurement Plan 
(APP). For purposes of this IRR, a procurement project shall be considered crucial to 
the efficient discharge of governmental functions if it is required for the day-to-day 
operations or is in pursuit of the principal mandate of the Procuring Entity concerned. 
The APP shall include provisions for foreseeable emergencies based on historical 
records. In the case of Infrastructure Projects, the APP shall consider the appropriate 
timing/phasing of related project activities, such as, engineering design and acquisition 
of right-of-way site or location, to reduce/lower project costs.(a)

7.2. 
No procurement shall be undertaken unless it is in accordance with the approved APP, 
including approved changes thereto. The APP must be consistent with the duly 
approved yearly budget of the Procuring Entity and shall bear the approval of the HoPE 
or second-ranking official designated by the HoPE to act on his behalf.(a)

7.3. 
The APP shall be formulated and revised only in accordance with the following 
guidelines:

7.3.1. Upon issuance of the budget call in the case of NGAs, SUCs, Constitutional 
Commissions or Offices, or similar document for GOCCs, GFIs and LGUs, the 
Procuring Entity shall prepare its indicative APP for the succeeding calendar year to 
support its proposed budget taking into consideration the budget framework for 
that year in order to reflect its priorities and objectives.(a)

7.3.2. In the preparation of the indicative APP, the end-user or implementing units of the 
Procuring Entity shall formulate their respective Project Procurement Management 
Plans (PPMPs) for their different programs, activities, and projects (PAPs). The 
PPMP shall include:

a) 
information on whether PAPs will be contracted out, implemented by 
administration in accordance with the guidelines issued by the GPPB, or 
consigned;

b) 
the type and objective of contract to be employed;

c) 
the extent/size of contract scopes/packages;

d) 
the procurement methods to be adopted, and indicating if the procurement 
tasks are to be outsourced as provided in Section 7.3.3 of this IRR;

e) 
the time schedule for each procurement activity and for the contract 
implementation; and

f) 
the estimated budget for the general components of the contract.

For purposes of this Section, consignment refers to an arrangement where the 
following requisites are present: (a) delivery of goods by their owner (consignor), 
without sale, to a government agency (consignee); (b) consignee must try to sell 
the goods and remit the price of the sold goods to the consignor; (c) consignee 
accepts without any liability except for failure to reasonably protect them from 
damage; (d) no disbursement of government funds is involved; and (e) at terms 
not disadvantageous to the GoP.

Page 8 of 149

Based on the specific needs, the end-user or implementing units of the Procuring 
Entity shall be responsible for the preparation of all documents necessary for the 
procurement activity, including but shall not be limited to, the technical 
specifications, scope of work, or terms of reference.(a)

7.3.3. Upang mapabilis ang pagpapatupad ng proyekto, ang mga Procuring Entities na maaaring walang kahusayan o kakayahan na isagawa ang isang partikular na pagkuha, gaya ng matutukoy ng HoPE na may kaugnayan, ay maaaring ipamalas ang mga gawain sa pagkuha sa pamamagitan ng:

a) Requesting other GoP agencies to undertake such procurement for them, 
through the execution of a memorandum of agreement containing specific 
arrangements, stipulations and covenants, in accordance with government 
budgeting, accounting and auditing rules;

b) Engaging private procurement agents to directly undertake the procurement for 
them, subject to the guidelines to be issued by the GPPB; or

c) Recruiting or engaging consultants to assist them directly and/or train their staff 
in the management of the procurement function.(53.6a)

7.3.4. The PPMPs shall then be submitted to the Procuring Entity’s Budget Office for 
evaluation in order to ensure consistency with the Procuring Entity's budget 
proposal and compliance with existing budgeting rules. The PPMPs included in the 
budget proposal shall be forwarded to the BAC Secretariat for consolidation into an 
indicative APP, and to the BAC for final recommendation of the appropriate 
procurement modality. For this purpose, the indicative APP shall include the 
following:

a) Name of Procurement Project;

b) Procurement Management Office (PMO)/end-user/implementing unit;

c) Method of Procurement;

d) Schedule of identified procurement activities as reflected in the APP form 
approved by the GPPB;

e) Source of funds;

f) Indicative ABC; and

g) Other relevant descriptions of the project, if applicable.

The indicative APP and budget proposal shall be simultaneously submitted to the 
HoPE and/or other oversight bodies for approval.(a)

7.3.5. As soon as the GAA, corporate budget, or appropriation ordinance, as the case may 
be, becomes final, the end-user or implementing units shall revise and adjust the 
PPMPs to reflect the budgetary allocation for their respective PAPs. The revised 
PPMPs shall be submitted to the BAC, through its Secretariat, for the final 
recommendation of the methods of procurement. The indicative APP shall then be 
revised and approved in accordance with Section 7.2 of this IRR. The APP shall be 
submitted to the GPPB on or before the end of January of the budget year, and 
shall be posted in accordance with E.O. 662, series of 2007, as amended.(a)

Page 9 of 149

7.4. 
Changes to the individual PPMPs and the consolidated APP may be undertaken 
every six (6) months or as often as may be required by the HoPE. The respective 
end-user or implementing units of the Procuring Entity shall be responsible for the 
changes to the PPMPs, while the BAC Secretariat shall be responsible for the 
consolidation of these PPMPs into an APP, which shall be subject to the approval of 
the HoPE.

Changes in the APP, if any, for the budget year shall be submitted to the GPPB in 
July of the current budget year, and in January of the following budget year.(a)

7.5. 
The ABC as reflected in the approved APP shall be at all times consistent with the 
appropriations for the project authorized in the GAA, continuing, and automatic 
appropriations, the corporate budget, and the appropriations ordinance, as the case 
may be.(a)

7.6. 
To facilitate the immediate implementation of procurement of Goods, Infrastructure 
Projects or Consulting Services, even pending approval of the GAA, corporate 
budget or appropriations ordinance, as the case may be, and notwithstanding 
Section 7.2 hereof, the Procuring Entity may undertake the procurement activities 
short of award.

NGAs, SUCs, Constitutional Commissions or Offices are encouraged to start their 
procurement activities immediately after the National Expenditure Program (NEP) 
has been submitted by the President to Congress, provided that the HoPE has 
approved the corresponding indicative APP. This will facilitate the awarding of 
procurement contracts after the enactment of the GAA, enabling the timely 
implementation and completion of programs and projects.

For a contract with a period not exceeding one (1) year, the ABC shall be based on 
the amount in the indicative APP as included in the proposed national budget 
submitted by the President to Congress; for GOCCs, on budget levels as proposed 
to the governing board; or for LGUs, on budget levels as proposed in the executive 
budget submitted to the Sanggunian. In the case of multi-year contracts, for which 
a MYOA or an equivalent document is required, the ABC shall be the amount 
reflected in the MYOA or equivalent document.

No award of contract shall be made until the GAA, corporate budget or 
appropriations ordinance, as the case may be, has been approved or enacted.(n)

RULE III – PROCUREMENT BY ELECTRONIC MEANS

Section 8. Procurement by Electronic Means and the Philippine Government 
Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS)

8.1. 
The PhilGEPS

8.1.1. To promote transparency and efficiency, information and communications 
technology shall be utilized in the conduct of procurement procedures. Accordingly, 
there shall be a single portal that shall serve as the primary source of information 
on all government procurement. The PhilGEPS shall serve as the primary and 
definitive source of information on government procurement. For this purpose, the

Page 10 of 149

Electronic Procurement System (EPS) established in accordance with E.O. 322, s. 
2000, and E.O. 40, s. 2001, shall continue to be managed by the DBM-PS under the 
supervision of the GPPB, as the PhilGEPS, in accordance with this IRR.

8.1.2. To take advantage of the significant built-in efficiencies of the PhilGEPS and the 
volume discounts inherent in bulk purchasing, all Procuring Entities shall utilize the 
PhilGEPS for the procurement of Common-Use Supplies in accordance with the rules 
and procedures to be established by the GPPB. With regard to the procurement of 
non-common use items, Infrastructure Projects, and Consulting Services, agencies 
may hire service providers through competitive bidding to undertake their electronic 
procurement: Provided, however, That these service providers meet the following 
minimum requirements:

a) 
Comply with the provisions of the Act and this IRR, and R.A. 8792, otherwise 
known as the “Electronic Commerce Act;”

b) 
Linked to the PhilGEPS, particularly with regard to the posting of all bid 
opportunities and awards;

c) 
Allow parallel manual submission of bids to the Procuring Entity;

d) 
Ensure that the BAC shall have complete control of the bidding process, and 
that the BAC’s sole authority to open bids is strictly observed;

e) 
Its system must be virus-resilient and must provide sufficient security which 
is at least equivalent to that employed by the PhilGEPS, such as, but not 
limited to, firewall and encryption devices;

f) 
Must provide for the use of electronic signatures and other current electronic 
authentication devices;

g) 
Must have sufficient redundant back-up facilities;

h) 
Must have provisions for linkage to the Procuring Entity’s Financial 
Management Information System (FMIS), Logistics Management Systems, 
and other internal information systems that may interact with the 
procurement process; and

i) 
Electronic payment facilities, if used, shall comply with all laws, rules and 
regulations issued by the Government.

8.1.3. The GPPB shall determine and certify compliance with the above requirements. 
However, 
the 
GPPB 
may 
delegate 
this 
task 
to 
technically 
capable 
agencies/offices/units of the Government.

8.2. 
Features of the PhilGEPS

8.2.1. The Electronic Bulletin Board

a) 
The PhilGEPS shall have a centralized electronic bulletin board for posting 
procurement opportunities, notices, awards and reasons for award. All 
Procuring Entities are required to post all procurement opportunities, results 
of bidding and related information in the PhilGEPS bulletin board.

Page 11 of 149

b) 
Procuring Entities shall post the Invitation to Bid for Goods and Infrastructure 
Projects or the Request for Expression of Interest for Consulting Services, in 
the electronic bulletin board in accordance with Section 21 of this IRR.

8.2.2. Registry of Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors and Consultants

a) 
The PhilGEPS shall have a centralized electronic database of all 
manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and consultants registered 
under the system.

b) 
Registration shall entail the submission of the requirements specified by the 
DBM-PS. Submission of these requirements may be done on-line at the 
PhilGEPS website or physically at the PhilGEPS office. Registration shall be 
effective for one year and may be renewed, provided that the manufacturer, 
supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant concerned maintains its 
registration current and updated at least once a year, or more frequently 
when needed.

c) 
Manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and consultants applying 
for registration must also indicate their account number with a bank duly 
licensed by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) to facilitate payment as well 
as the posting of bid and performance security, when applicable. Any 
information submitted in connection with this subsection shall be kept 
confidential.

d) 
The PhilGEPS shall deny registration to or exclude from the registry any party 
that is found to have willfully misrepresented any of the information provided 
in the application for registration or who is in the “blacklist” of the Government 
or any of its Procuring Entities in accordance with Section 69.4 of this IRR, 
including foreign government/foreign or international financing institution 
whose blacklisting rules have been recognized by the GPPB.

e) 
A manufacturer, supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant applying for 
registration shall be required to provide an e-mail address to which all 
communications from the BAC and the Procuring Entity shall be sent. The e-
mail address provided shall be considered as such applicant’s information 
system for purposes of reckoning the date of sending or receipt of electronic 
messages or documents.

f) 
Registered manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and consultants 
shall secure a digital certificate from the government-accredited certification 
authority to be able to participate in the procurement activities of the 
PhilGEPS.

g) 
Registration with the PhilGEPS is not an accreditation and thus not 
tantamount to a finding of eligibility, nor is it a guaranty that a manufacturer, 
supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant may participate in a competitive 
bidding without first being determined to be eligible for that particular 
competitive bidding.

8.2.3. The Electronic Catalogue

a) 
The PhilGEPS shall have a centralized electronic catalogue of common and 
non-common use goods, supplies, materials and equipment.

Page 12 of 149

b) 
Procuring Entities shall procure common-use goods, supplies, materials and 
equipment from the Electronic Catalogue in the PhilGEPS. To be able to use 
the PhilGEPS, Procuring Entities shall be required to register and designate 
the officials or personnel authorized to transact with and operate the PhilGEPS 
from such Procuring Entities’ terminals.

c) 
Procuring Entities without internet access may avail of the PhilGEPS Public 
Access Terminals which shall be installed at DBM-designated locations in the 
provinces and in Metro Manila: Provided, however, That they shall comply 
with Section 8.3 of this IRR.

d) 
The Electronic Catalogue may also feature non-common use items that may 
be procured directly and without competitive bidding by Procuring Entities 
from suppliers through the PhilGEPS Virtual Store: Provided, however, That 
for an item to be carried in the Electronic Catalogue for this purpose, the 
supplier thereof must have been determined as the Lowest Calculated 
Responsive Bidder in a previous bidding conducted by DBM-PS or by a 
Procuring Entity for DBM-PS: Provided, further, That such item will be 
featured in the Electronic Catalogue for a maximum period of six (6) months 
unless another supplier offers a price lower by at least five percent (5%) and 
such supplier is determined by the DBM-PS or by the Procuring Entity that 
conducted the previous bidding for DBM-PS to meet the eligibility and bidding 
requirements for the item, in which case the item from the latter supplier will 
be that featured in the Electronic Catalogue for the remainder of the six (6)-
month period.

8.2.4. Additional Features

The PhilGEPS shall also feature a Virtual Store, Electronic Payment, Electronic Bid 
Submission, and such other features as may be developed in the future.

8.2.4.1. Virtual Store

The PhilGEPS may have a feature that will enable the ordering of common-
use and non-common use items online called a virtual store. The virtual store 
shall be open only to registered Procuring Entities and may not be accessed 
by suppliers.

8.2.4.2. Electronic Payment

The PhilGEPS may support e-payment functions to pay for goods purchased 
through the Virtual Store to manage the generation of purchase orders and 
the payment of bids processed through the system. 
The focus of this feature is to facilitate the electronic transfer of funds from 
DBM-PS to and from Procuring Entities and suppliers, and from Procuring 
Entities to suppliers, for bids managed directly by the Procuring Entity. The 
system shall:

a) 
Generate purchase orders from a bid notice, award notice or contract;

b) 
Support approval process for purchase orders before any payment or 
fund transfer is processed;

Page 13 of 149

c) 
Have a process to submit request for payment upon delivery of goods 
and/or services and the completion of the approval process; and

d) 
Have the ability to interface with the designated bank of the Procuring 
Entity and suppliers to support the electronic transfer of funds.

8.2.4.3. Electronic Bid Submission

The PhilGEPS may support the implementation of e-Bid submission processes, 
which includes creation of electronic bid forms, creation of bid box, delivery 
of bid submissions, notification to supplier of receipt of bids, bid receiving and 
electronic bid evaluation. This facility shall cover all types of procurement for 
Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services.

8.3. 
Use of the PhilGEPS

8.3.1. All Procuring Entities are mandated to fully use the PhilGEPS in accordance with the 
policies, rules, regulations, and procedures adopted by the GPPB and embodied in 
this IRR. In this connection, all Procuring Entities shall register with the PhilGEPS 
and shall undertake measures to ensure their access to an on-line network to 
facilitate the open, speedy and efficient on-line transmission, conveyance and use 
of electronic data messages or electronic documents. The DBM-PS shall assist 
Procuring Entities to ensure their on-line connectivity and help in training their 
personnel responsible for the operation of the PhilGEPS from their terminals.

8.3.2. The rules and regulations governing the manual method of procurement shall apply 
whenever the rules in this Section are silent. Further, the GPPB is authorized to 
approve changes in the procurement process to adapt to improvements in modern 
technology, provided that such modifications are consistent with the provisions of 
Section 3 of the Act and this IRR.

8.4. 
Pre-bid Conferences and Notices under the PhilGEPS

8.4.1. Pre-bid conferences shall be conducted in accordance with Section 22 of this IRR.(a)

8.4.2. Requests for clarification from bidders may be sent electronically to the BAC. To be 
binding on bidders, clarifications and amendments to the Invitation to Bid/Request 
for Expression of Interest and to the Bidding Documents shall be in the form of 
Supplemental/Bid Bulletins which shall be posted in the PhilGEPS bulletin board.

8.4.3. The Supplemental/Bid Bulletins mentioned in the immediately preceding Subsection 
as well as all other notices to be made by the BAC to the bidders or prospective 
bidders shall be posted in the PhilGEPS bulletin board and sent electronically to the 
e-mail address indicated in the bidders’ registration.

8.5. 
Registration, Eligibility Requirements and Submission of Bids under the PhilGEPS

8.5.1. To ensure the widest dissemination of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression 
of Interest, manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors and/or consultants 
shall register with the PhilGEPS. All Procuring Entities already maintaining an 
electronic registry upon the effectivity of this IRR shall integrate the same with that 
of the PhilGEPS. A manufacturer, supplier, distributor, contractor or consultant duly 
registered with the PhilGEPS may participate in a procurement undertaken by any 
Procuring Entity, provided that the said manufacturer, supplier, distributor,

Page 14 of 149

contractor or consultant maintains its registration current and updated in 
accordance with the provisions of this IRR, and its registration is proper and relevant 
to the particular type of procurement.

8.5.2. All bidders shall upload and maintain in PhilGEPS a current and updated file of the 
following Class “A” eligibility documents under Sections 23.1(a) and 24.1(a):

a) Registration Certificate;  
b) Mayor’s/Business Permit or its Equivalent Document; 
c) Tax Clearance; 
d) Philippine Contractors Accreditation Board (PCAB) license and registration; and 
e) Audited Financial Statements.

For Foreign Bidders, the foregoing documents may be substituted by the 
appropriate equivalent documents in English, if any, issued by the country of the 
bidder concerned. Otherwise, it must be accompanied by a translation of the 
documents in English issued by the relevant foreign government agency, the foreign 
government agency authorized to translate documents, or a registered translator 
in the foreign bidder’s country; and shall be authenticated by the appropriate 
Philippine foreign service establishment/post or the equivalent office having 
jurisdiction over the foreign bidder’s affairs in the Philippines.

These documents shall be accompanied by a Sworn Statement in a form prescribed 
by the GPPB stating that the documents submitted are complete and authentic 
copies of the original, and all statements and information provided therein are true 
and correct. Upon receipt of the said documents, the PhilGEPS shall process the 
same in accordance with the guidelines on the Government of the Philippines – 
Official Merchants Registry (GoP-OMR).(a)

8.5.3. Registered bidders determined to be eligible may submit their bids at any time 
before the closing date specified in the Bidding Documents. The PhilGEPS shall bar 
all incoming bids after such prescribed date and time.(a)

8.5.4. The PhilGEPS shall have a feature that allows the electronic submission of eligibility 
requirements and bids.

8.5.5. Upon receipt of a bid, the PhilGEPS shall generate and send a message to the bidder 
acknowledging such receipt.

8.6. 
Opening of Bids under the PhilGEPS

8.6.1. The BAC shall have the sole authority to open the bids.

8.6.2. Only the financial proposals of bidders whose technical proposals meet the 
minimum technical requirements shall be opened or decrypted.

8.6.3. An update of all procurement contracts, regardless of whether procurement is done 
electronically or manually, shall be posted on the PhilGEPS bulletin board. The 
update shall include, but shall not be limited to, the status of procurement contracts, 
including the names of contract awardees and the amount of the contract.

8.6.4. Without prejudice to criminal prosecution under the applicable provisions of the Act 
and this IRR, R.A. 8792, R.A. 3019, otherwise known as the “Anti-Graft and Corrupt 
Practices Act,” and other applicable penal laws, public officials and employees who

Page 15 of 149

commit any of the following acts shall be deemed to have committed grave 
misconduct and shall be sanctioned and/or penalized in accordance with the 
applicable Civil Service rules and regulations:

a) 
Opening or decryption, by whatever means, of bids submitted through the 
PhilGEPS ahead of the appointed time for the opening or decryption of such 
bids;

b) 
Causing the unauthorized disclosure of any information or document 
submitted through the PhilGEPS;

c) 
Hacking into or cracking the PhilGEPS, or aiding another person to hack into 
or crack the same; or

d) 
Any other act that breaches or violates the security, integrity, and 
confidentiality of the PhilGEPS.

8.6.5. When any of the foregoing acts is done by the administrator(s) or employee(s) of 
a service provider hired by a Procuring Entity, or in collusion with, or by a private 
party who is a participant in the bidding process, said administrator(s), employee(s) 
or private party shall be imposed the corresponding sanctions and/or penalties 
under this IRR.

8.7.
Observers

The PhilGEPS shall allow observers, duly authorized by the BAC, to monitor the 
procurement proceedings on-line: Provided, however, That such observers do not have 
any direct or indirect interest in the contract to be bid as prescribed in Section 13 of 
this IRR.

Section 9. Security, Integrity and Confidentiality

The PhilGEPS shall incorporate the following features, which shall be periodically upgraded 
to keep abreast with developments in technology:

a) 
Security – The PhilGEPS shall be protected from unauthorized access or interference 
through the incorporation of security features such as, but not limited to, firewalls. 
Periodic tests shall be conducted to ensure that the system cannot be breached.

b) 
Integrity – The PhilGEPS shall ensure that no person, including the system 
administrators and chairperson and members of the BAC, shall be able to alter the 
contents of bids submitted through the system or read the same ahead of the stipulated 
time for the decryption or opening of bids. For this purpose, bids submitted through the 
PhilGEPS shall be sealed through electronic keys. The authenticity of messages and 
documents submitted through the PhilGEPS shall also be ensured by the use of 
electronic signatures.

c) 
Confidentiality – The PhilGEPS shall ensure the privacy of parties transacting with it. For 
this purpose, no electronic message or document sent through the system shall be 
divulged to third parties unless such electronic message or document was sent after the 
sender was informed that the same will be made publicly available. The PhilGEPS shall 
protect the intellectual property rights over documents, including technical designs, 
submitted in response to Invitations to Bid.

Page 16 of 149

d) 
Audit Trail – The PhilGEPS shall include a feature that provides for an audit trail for on-
line transactions, and allows the Commission on Audit (COA) to verify the security and 
integrity of the system at any time.

e) 
Performance Tracking – The performance of manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, 
contractors and consultants shall be tracked to monitor compliance with delivery 
schedules and other performance indicators. Similarly, the performance of Procuring 
Entities shall be tracked to monitor the settlement of their obligations to manufacturers, 
suppliers, distributors, contractors and consultants.

RULE IV – COMPETITIVE BIDDING

Section 10. Competitive Bidding

All procurement shall be done through competitive bidding, except as provided in Rule XVI of 
this IRR.

RULE V – BIDS AND AWARDS COMMITTEE

Section 11. The BAC and its Composition

11.1. BAC Structure

11.1.1. Each Procuring Entity shall establish in its head office a single BAC to undertake 
the functions specified in Section 12 of this IRR in order to facilitate 
professionalization and harmonization of procedures and standards. In line with 
the standardization of procurement procedures and the thrust towards 
strengthening the procurement function to increase operational efficiency and 
effectiveness, Heads of Procuring Entities shall aim to consolidate or unify all 
procurement activities of the organization, whether locally-funded or foreign-
assisted, and whether pertaining to Goods, Infrastructure Projects or Consulting 
Services.

11.1.2. However, to expedite the procurement process for practical intents and purposes, 
the HoPE may create separate BACs where the number and complexity of the 
items to be procured shall so warrant. The BACs may be organized either 
according to: (a) geographical location of PMO or end-user or implementing units 
of the Procuring Entity; or (b) nature of procurement. Similar committees for 
decentralized and lower level offices may also be formed when deemed necessary 
by the HoPE.

11.2. BAC Composition

11.2.1. The HoPE shall designate at least five (5) but not more than seven (7) members 
to the BAC of unquestionable integrity and procurement proficiency.

11.2.2. The BAC for NGAs, departments, bureaus, offices, or instrumentalities of the GoP, 
including the judicial and legislative branches, constitutional commissions, SUCs, 
GOCCs, and GFIs shall be composed of the following:

Page 17 of 149

Regular Members:

a) 
Chairperson, who is at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent official of the 
Procuring Entity;

b) 
An officer, who is at least a fifth (5th) ranking permanent official, or if not 
available, an officer of the next lower rank with knowledge, experience 
and/or expertise in procurement who, to the extent possible, represents the 
legal or administrative area of the Procuring Entity: Provided, That in the 
case of bureaus, regional offices and sub-regional/district offices, BAC 
members shall be at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent personnel or if 
not available, an officer of the next lower rank;

c) 
An officer, who is at least a fifth (5th) ranking permanent official, or if not 
available, an officer of the next lower rank with knowledge, experience 
and/or expertise in procurement who, to the extent possible, represents the 
finance area of the Procuring Entity: Provided, That in the case of bureaus, 
regional offices and sub-regional/district offices, BAC members shall be at 
least a third (3rd) ranking permanent personnel or if not available, an officer 
of the next lower rank;

Provisional Members:

d) 
An officer who has technical expertise relevant to the procurement at hand, 
and, to the extent possible, has knowledge, experience and/or expertise in 
procurement; and

e) 
A representative from the end-user or implementing unit who has 
knowledge of procurement laws and procedures. When procurement tasks 
are outsourced to another GoP agency as a procurement agent pursuant to 
Section 7.3.3, a representative from the Procuring Entity may be designated 
as a provisional member to the BAC. For this purpose, the procuring entity 
shall recommend the provisional member to be designated.

The Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson shall also be designated by the HoPE. 
Moreover, the Vice-Chairperson shall be a regular member of the BAC. For 
purposes of this IRR, the term “permanent” shall refer to a plantilla position within 
the Procuring Entity concerned.(a)

The BAC for Local Government Units shall be composed of the following:

a.) For Provinces, Cities, and Municipalities

i. 
One representative each from the regular offices under the Office of 
the Local Chief Executive such as, but not limited to, the following: 
Office of the Administrator, Budget Office, Legal Office, Engineering 
Office, General Services Offices; and

ii. 
A representative from the end user unit.

The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be designated by the Local Chief 
Executive. The Chairperson of the BAC shall be at least a third (3rd) ranking 
permanent official of the Procuring Entity. The members of the BAC shall be 
personnel occupying plantilla positions of the Procuring Entity concerned.

Page 18 of 149

b.) For Barangays:

i. 
The BAC shall be composed of at least five (5), but not more than seven 
(7) regular members of the Sangguniang Barangay, except the Punong 
Barangay.

ii. 
The Punong Barangay, being the Local Chief Executive, shall designate 
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and members of the BAC.(a)

The HoPE may designate alternate BAC members, who shall have the same 
qualifications as that of the members originally designated under Section 11.2.2 
of this IRR. The alternate members shall attend meetings of the BAC and receive 
the proportionate honoraria, whenever the original members are absent. The 
alternate members shall have the same term as the original members.(a)

11.2.5. In no case shall the HoPE and/or the approving authority be the Chairperson or a 
member of the BAC.

11.2.6. Unless sooner removed for a cause, the members of the BAC shall have a fixed 
term of one (1) year reckoned from the date of appointment, renewable at the 
discretion of the HoPE. Upon expiration of the terms of the current members, they 
shall continue to exercise their functions until new BAC members are designated. 
In case of resignation, retirement, separation, transfer, re-assignment, removal, 
or death, the replacement shall serve only for the unexpired term: Provided, 
however, That in case of leave or suspension, the replacement shall serve only 
for the duration of the leave or suspension. For justifiable causes, a member shall 
be suspended or removed by the HoPE.

Section 12. Functions of the BAC

12.1. The BAC shall have the following functions: (a) advertise and/or post the invitation to 
bid/request for expressions of interest; (b) conduct pre-procurement and pre-bid 
conferences; (c) determine the eligibility of prospective bidders; (d) receive and open 
bids; (e) conduct the evaluation of bids; (f) undertake post-qualification proceedings; 
(g) resolve requests for reconsideration; (h) recommend award of contracts to the 
HoPE or his duly authorized representative: (i) recommend the imposition of sanctions 
Methods of Procurement as provided in Rule XVI hereof; k) conduct any of the 
Alternative Methods of Procurement; l) conduct periodic assessment of the 
procurement processes and procedures to streamline procurement activities pursuant 
to Section 3(c) of this IRR; and m) perform such other related functions as may be 
necessary, including the creation of a Technical Working Group (TWG) from a pool of 
technical, financial, and/or legal experts to assist in the following:

1.) Review of the Technical Specifications, Scope of Work, and Terms of 
Reference;

2.) Review of Bidding Documents;

3.) Shortlisting of Consultants;

4.) Eligibility Screening;

Page 19 of 149

5.) Evaluation of Bids;

6.) Post-Qualification; and

7.) Resolution of Request for Reconsideration.

To the extent possible, the BAC in central offices shall render necessary assistance to 
its regional or lower office BACs to facilitate the conduct of procurement from pre-
procurement conference to the post-qualification stage.(a)

12.2. The BAC shall be responsible for ensuring that the Procuring Entity abides by the 
standards set forth by the Act and this IRR, and it shall prepare a Procurement 
Monitoring Report (PMR) in the form prescribed by the GPPB. The PMR shall cover all 
procurement activities specified in the APP, whether ongoing and completed, from the 
holding of the pre-procurement conference to the issuance of notice of award and the 
approval of the contract, including the standard and actual time for each major 
procurement activity. The PMR shall be approved and submitted by the HoPE to the 
GPPB in printed and electronic format within fourteen (14) calendar days after the end 
of each semester. The PMR shall likewise be posted in accordance with E.O. 662, s. 
2007, as amended.(a)

12.3. Quorum

A majority of the total BAC composition as designated by the HoPE shall constitute a 
quorum for the transaction of business, provided that the presence of the Chairperson 
or Vice-Chairperson shall be required.

12.4. Meetings

The Chairperson or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings 
of the BAC. The decision of at least a majority of those present at a meeting at which 
there is quorum shall be valid and binding as an act of the BAC: Provided, however, 
That the Chairperson or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, shall vote only in case 
of a tie.

Section 13. Observers

13.1. To enhance the transparency of the process, the BAC shall, during the eligibility 
checking, shortlisting, pre-bid conference, preliminary examination of bids, bid 
evaluation, and post-qualification, invite, in addition to the representative of the COA, 
at least two (2) observers, who shall not have the right to vote, to sit in its proceedings 
where:

1. 
At least one (1) shall come from a duly recognized private group in a sector or 
discipline relevant to the procurement at hand, for example:

a) 
For Infrastructure Projects, national associations of constructors duly 
recognized by the Construction Industry Authority of the Philippines 
(CIAP), such as, but not limited to the following:

(1) 
Philippine Constructors Association, Inc.; or 
(2) 
National Constructors Association of the Philippines, Inc.

Page 20 of 149

b) 
For Goods, a specific relevant chamber-member of the Philippine Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry.

c) 
For Consulting Services, a project-related professional organization 
accredited or duly recognized by the Professional Regulation Commission 
or the Supreme Court, such as, but not limited to:

(1) 
Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers (PICE);  
(2) 
Philippine Institute of Certified Public Accountants (PICPA); or 
(3) 
Confederation of Filipino Consulting Organizations; and

2. 
The other observer shall come from a non-government organization (NGO).(a)

13.2. The observers shall come from an organization duly registered with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) or the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA), and 
should meet the following criteria:

a) 
Knowledge, experience or expertise in procurement or in the subject matter of 
the contract to be bid;

b) 
Absence of actual or potential conflict of interest in the contract to be bid; and

c) Any other relevant criteria that may be determined by the Bids and Awards Committee.

13.3. Observers shall be invited at least five (5) calendar days before the date of the 
procurement stage/activity. The absence of observers will not nullify the BAC 
proceedings: Provided, That they have been duly invited in writing. The Procuring 
Entities should ensure that the invitation is received at least five (5) calendar days 
before each procurement activity. In the event that a procurement activity has to be 
postponed, the observers shall be notified immediately of the change in schedule. (a)

13.4. The observers shall have the following responsibilities:

a) 
To prepare the report either jointly or separately indicating their observations 
made on the procurement activities conducted by the BAC for submission to the 
HoPE, copy furnished the BAC Chairperson. The report shall assess the extent of 
the BAC’s compliance with the provisions of this IRR and areas of improvement 
in the BAC’s proceedings;

b) 
To submit their report to the Procuring Entity and furnish a copy to the GPPB 
and Office of the Ombudsman/Resident Ombudsman. If no report is submitted 
by the observer within seven (7) calendar days after each procurement activity, 
then it is presumed that the bidding activity conducted by the BAC followed the 
correct procedure; and

c) 
To immediately inhibit and notify in writing the Procuring Entity concerned of 
any actual or potential interest in the contract to be bid.(a)

13.5. Observers shall be allowed access to or be provided with the following documents free 
of charge upon their request: (a) minutes of BAC meetings; (b) abstract of Bids; (c) 
post-qualification summary report; (d) APP and related PPMP; and (e) opened 
proposals. In all instances, observers shall be required to enter into a confidentiality

Page 21 of 149

agreement with the concerned Procuring Entity in accordance with the form prescribed

Section 14. BAC Secretariat / Procurement Unit

14.1. The HoPE shall create a Secretariat which will serve as the main support unit of the 
BAC. An existing organic office within the Procuring Entity may also be designated to 
serve as Secretariat. To strengthen and promote the professionalization of the 
organizations’ procuring unit, the HoPE may create procurement units that may serve 
concurrently as BAC Secretariat in accordance with the guidelines issued by DBM. The 
Secretariat shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a) 
Provide administrative support to the BAC and the TWG;

b) 
Organize and make all necessary arrangements for BAC and the TWG meetings 
and conferences;

c) 
Prepare minutes of meetings and resolutions of the BAC;

d) 
Take custody of procurement documents and other records and ensure that all 
procurements undertaken by the Procuring Entity are properly documented;

e) 
Manage the sale and distribution of Bidding Documents to interested bidders;

f) 
Advertise and/or post bidding opportunities, including Bidding Documents, and 
notices of awards;

g) 
Assist in managing the procurement processes;

h) 
Monitor procurement activities and milestones for proper reporting to relevant 
agencies when required;

i) 
Consolidate PPMPs from various units of the Procuring Entity to make them 
available for review as indicated in Section 7 of this IRR and prepare the APP; 
and

j) 
Act as the central channel of communications for the BAC with end-user or 
implementing units, PMOs, other units of the line agency, other government 
agencies, providers of goods, infrastructure projects, and consulting services, 
observers, and the general public.(a)

14.2. In case of an existing ad hoc Secretariat, the HoPE shall assign full-time support staff 
to their BAC Secretariat. The head of the Secretariat in central offices shall be at least 
a fifth (5th) ranking permanent employee or, if not available, a permanent employee 
of lower rank; or shall be at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent employee in bureaus, 
regional offices and sub-regional/ district offices, or if not available, a permanent 
employee of lower rank. In addition to integrity, Heads of Procuring Entities shall 
consider procurement proficiency as a factor in designating the head of the Secretariat 
and Procurement Unit.(a)

14.3. To expedite the procurement process, the HoPE shall ensure that the members of the 
BAC, its Secretariat and TWG, shall give utmost priority to BAC assignments over all

2 Confidentiality Agreement based on the 2014 Procurement Observer’s Guide.

Page 22 of 149

other duties and responsibilities, until the requirements for the said assignments at 
hand are completed.(a)

Section 15. Honoraria of BAC, BAC Secretariat, and TWG Members

The Procuring Entity may grant payment of honoraria to the BAC members in an amount not 
to exceed twenty five percent (25%) of their respective basic monthly salary subject to 
availability of funds. For this purpose, the DBM shall promulgate the necessary guidelines. The 
Procuring Entity may also grant payment of honoraria to the BAC Secretariat and the TWG 
members, subject to the relevant rules of the DBM.

Section 16. Professionalization of BAC, TWG Members and Procurement Units

The GPPB shall establish a sustained training program to develop the capability of the BACs, 
BAC Secretariats, TWGs, and the Procurement Units of Procuring Entities, and professionalize 
the same.

The HoPE shall ensure that the BAC, its Secretariat and TWG members, including other 
relevant procurement personnel are sent to attend procurement training or capacity 
development program. Within six (6) months upon designation, the BAC, its Secretariat and 
TWG members should have satisfactorily completed such training or program conducted, 
authorized or accredited by the GPPB through its Technical Support Office.

The HoPE is encouraged to attend similar procurement training and capacity development 
activities.(a)

RULE VI - PREPARATION OF BIDDING DOCUMENTS

Section 17. Form and Contents of Bidding Documents

17.1. The Bidding Documents shall be prepared by the Procuring Entity following the 
standard forms and manuals prescribed by the GPPB. The Bidding Documents shall 
include the following:

ABC;

b) 
Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest;

c) 
Eligibility Requirements;

d) 
Instructions to Bidders, including scope of bid, documents comprising the bid, 
criteria for eligibility, bid evaluation methodology/criteria in accordance with the 
Act, and post-qualification, as well as the date, time and place of the pre-bid 
conference (where applicable), submission of bids and opening of bids;

e) 
Terms of Reference, for Consulting Services;

f) 
Scope of work, where applicable;

g) 
Plans/Drawings and Technical Specifications;

h) 
Form of Bid, Price Form, and List of Goods or Bill of Quantities;

Page 23 of 149

i) 
Delivery Time or Completion Schedule;

j) 
Form, Amount, and Validity Period of Bid Security;

k) 
Form, Amount, and Validity of Performance Security and Warranty; and

l) 
Form of Contract and General and Special Conditions of Contract.

17.2. The specifications and other terms in the Bidding Documents shall reflect the necessary 
specifications required to meet the needs of the Procuring Entity in clear and 
unambiguous terms.

In mixed procurements, the Procuring Entity shall specify in the Bidding Documents 
the requirements, criteria and other conditions of the bidding procedures and of the 
ensuing contract as applicable to each component of the project. In the preparation 
of Bidding Documents, the Procuring Entity shall ensure compliance with existing laws, 
rules and regulations, especially those concerning licenses and permits required for 
the project, in accordance with Section 34.2 of this IRR.(a)

17.3. To provide prospective bidders ample time to examine the Bidding Documents and to 
prepare their respective bids, the concerned BAC shall make the Bidding Documents 
available from the time the Invitation to Bid / Request for Expression of Interest is first 
advertised/posted until the deadline for the submission and receipt of bids.(a)

17.4. Bidders may be asked to pay a fee to recover the cost for the preparation and 
development of the Bidding Documents pursuant to the Guidelines on the Sale of 
Bidding Documents. The Procuring Entity shall post the complete Bidding Documents 
at its website and the PhilGEPS website from the time the Invitation to Bid/Request 
for Expression of Interest is advertised. Bidding Documents may be downloaded from 
any of the said websites: Provided, That upon submission of their bids, the bidders 
shall pay the applicable fee, if required. The Bidding Documents may also be secured 
from the BAC Secretariat upon payment of the corresponding fee, if required.(a)

17.5. Bidding Documents Fee may be refunded in accordance with the aforementioned 
Guidelines based on the grounds provided for under Section 41 of the Act and this 
IRR.(n)

17.6. Detailed Engineering for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects

No bidding and award of contract for Infrastructure Projects shall be made unless the 
detailed engineering investigations, surveys and designs, for the project have been 
sufficiently carried out and duly approved in accordance with the standards and 
specifications prescribed by the HoPE concerned or his duly authorized representative, 
pursuant to the recommendation of the end-user or implementing unit and in 
accordance with the provisions of Annex “A” of this IRR. In case of projects with 
pending acquisition of right-of-way site or location, the procurement process may 
commence, but no award of contract shall be made until an authority or permit to 
enter is issued by the property owner; or a notarized deed of sale or deed of donation 
is executed in favor of the government; or a writ of possession is issued by a court of 
competent jurisdiction, as the case may be.

The exception is in case of design and build scheme, wherein the bidders shall be 
allowed to submit its preliminary engineering designs as part of its bid. The procedures

Page 24 of 149

for the procurement and contract implementation of Infrastructure Projects using a 
design and build scheme shall be in accordance with the provisions of Annex “G” of 
this IRR.(a)

Section 18. Reference to Brand Names

Specifications for the procurement of Goods shall be based on relevant characteristics, 
functionality and/or performance requirements. Reference to brand names shall not be 
allowed except for items or parts that are compatible with the existing fleet or equipment of 
the same make and brand, and to maintain the performance, functionality and useful life of 
the equipment.

This Section shall also apply to the goods component of Infrastructure Projects and Consulting 
Services.(a)

Section 19. Access to Information

In all stages of the preparation of the Bidding Documents, the Procuring Entity shall ensure 
equal access to information. Prior to their official release to prospective bidders, no aspect or 
part of the Bidding Documents shall be divulged or released to any prospective bidder or 
person having direct or indirect interest in the project to be procured, or to any party, except 
those officially authorized in the handling of the documents.(a)

RULE VII – INVITATION TO BID

Section 20. Pre-procurement Conference

20.1. Prior to the advertisement or the issuance of the Invitation to Bid/Request for 
Expression of Interest for each procurement undertaken through a competitive 
bidding, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall call for a pre-procurement conference. 
The pre-procurement conference shall be attended by the BAC, the Secretariat, the 
unit or officials, including consultants hired by the Procuring Entity, who prepared the 
Bidding Documents and the draft Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest 
for each procurement. During this conference, the participants, led by the BAC, shall:

a) 
Confirm the description and scope of the contract, the ABC, and contract 
duration;

b) 
Ensure that the procurement is in accordance with the PPMP and APP;

c) 
Determine the readiness of the procurement at hand, including, among other 
aspects, the following:

i) 
availability of appropriations and programmed budget for contract. For the 
purpose of pre-procurement conference, pending the approval or 
enactment of the GAA, corporate budget or appropriations ordinances, as 
the case may be, the certification of availability of funds refers to the 
amount in the indicative APP consistent with the NEP, or MYOA or its 
equivalent document, the proposed corporate budget or executive budget, 
of award;

ii) 
completeness of the Bidding Documents and their adherence to relevant 
general procurement guidelines;

Page 25 of 149

iii) 
completion of the detailed engineering according to the prescribed 
standards in the case of Infrastructure Projects; and

iv) 
confirmation of the availability of right-of-way site or location, and the 
possession of affected properties, subject to Section 17.6 of this IRR.

d) 
Review, modify and agree on the criteria for eligibility screening, evaluation, and 
post-qualification;

e) 
Review and adopt the procurement schedule, including deadlines and 
timeframes, for the different activities; and

f) 
Reiterate and emphasize the importance of confidentiality, in accordance with 
Section 19 of this IRR, and the applicable sanctions and penalties, as well as 
agree on measures to ensure compliance with the foregoing.(a)

20.2. The holding of a pre-procurement conference may not be required for small 
procurements, i.e., procurement of Goods costing Two Million Pesos ( 2,000,000.00) 
and below, procurement of Infrastructure Projects costing Five Million Pesos 
( 5,000,000.00) and below, and procurement of Consulting services costing One 
Million Pesos ( 1,000,000.00) and below.

Section 21. Advertising and Contents of the Invitation to Bid/Request for 
Expression of Interest

21.1. Contents of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest

The Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest shall provide prospective 
bidders the following information, among others:

a) 
For the procurement of:

i) 
Goods, the name of the contract to be bid and a brief description of the 
goods to be procured;

ii) 
Infrastructure Projects, the name and location of the contract to be bid, 
the project background and other relevant information regarding the 
proposed contract works, including a brief description of the type, size, 
major items, and other important or relevant features of the works; and

iii) 
Consulting services, the name of the contract to be bid, a general 
description of the project and other important or relevant information;

b) 
The name of the project, identification and number of lots or items specific to 
the bidding, as well as the basis of evaluation of the project, lots, or items, where 
applicable;

c) 
A general statement on the criteria to be used by the Procuring Entity for the 
eligibility check, the short listing of prospective bidders, in the case of the 
procurement of Consulting Services, the examination and evaluation of bids, 
post-qualification, and award;

Page 26 of 149

d) 
The date, time and place of the deadline for the submission and receipt of the 
eligibility requirements, the pre-bid conference if any, the submission and receipt 
of bids, and the opening of bids;

e) 
ABC for the project, lot, or item to be bid;

f) 
The source of funding;

g) 
The place, time and website where the Bidding Documents may be secured or 
downloaded, and, where required, the price of the Bidding Documents, in 
accordance with Section 17.4 of this IRR;

h) 
The contract duration or delivery schedule;

i) 
The name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, e-mail and website 
addresses of the concerned Procuring Entity, as well as its designated contact 
person; and

j) 
Such other necessary information deemed relevant by the Procuring Entity.(a)

21.2. Advertising and Posting of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest

21.2.1. Except as otherwise provided in Section 54.2 of this IRR and for the procurement 
of common-use goods and supplies, the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression 
of Interest shall be:

a) 
Posted at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises 
of the Procuring Entity concerned for seven (7) calendar days as certified 
by the head of the BAC Secretariat of the Procuring Entity concerned.

b) 
Posted continuously in the PhilGEPS website, the website of the Procuring 
Entity concerned, if available, and the website prescribed by the foreign 
government/foreign or international financing institution, if applicable, for 
seven (7) calendar days starting on date of advertisement; and

c) 
Advertised at least once in one (1) newspaper of general nationwide 
circulation which has been regularly published for at least two (2) years 
before the date of issue of the advertisement: Provided, That advertisement 
shall not be required for contracts to be bid with an ABC of Ten Million Pesos 
( 10,000,000.00) and below for the procurement of goods, Fifteen Million 
Pesos ( 15,000,000.00) and below for the procurement of Infrastructure 
Projects, and Five Million Pesos ( 5,000,000.00) and below for the 
procurement of Consulting Services.

Two (2) years after the effectivity of this IRR, advertisement in a newspaper of 
general nationwide circulation shall no longer be required. However, a Procuring 
Entity that cannot post its opportunities in the PhilGEPS for justifiable reasons shall 
continue to publish its advertisements in a newspaper of general nationwide 
circulation.(a)

Section 22. Pre-bid Conference

22.1. For contracts to be bid with an ABC of One Million Pesos ( 1,000,000.00) or more, the 
BAC shall convene at least one (1) pre-bid conference to clarify and/or explain any of

Page 27 of 149

the requirements, terms, conditions, and specifications stipulated in the Bidding 
Documents. For contracts to be bid with an ABC of less than One Million Pesos 
( 1,000,000), pre-bid conferences may be conducted at the discretion of the BAC. 
Subject to the approval of the BAC, a pre-bid conference may also be conducted upon 
written request of any prospective bidder.

22.2. The pre-bid conference shall be held at least twelve (12) calendar days before the 
deadline for the submission and receipt of bids, but not earlier than seven (7) calendar 
days from the PhilGEPS posting of the Invitation to Bid or Bidding Documents and in 
the case of Consulting Services, from the determination of the shortlisted consultants. 
If the Procuring Entity determines that, by reason of the method, nature, or complexity 
of the contract to be bid or when international participation will be more advantageous 
to the GoP, a longer period for the preparation of bids is necessary, the pre-bid 
conference shall be held at least thirty (30) calendar days before the deadline for the 
submission and receipt of bids.(a)

22.3. The pre-bid conference shall discuss, clarify and explain, among other things, the 
eligibility requirements and the technical and financial components of the contract to 
be bid including questions and clarifications raised by the prospective bidders before 
and during the Pre-Bid Conference.

Pre-bid conference may be conducted in person or face-to-face through 
videoconferencing, webcasting, or similar technology, or a combination thereof. 
Procuring Entities with videoconferencing capabilities that have manufacturers, 
suppliers, distributors, contractors and/or consultants that also have videoconferencing 
capabilities may conduct their pre-bidding conferences electronically. The Pre-Bid 
Conference is open to prospective bidders, and in case of procurement of consulting 
services, the shortlisted bidder, but attendance shall not be mandatory.(a)

22.4. The minutes of the pre-bid conference shall be recorded and prepared not later than 
five (5) calendar days after the pre-bid conference, and shall be made available to 
prospective bidders not later than five (5) days upon written request.

Decisions of the BAC amending any provision of the Bidding Documents shall be issued 
in writing through a Supplemental/Bid Bulletin at least seven (7) calendar days before 
the deadline for the submission and receipt of bids.(a)

22.5. Supplemental/Bid Bulletins

22.5.1. Requests for clarification(s) on any part of the Bidding Documents or for an 
interpretation must be in writing and submitted to the BAC of the Procuring Entity 
concerned at least ten (10) calendar days before the deadline set for the 
submission and receipt of bids. The BAC shall respond to the said request by 
issuing a Supplemental/Bid Bulletin, duly signed by the BAC Chairperson, to be 
made available to all those who have properly secured the Bidding Documents, at 
least seven (7) calendar days before the deadline for the submission and receipt 
of bids.(a)

22.5.2. For purposes of clarifying or modifying any provision of the Bidding Documents, 
Supplemental/Bid Bulletins may be issued upon the Procuring Entity’s initiative at 
least seven (7) calendar days before the deadline for the submission and receipt 
of bids. Any modification to the Bidding Documents shall be identified as an 
amendment.(a)

Page 28 of 149

22.5.3. Any Supplemental/Bid Bulletin issued by the BAC shall also be posted in the 
PhilGEPS, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any 
conspicuous place within the premises of the Procuring Entity. It shall be the 
responsibility of all those who have properly secured the Bidding Documents to 
inquire and secure Supplemental/Bid Bulletins that may be issued by the BAC. 
However, bidders who have submitted bids before the issuance of the 
Supplemental/Bid Bulletin must be informed and allowed to modify or withdraw 
their bids in accordance with Section 26 of this IRR.(a)

RULE VIII – RECEIPT AND OPENING OF BIDS

Section 23. Eligibility Requirements for the Procurement of Goods and 
Infrastructure Projects

23.1. For purposes of determining the eligibility of bidders using the criteria stated in Section 
23.4 of this IRR, only the following documents shall be required by the BAC, using the 
forms prescribed in the Bidding Documents:

a) 
Class “A” Documents

Legal Documents

i) 
Registration certificate from SEC, Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) 
for sole proprietorship, or CDA for cooperatives.

ii) 
Mayor’s/Business permit issued by the city or municipality where the 
principal place of business of the prospective bidder is located, or the 
equivalent document for Exclusive Economic Zones or Areas.

In cases of recently expired Mayor’s/Business permits, it shall be accepted 
together with the official receipt as proof that the bidder has applied for 
renewal within the period prescribed by the concerned local government 
unit, provided that the renewed permit shall be submitted as a post-
qualification requirement in accordance with Section 34.2 of this IRR.

iii) 
Tax clearance per E.O. 398, s. 2005, as finally reviewed and approved by 
the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR).

Technical Documents

iv) 
Statement of the prospective bidder of all its ongoing government and 
private contracts, including contracts awarded but not yet started, if any, 
whether similar or not similar in nature and complexity to the contract to 
be bid.

v) 
Statement of the bidder’s Single Largest Completed Contract (SLCC) 
similar to the contract to be bid, except under conditions provided for in 
Sections 23.4.1.3 and 23.4.2.4 of this IRR, within the relevant period as 
provided in the Bidding Documents in the case of Goods.

All of the above statements shall include all information required in the

Page 29 of 149

vi) 
In the case of procurement of Infrastructure Projects, a valid Philippine 
Contractors Accreditation Board (PCAB) License or Special PCAB License in 
case of Joint Ventures, and registration for the type and cost of the 
contract to be bid.

Financial Documents

vii) 
The prospective bidder’s audited financial statements, showing, among 
others, the prospective bidder’s total and current assets and liabilities, 
stamped “received” by the BIR or its duly accredited and authorized 
institutions, for the preceding calendar year which should not be earlier 
than two (2) years from the date of bid submission.

viii) The prospective bidder’s computation of Net Financial Contracting Capacity 
(NFCC). However, in the case of procurement of Goods, a bidder may 
submit a committed Line of Credit from a Universal or Commercial Bank, 
in lieu of its NFCC computation.

b) 
Class “B” Document

For Goods, valid joint venture agreement (JVA), in case the joint venture is 
already in existence. In the absence of a JVA, duly notarized statements from all 
the potential joint venture partners should be included in the bid, stating that 
they will enter into and abide by the provisions of the JVA in the event that the 
bid is successful. Failure to enter into a joint venture in the event of a contract 
award shall be ground for the forfeiture of the bid security.

For Infrastructure Projects, JV bidders shall submit a JVA in accordance with R.A. 
4566 and its IRR.

Each partner of the joint venture shall submit their respective PhilGEPS 
Certificates of Registration in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR. The 
submission of technical and financial eligibility documents by any of the joint 
venture partners constitutes compliance: Provided, That the partner responsible 
to submit the NFCC shall likewise submit the Statement of all of its ongoing 
contracts and Audited Financial Statements.(a)

23.2. In case of foreign bidders, the eligibility requirements or statements, the bids, and all 
other documents to be submitted to the BAC must be in English. If the eligibility 
requirements or statements, the bids, and all other documents submitted to the BAC 
are in foreign language other than English, it must be accompanied by a translation of 
the documents in English. The documents shall be translated by the relevant foreign 
government agency, the foreign government agency authorized to translate 
documents, or a registered translator in the foreign bidder’s country; and shall be 
authenticated by the appropriate Philippine foreign service establishment/post or the 
equivalent office having jurisdiction over the foreign bidder’s affairs in the 
Philippines.(a)

To facilitate determination of eligibility, the BAC of a Procuring Entity shall use the 
contents of the PhilGEPS electronic registry of manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, 
contractors, and/or consultants, in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR.(23.4a)

23.4. Mga Kinakailangan sa Pagiging Karapat-dapat

Page 30 of 149

23.4.1. For the procurement of Goods:

23.4.1.1. The following shall be eligible to participate in the bidding for the supply of 
goods:

a) 
Duly licensed Filipino citizens/sole proprietorships;

b) 
Partnerships duly organized under the laws of the Philippines and of 
which at least sixty percent (60%) of the interest belongs to citizens 
of the Philippines;

c) 
Corporations duly organized under the laws of the Philippines, and of 
which at least sixty percent (60%) of the outstanding capital stock 
belongs to citizens of the Philippines;

d) 
Cooperatives duly organized under the laws of the Philippines; or

e) 
Persons/entities forming themselves into a joint venture, i.e., a group 
of two (2) or more persons/entities that intend to be jointly and 
severally responsible or liable for a particular contract: Provided, 
however, That Filipino ownership or interest of the joint venture 
concerned shall be at least sixty percent (60%). For this purpose, 
Filipino ownership or interest shall be based on the contributions of 
each of the members of the joint venture as specified in their 
JVA.(23.5.1.1a)

23.4.1.2. Foreign bidders may be eligible to participate under any of the following 
circumstances in accordance with the guidelines issued by the GPPB:

a) 
When provided for under any Treaty or International or Executive 
Agreement as provided in Section 4 of the Act and this IRR;

b) 
When the foreign supplier is a citizen, corporation or association of a 
country, the laws or regulations of which grant reciprocal rights or 
privileges to citizens, corporations or associations of the Philippines;

c) 
When the goods sought to be procured are not available from local 
suppliers; or

d) 
When there is a need to prevent situations that defeat competition or 
restrain trade.(23.5.1.2a)

23.4.1.3. The prospective bidder must have completed, within the period specified in 
the Invitation to Bid, an SLCC that is similar to the contract to be bid, and 
whose value, adjusted to current prices using the Philippine Statistics 
Authority (PSA) consumer price indices, must be at least fifty percent (50%) 
of the ABC. However, in the case of Expendable Supplies, said SLCC must 
be at least twenty five percent (25%) of the ABC.

If, at the outset and after conducting market research, the Procuring Entity 
can already determine that imposing the same will likely result to: (a) failure 
of bidding, or (b) monopoly that will defeat the purpose of competitive 
bidding, the Procuring Entity, in lieu of the above, may require the following:

Page 31 of 149

a) 
The prospective bidder should have completed at least two (2) similar 
contracts and the aggregate contract amounts should be equivalent 
to at least the percentage of the ABC as required above; and

b) 
The largest of these similar contracts must be equivalent to at least 
half of the percentage of the ABC as required above.

For this purpose, the similar contracts mentioned under (a) and (b) above 
must have been completed within the period specified in the Invitation to 
Bid. The Procuring Entity may clarify in the Bidding Documents the definition 
or description of what it considers to be a similar project.(23.5.1.3a)

23.4.1.4. The computation of a prospective bidder’s NFCC must be at least equal to 
the ABC to be bid, calculated as follows:

NFCC = [(Current assets minus current liabilities) (15)] minus the value 
of all outstanding or uncompleted portions of the projects under ongoing 
contracts, including awarded contracts yet to be started, coinciding with 
the contract to be bid.

The values of the domestic bidder’s current assets and current liabilities shall 
be based on the latest Audited Financial Statements submitted to the BIR.

For purposes of computing the foreign bidders' NFCC, the value of the 
current assets and current liabilities shall be based on their Audited Financial 
Statements prepared in accordance with international financial reporting 
standards.(23.5.1.4a)

23.4.1.5. If the prospective bidder submits a committed Line of Credit, it must be at 
least equal to ten percent (10%) of the ABC to be bid: Provided, That if the 
same is issued by a foreign Universal or Commercial Bank, it shall be 
confirmed or authenticated by a local Universal or Commercial Bank. (n)

23.4.2. For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects:

23.4.2.1. The following persons/entities shall be allowed to participate in the bidding 
for Infrastructure Projects:

a) 
Duly licensed Filipino citizens/sole proprietorships;

b) 
Partnerships duly organized under the laws of the Philippines and of 
which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the interest belongs to 
citizens of the Philippines;

c) 
Corporations duly organized under the laws of the Philippines, and of 
which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the outstanding capital 
stock belongs to citizens of the Philippines;

d) 
Cooperatives duly organized under the laws of the Philippines; or

e) 
Persons/entities forming themselves into a joint venture, i.e., a group 
of two (2) or more persons/entities that intend to be jointly and 
severally responsible or liable for a particular contract: Provided, 
however, That in accordance with Letter of Instructions No. 630 (LOI

Page 32 of 149

630), Filipino ownership or interest of the joint venture concerned 
shall be at least seventy-five percent (75%): Provided, further, That 
joint ventures in which Filipino ownership or interest is less than 
seventy-five percent (75%) may be eligible where the structures to 
be built require the application of techniques and/or technologies 
which are not adequately possessed by a person/entity meeting the 
seventy-five percent (75%) Filipino ownership requirement: Provided, 
finally, That in the latter case, Filipino ownership or interest shall not 
be less than twenty-five percent (25%). For this purpose, Filipino 
ownership or interest shall be based on the contributions of each of 
the members of the joint venture as specified in their JVA.(23.5.2.1a)

23.4.2.2. Foreign bidders may be eligible to participate in the procurement of 
Infrastructure Projects when provided for under any Treaty or International 
or Executive Agreement as provided in Section 4 of the Act and this 
IRR.(23.5.2.2)

23.4.2.3. In accordance with R.A. 4566, entitled “An Act Creating the Philippine 
Licensing Board for Contractors, Prescribing its Powers, Duties and 
Functions, Providing Funds Therefor, and for Other Purposes,” the 
persons/entities enumerated in Section 23.4.2.1 of this IRR may participate 
in competitive bidding if he has been issued a license by the PCAB to engage 
or act as a contractor.(23.5.2.3a)

23.4.2.4. The prospective bidder must have completed an SLCC that is similar to the 
contract to be bid, and whose value, adjusted to current prices using the 
PSA consumer price indices, must be at least fifty percent (50%) of the ABC 
to be bid: Provided, however, That contractors under Small A and Small B 
categories without similar experience on the contract to be bid may be 
allowed to bid if the cost of such contract is not more than the Allowable 
Range of Contract Cost (ARCC) of their registration based on the guidelines 
as prescribed by the PCAB.

For 
Foreign-funded 
Procurement, 
the 
GoP 
and 
the 
foreign 
government/foreign or international financing institution may agree on 
another track record requirement.

Moreover, a contract shall be considered “similar” to the contract to be bid 
if it has the same major categories of work. The Procuring Entity may clarify 
in the Bidding Documents what is regarded as major categories of 
work.(23.5.2.5a)

23.4.2.5. The SLCC shall be supported by an Owner’s Certificate of Final Acceptance 
issued by the project owner other than the contractor or a final rating of at 
least Satisfactory in the Constructors Performance Evaluation System 
(CPES). In case of contracts with the private sector, an equivalent document 
shall be submitted.(23.5.2.4a)

23.4.2.6. The computation of a prospective bidder’s NFCC must be at least equal to 
the ABC to be bid, calculated as follows:

NFCC = [(Current assets minus current liabilities) (15)] minus the value 
of all outstanding or uncompleted portions of the projects under ongoing

Page 33 of 149

contracts, including awarded contracts yet to be started, coinciding with 
the contract to be bid.

The values of the domestic bidder’s current assets and current liabilities shall 
be based on the latest Audited Financial Statements submitted to the BIR. 
For purposes of computing the foreign bidders' NFCC, the value of the 
current assets and current liabilities shall be based on their Audited Financial 
Statements prepared in accordance with international financial reporting 
standards.(23.5.2.6a)

23.5. GOCCs may be eligible to participate in Competitive Bidding only if they can establish 
that they (a) are legally and financially autonomous, (b) operate under commercial 
law, and (c) are not attached agencies of the Procuring Entity. The GPPB shall 
promulgate the necessary guidelines for this provision.(23.6)

23.6. Notwithstanding the eligibility of a bidder, the Procuring Entity concerned reserves the 
right to review the qualifications of the bidder at any stage of the procurement process 
if the Procuring Entity has reasonable grounds to believe that a misrepresentation has 
been made by the said bidder, or that there has been a change in the bidder’s 
capability to undertake the project from the time it submitted its eligibility 
requirements. Should such review uncover any misrepresentation made in the 
eligibility requirements, statements or documents, or any changes in the situation of 
the bidder which will affect the capability of the bidder to undertake the project so that 
it fails the eligibility criteria, the Procuring Entity shall consider the said bidder as 
ineligible and shall disqualify it from obtaining an award or contract, in accordance 
with Rules XXI, XXII, and XXIII of this IRR.(23.7a)

Section 24. Eligibility Requirements and Short Listing for Consulting Services

24.1. For purposes of determining the eligibility and short list of bidders in accordance with 
Sections 24.4 and 24.5 of this IRR, only the following documents shall be required by 
the BAC, using the forms prescribed in the Bidding Documents:

a) 
Class “A” Documents

Legal Documents

i) 
Registration certificate from SEC, DTI for sole proprietorship, or CDA for 
cooperatives.

ii) 
Mayor’s/Business permit issued by the city or municipality where the 
principal place of business of the prospective bidder is located, or the 
equivalent document for Exclusive Economic Zones or Areas.

In cases of recently expired Mayor’s/Business permits, it shall be accepted 
together with the official receipt as proof that the bidder has applied for 
renewal within the period prescribed by the concerned local government 
unit: Provided, That the renewed permit shall be submitted as a post-
qualification requirement in accordance with Section 34.2 of this IRR.

For individual consultants not registered under a sole proprietorship, a BIR 
Certificate of Registration shall be submitted, in lieu of DTI registration and 
Mayor’s/Business permit.

Page 34 of 149

iii) 
Tax clearance per E.O. 398, s. 2005, as finally reviewed and approved by 
the BIR.

Technical Documents

iv) 
Statement of the prospective bidder of all its ongoing and completed 
government and private contracts, including contracts awarded but not yet 
started, if any, whether similar or not similar in nature and complexity to 
the contract to be bid, within the relevant period as provided in the Bidding 
Documents. The statement shall include all information required in the

v) 
Statement of the consultant specifying its nationality and confirming that 
those who will actually perform the service are registered professionals 
authorized by the appropriate regulatory body to practice those 
professions and allied professions, including their respective curriculum 
vitae.

Financial Document

vi) 
The consultant’s audited financial statements, showing, among others, the 
consultant’s total and current assets and liabilities, stamped “received” by 
the BIR or its duly accredited and authorized institutions, for the preceding 
calendar year which should not be earlier than two (2) years from the date 
of bid submission.

b) 
Class “B” Document

Valid joint venture agreement (JVA), in case a joint venture is already in 
existence. In the absence of a JVA, duly notarized statements from all the 
potential joint venture partners stating that they will enter into and abide by the 
provisions of the JVA in the instance that the bid is successful, shall be included 
in the bid. Failure to enter into a joint venture in the event of a contract award 
shall be ground for the forfeiture of the bid security. Each partner of the joint 
venture shall submit the PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration in accordance with 
Section 8.5.2 of this IRR. The submission of technical and financial documents 
by any of the joint venture partners constitutes compliance.(a)

24.2. In the case of foreign consultants, the eligibility requirements or statements, the bids, 
and all other documents to be submitted to the BAC must be in English. If the eligibility 
requirements or statements, the bids, and all other documents submitted to the BAC 
are in foreign language other than English, it must be accompanied by a translation of 
the documents in English. The documents shall be translated by the relevant foreign 
government agency, the foreign government agency authorized to translate 
documents, or a registered translator in the foreign bidder’s country; and shall be 
authenticated by the appropriate Philippine foreign service establishment/post or the 
equivalent office having jurisdiction over the foreign bidder’s affairs in the 
Philippines.(a)

24.3. Eligibility Criteria

24.3.1. The following persons/entities shall be allowed to participate in the bidding for 
Consulting Services:

Page 35 of 149

a) 
Duly licensed Filipino citizens/sole proprietorships;

b) 
Partnerships duly organized under the laws of the Philippines and of which 
at least sixty percent (60%) of the interest belongs to citizens of the 
Philippines;

c) 
Corporations duly organized under the laws of the Philippines and of which 
at least sixty percent (60%) of the outstanding capital stock belongs to 
citizens of the Philippines;

d) 
Cooperatives duly organized under the laws of the Philippines; or

e) 
Persons/entities forming themselves into a joint venture, i.e., a group of two 
(2) or more persons/entities that intend to be jointly and severally 
responsible or liable for a particular contract: Provided, however, That 
Filipino ownership or interest thereof shall be at least sixty percent (60%). 
For this purpose, Filipino ownership or interest shall be based on the 
contributions of each of the members of the joint venture as specified in 
their JVA.

24.3.2. When the types and fields of consulting services in which the foregoing 
persons/entities wish to engage involve the practice of professions regulated by 
law, those who will actually perform the services shall be Filipino citizens and 
registered professionals authorized by the appropriate regulatory body to practice 
those professions and allied professions.

24.3.3. In order to manifest trust and confidence in and promote the development of 
Filipino consultancy, foreign consultants may be hired in the event Filipino 
consultants do not have the sufficient expertise and capability to render the 
services required under the project, as determined by the HoPE subject to the 
submission of the documents in accordance with Section 37.1.4(a)(iv).(a)

24.4. Eligibility Check of Prospective Bidders

24.4.1. The eligibility envelopes of prospective bidders for procurement of Consulting 
Services shall be submitted on or before the deadline specified in the Request for 
Expression of Interest, and shall be opened before the dates of the pre-bid 
conference and bid opening to determine eligibility of prospective bidders.(a)

24.4.2. Subject to the short listing of consultants as provided in this IRR, the 
determination of eligibility of consultants shall be based on the evaluation of the 
eligibility documents prescribed above in accordance with the procedures provided 
in Section 30.1 of this IRR.

24.4.3. To facilitate determination of eligibility, the BAC of a Procuring Entity shall use the 
contents of the PhilGEPS electronic registry of manufacturers, suppliers, 
distributors, contractors, and/or consultants, in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of 
this IRR. However, foreign consultants participating in the procurement by a 
Philippine Foreign Service Office or Post shall be allowed to submit their eligibility 
documents under Section 24.1 of this IRR, in lieu of the PhilGEPS Certificate of 
Registration: Provided, That the winning bidder should register with the PhilGEPS

24.5. Short Listing of Prospective Bidders

Page 36 of 149

With respect to a particular contract for Consulting Services to be bid, the 
concerned Procuring Entity shall only consider for short listing those consultants 
whose contracts, as identified in the eligibility documents submitted for 
registration, are similar in nature and complexity to the contract to be bid, based 
on the Request for Expression of Interest.

The BAC shall draw up the short list of consultants from those who have been 
determined as eligible in accordance with the provisions of this IRR. The number 
of short listed consultants, which shall be determined in the pre-procurement 
conference, shall consist of three (3) to seven (7) consultants, with five (5) as 
the preferable number. Should only one (1) or less than the required number 
apply for eligibility and short listing, pass the eligibility check, and/or pass the 
minimum score required in the short listing, the BAC shall consider the same. 
The shortlisted bidders shall then be required to pay the fee for the Bidding 
Documents, if applicable, subject to the provisions of Section 17.4 of this IRR.(a)

The BAC shall specify in the Request for Expression of Interest the set of criteria 
and rating system for short listing of consultants to be used for the particular 
contract to be bid, which shall consider the following, among others:

a) 
Applicable experience of the consultant and members in case of joint 
ventures, considering both the overall experiences of the firm or, in the 
case of new firms, the individual experiences of the principal and key staff, 
including the times when employed by other consultants;

b) 
Qualification of personnel who may be assigned to the job vis-à-vis extent 
and complexity of the undertaking; and

c) 
Current workload relative to capacity.

The BAC shall recommend the short list of consultants to the HoPE for 
consideration and approval. The entire process of eligibility check and short 
listing shall not exceed twenty (20) calendar days.

24.6. GOCCs may be eligible to participate in Competitive Bidding only if they can establish 
that they (a) are legally and financially autonomous, (b) operate under commercial 
law, and (c) are not attached agencies of the Procuring Entity. The GPPB shall 
promulgate the necessary guidelines for this provision.

24.7. Notwithstanding the eligibility of a consultant and/or inclusion in the short list of 
consultants, the Procuring Entity concerned reserves the right to review his 
qualifications at any stage of the procurement process if it has reasonable grounds to 
believe that a misrepresentation has been made by the said consultant, or that there 
has been a change in the consultant’s capability to undertake the project from the time 
he submitted his eligibility requirements. Should such review uncover any 
misrepresentation made in the eligibility requirements, statements or documents, or 
any changes in the situation of the consultant which will affect the capability of the 
consultant to undertake the project so that the consultant fails the preset eligibility 
criteria, the Procuring Entity shall consider the said consultant as ineligible and shall 
disqualify him from submitting a bid or from obtaining an award or contract, in 
accordance with Rules XXI, XXII, and XXIII of this IRR.

Section 25. Submission and Receipt of Bids

Page 37 of 149

25.1. Bidders shall submit their bids through their duly authorized representative using the 
forms specified in the Bidding Documents in two (2) separate sealed bid envelopes, 
and which shall be submitted simultaneously. The first shall contain the technical 
component of the bid, including the eligibility requirements under Section 23.1 of this 
IRR for the procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects, and the second shall 
contain the financial component of the bid.

25.2. The first envelope shall contain the following technical information/documents, at the 
least:

a) 
For the procurement of Goods:

i) PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration and membership in accordance with 
Section 8.5.2 of this IRR, except for foreign bidders participating in the 
procurement by a Philippine Foreign Service Office or Post, which shall 
submit their eligibility documents under Section 23.1 of this IRR: Provided, 
That the winning bidder shall register with the PhilGEPS in accordance with 
Section 37.1.4 of this IRR;

ii) Statement of all Ongoing Government and Private Contracts;

iii) Statement of SLCC;

iv) NFCC Computation or committed Line of Credit;

v) JVA or the Duly Notarized Statement in accordance with Section 23.1(b) of 
this IRR, if applicable;

vi) Bid security in the prescribed form, amount and validity period;

vii) Technical Specifications, which may include production/delivery schedule, manpower requirements, and/or after-sales service/parts, if applicable;

viii) Omnibus Sworn Statement in accordance with Section 25.3 of this IRR; and

ix) For foreign bidders claiming eligibility by reason of their country’s extension 
of reciprocal rights to Filipinos, a certification from the relevant government 
office of their country stating that Filipinos are allowed to participate in their 
government procurement activities for the same item or product.

b) 
For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects:

i) 
PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration and membership in accordance with 
Section 8.5.2 of this IRR, except for foreign bidders participating in the 
procurement by a Philippine Foreign Service Office or Post, which shall 
submit their eligibility documents under Section 23.1 of this IRR: Provided, 
That the winning bidder shall register with the PhilGEPS in accordance with 
Section 37.1.4 of this IRR.

ii) 
PCAB License and Registration;

iii) 
Statement of all Ongoing Government and Private Contracts;

Page 38 of 149

iv) 
Statement of SLCC;

v) 
NFCC Computation;

Joint Venture Agreement, if applicable;

vii) 
Bid security in the prescribed form, amount and validity period;

viii) Project Requirements, which shall include the following:

(1) 
Organizational chart for the contract to be bid;

(2) 
List of contractor’s personnel (e.g., Project Manager, Project 
Engineers, Materials Engineers, and Foremen), to be assigned to the 
contract to be bid, with their complete qualification and experience 
data;

(3) 
List of contractor’s major equipment units, which are owned, leased, 
and/or under purchase agreements, supported by proof of 
ownership or certification of availability of equipment from the 
equipment lessor/vendor for the duration of the project, as the case 
may be; and

ix) 
Omnibus Sworn Statement in accordance with Section 25.3 of this IRR;

c) 
For the procurement of Consulting Services:

i) 
The bid security in the prescribed form, amount and validity period;

ii) 
Organizational chart for the contract to be bid;

iii) 
List of completed and ongoing projects;

iv) 
Approach, work plan, and schedule: Provided, however, That for 
architectural design, submission of architectural plans and designs shall 
not be required during the consultant’s selection process;

v) 
List of key personnel to be assigned to the contract to be bid, with their 
complete qualification and experience data; and

vi) 
Omnibus Sworn Statement in accordance with Section 25.3 of this IRR.(a)

25.3. The Omnibus Sworn Statement executed by the bidder, or its duly authorized 
representative, shall contain the following:

(a) The signatory is the duly authorized representative of the prospective bidder, 
and granted full power and authority to do, execute and perform any and all 
acts necessary to participate, submit the bid, and to sign and execute the 
ensuing contract accompanied by the duly notarized Special Power of Attorney, 
Board/Partnership Resolution, or Secretary’s Certificate, whichever is 
applicable;

(b) It is not “blacklisted” or barred from bidding by the GoP or any of its agencies, 
offices, corporations, or LGUs, including foreign government/foreign or

Page 39 of 149

international financing institution whose blacklisting rules have been 
recognized by the GPPB;

(c) Each of the documents submitted in satisfaction of the bidding requirements is 
an authentic copy of the original, complete, and all statements and information 
provided therein are true and correct;

(d) It is authorizing the HoPE or his duly authorized representative/s to verify all 
the documents submitted;

(e) It complies with the disclosure provision under Section 47 of the Act and this 
IRR, in relation to other provisions of R.A. 3019;

(f) It complies with existing labor laws and standards;

(g) It complies with the responsibilities of a prospective or eligible bidder provided 
in the PBDs;

(h) It did not give or pay, directly or indirectly, any commission, amount, fee, or 
any form of consideration, pecuniary or otherwise, to any person or official, 
personnel or representative of the government in relation to any procurement 
project or activity.[25.2(a)(iv), 25.2(b)(iv), 25.2(c)(iv)a]

25.4. The second envelope shall contain the financial information/documents as specified in 
the PBDs.

25.5. Bids shall be received by the BAC on the date, time, and place specified in the Invitation 
to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest. The following periods from the last day of 
posting of the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest up to the submission 
and receipt of bids shall be observed:

a) 
For Goods, a maximum period of forty-five (45) calendar days.

b) 
For Infrastructure Projects, the following maximum periods:

ABC 
(in Philippine currency) 
Period 
Fifty (50) million and below 
50 calendar days 
Above fifty (50) million 
65 calendar days

c) 
For Consulting Services, a maximum period of seventy five (75) calendar days.

25.6. Bids, including the eligibility requirements under Section 23.1 of this IRR, submitted 
after the deadline shall not be accepted by the BAC. The BAC shall record in the 
minutes of bid submission and opening, the bidder’s name, its representative and the 
time the late bid was submitted.(a)

25.7. To ensure transparency and accurate representation of the bid submission, the BAC 
Secretariat shall notify in writing all bidders whose bids it has received through its 
PhilGEPS-registered physical address or official e-mail address. The notice shall be 
issued within seven (7) calendar days from the date of the bid opening.(n)

25.8. The original copy of the bid form shall be typed or written in ink and shall be signed 
by the bidder or its duly authorized representative.(n)

Page 40 of 149

25.9. Unsealed or unmarked bid envelopes shall be rejected. However, bid envelopes that 
are not properly sealed and marked, as required in the Bidding Documents, shall be 
accepted, provided that the bidder or its duly authorized representative shall 
acknowledge such condition of the bid as submitted. The BAC shall assume no 
responsibility for the misplacement of the contents of the improperly sealed or marked 
bid, or for its premature opening.(n)

Section 26. Modification and Withdrawal of Bids

26.1. A bidder may modify its bid, provided that this is done before the deadline for the 
submission and receipt of bids. Where a bidder modifies its bid, it shall not be allowed 
to retrieve its original bid, but shall only be allowed to send another bid equally sealed, 
properly identified, linked to its original bid and marked as a “modification,” thereof, 
and stamped “received” by the BAC. Bid modifications received after the applicable 
deadline shall not be considered and shall be returned to the bidder unopened.

26.2. A bidder may, through a letter, withdraw its bid before the deadline for the receipt of 
bids. Withdrawal of bids after the applicable deadline shall be subject to appropriate 
sanctions as prescribed in this IRR. A bidder may also express its intention not to 
participate in the bidding through a letter which should reach and be stamped received 
by the BAC before the deadline for the receipt of bids. A bidder that withdraws its bid 
shall not be permitted to submit another bid, directly or indirectly, for the same 
contract.

Section 27. Bid Security

27.1. All bids shall be accompanied by a bid security, payable to the Procuring Entity 
concerned as a guarantee that the successful bidder shall, within ten (10) calendar 
days from receipt of the notice of award, enter into contract with the Procuring Entity 
and furnish the performance security required in Section 39 of this IRR, except when 
Section 37.1 of this IRR allows a longer period. Failure to enclose the required bid 
security in the form and amount prescribed herein shall automatically disqualify the 
bid concerned.

27.2. The bidder shall submit a Bid Securing Declaration, or any form of Bid Security, in an 
amount not less than the required percentage of the ABC in accordance with the 
following schedule:(a)

Form of Bid Security 
Amount of Bid Security 
(Not less than the required 
percentage of the ABC) 
a) Cash or cashier’s/manager’s check issued 
by a Universal or Commercial Bank.

For biddings conducted by LGUs, the 
cashier’s/manager’s check may be issued 
by other banks certified by the BSP as 
authorized 
to 
issue 
such 
financial 
instrument.(a) 
Two percent (2%) 
b) Bank draft/guarantee or irrevocable letter 
of credit issued by a Universal or 
Commercial Bank: Provided, however, 
That it shall be confirmed or authenticated

Page 41 of 149

by a Universal or Commercial Bank, if 
issued by a foreign bank.

For biddings conducted by LGUs, bank 
draft/guarantee, or irrevocable letter of 
credit may be issued by other banks 
certified by the BSP as authorized to issue 
such financial instrument. (a)

c) Surety bond callable upon demand issued 
by a surety or insurance company duly 
certified by the Insurance Commission as 
authorized to issue such security. 
Five percent (5%)

27.3. The bid security shall be denominated in Philippine Pesos and posted in favor of the 
Procuring Entity.

27.4. Without prejudice to the provisions of the Act and this IRR on the forfeiture of bid 
securities, bid securities shall be returned only after the bidder with the Lowest 
Calculated Responsive Bid (LCRB) or Highest Rated Responsive Bid (HRRB), as the 
case may be, has signed the contract and furnished the performance security, except 
to those declared by the BAC as failed or post-disqualified in accordance with this IRR, 
upon submission of a written waiver of their right to file a request for reconsideration 
and/or protest.

27.5. A Bid Securing Declaration is an undertaking which states, among others, that the 
bidder shall enter into contract with the Procuring Entity and furnish the required 
performance security within ten (10) calendar days, as indicated in the Bidding 
Documents, from receipt of the Notice of Award, and commits to pay the 
corresponding amount as fine and be suspended for a period of time from being 
qualified to participate in any government procurement activity in the event it violates 
any of the conditions stated therein as required in the guidelines issued by the GPPB.(a)

27.6. In no case shall the bid security be returned later than the expiration of the bid validity 
period indicated in the Bidding Documents, unless it has been extended in accordance 
with Section 28.2 of this IRR.(a)

Section 28. Bid Validity

28.1. Bids and bid securities shall be valid for a reasonable period as determined by the 
HoPE concerned, which shall be indicated in the Bidding Documents, but in no case 
shall the period exceed one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date of the 
opening of bids.

28.2. Should it become necessary to extend the validity of the bids and bid securities beyond 
one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, the Procuring Entity concerned shall request 
in writing all those who submitted bids for such extension before the expiration date 
therefor. Bidders, however, shall have the right to refuse to grant such extension 
without forfeiting their bid security.

Section 29. Bid Opening

Page 42 of 149

The BAC shall open the bids immediately after the deadline for the submission and receipt of 
bids. The time, date, and place of the opening of bids shall be specified in the Bidding 
Documents.

In case the bids cannot be opened as scheduled due to justifiable reasons, the BAC shall take 
custody of the bids submitted and reschedule the opening of bids on the next working day or 
at the soonest possible time through the issuance of a Notice of Postponement to be posted 
in the PhilGEPS website and the website of the Procuring Entity concerned.

The bidders or their duly authorized representatives may attend the opening of bids. The BAC 
shall ensure the integrity, security, and confidentiality of all submitted bids. The abstract of 
bids as read and the minutes of the bid opening shall be made available to the public upon 
written request and payment of a specified fee to recover cost of materials.(a)

RULE IX – BID EVALUATION

Section 30. Preliminary Examination of Bids

30.1. The BAC shall open the first bid envelopes in public to determine each bidder’s 
compliance with the documents required to be submitted for eligibility and for the 
technical requirements, as prescribed in this IRR. For this purpose, the BAC shall check 
the submitted documents of each bidder against a checklist of required documents to 
ascertain if they are all present, using a non-discretionary “pass/fail” criterion, as 
stated in the Instructions to Bidders. If a bidder submits the required document, it 
shall be rated “passed” for that particular requirement. In this regard, bids that fail to 
include any requirement or are incomplete or patently insufficient shall be considered 
as “failed.” Otherwise, the BAC shall rate the said first bid envelope as “passed.”(a)

30.2. Immediately after determining compliance with the requirements in the first envelope, 
the BAC shall forthwith open the second bid envelope of each remaining eligible bidder 
whose first bid envelope was rated “passed.” The second envelope of each complying 
bidder shall be opened within the same day, except as provided under Section 33 of 
this IRR. In case any of the requirements in the second envelope of a particular bid is 
missing, incomplete or patently insufficient, and/or if the submitted total bid price 
exceeds the ABC, the BAC shall rate the bid concerned as “failed.” Only bids that are 
determined to contain all the bid requirements for both components shall be rated 
“passed” and shall immediately be considered for evaluation and comparison.(a)

30.3. For the procurement of Goods where, due to the nature of the requirements of the 
project, the required technical specifications/requirements of the contract cannot be 
precisely defined in advance of bidding, or where the problem of technically unequal 
bids is likely to occur, a two (2)-stage bidding procedure may be employed. In these 
cases, the Procuring Entity concerned shall prepare the Bidding Documents, including 
the technical specification in the form of performance criteria only. Under this 
procedure, prospective bidders shall be requested at the first stage to submit their 
respective eligibility requirements if needed, and initial technical proposals only (no 
price tenders). The concerned BAC shall then evaluate the technical merits of the 
proposals received from eligible bidders vis-à-vis the required performance standards. 
A meeting/discussion shall then be held by the BAC with those eligible bidders whose 
technical tenders meet the minimum required standards stipulated in the Bidding 
Documents 
for 
purposes 
of 
drawing 
up 
the 
final 
revised 
technical 
specifications/requirements of the contract. Once the final revised technical

Page 43 of 149

specifications are completed and duly approved by the concerned BAC, copies of the 
same shall be issued to all the bidders identified in the first stage who shall then be 
required to submit their revised technical tenders, including their price proposals in 
two (2) separate sealed envelopes in accordance with this IRR, at a specified deadline, 
after which time no more bids shall be received. The concerned BAC shall then proceed

30.4. For the procurement of Consulting Services, the detailed implementation of the 
procedure specified in this Section shall be as provided in Section 33 of this IRR.

Section 31. Ceiling for Bid Prices

31.1. The ABC shall be the upper limit or ceiling for acceptable bid prices. If a bid price, as 
evaluated and calculated in accordance with this IRR, is higher than the ABC, the 
bidder submitting the same shall be automatically disqualified. There shall be no lower 
limit or floor on the amount of the award.

31.2. For Foreign-funded Procurement, the ABC shall be applied as the ceiling: Provided, 
That the following conditions are met:

a) 
Bidding Documents are obtainable free of charge on a freely accessible website. 
If payment of Bidding Documents is required by the Procuring Entity, payment 
could be made upon the submission of bids.

b) 
The Procuring Entity has procedures in place to ensure that the ABC is based on 
recent estimates made by the engineer or the responsible unit of the Procuring 
Entity and that the estimates are based on adequate detailed engineering (in the 
case of Infrastructure Projects) and reflect the quality, supervision and risk and 
inflationary factors, as well as prevailing market prices, associated with the types 
of Goods or Infrastructure Projects to be procured.

c) 
The Procuring Entity has trained cost estimators on estimating prices and 
analyzing bid variances. In the case of Infrastructure Projects, the Procuring 
Entity must also have trained quantity surveyors.

d) 
The Procuring Entity has established a system to monitor and report bid prices 
relative to ABC and engineer’s/Procuring Entity’s estimate.

e) 
The Procuring Entity has established a monitoring and evaluation system for 
contract implementation to provide a feedback on actual total costs of Goods 
and Infrastructure Projects.

The GoP and the foreign government/foreign or international financing institution may agree to waive the foregoing conditions.(a)

Section 32. Bid Evaluation for the Procurement of Goods and Infrastructure 
Projects

32.1. Members of the BAC, its staff and personnel, Secretariat and TWG, as well as 
Observers, are prohibited from making or accepting any communication with any 
bidder regarding the evaluation of their bids until the issuance of the Notice of Award. 
However, the BAC, through its Secretariat, may ask in writing the bidder for a 
clarification of its bid. All responses to requests for clarification shall be in writing.(a)

Page 44 of 149

32.2. For the procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects, the BAC shall evaluate the 
financial component of the bids to determine the Lowest Calculated Bid using the 
following steps:

32.2.1. The BAC shall immediately conduct a detailed evaluation of all bids using non-
discretionary criteria in considering the following:

a) 
Completeness of the bid. Unless the Instructions to Bidders specifically allow 
partial bids, bids not addressing or providing all of the required items in the 
Bidding Documents including, where applicable, bill of quantities, shall be 
considered non-responsive and, thus, automatically disqualified. In this 
regard, where a required item is provided, but no price is indicated, the 
same shall be considered as non-responsive, but specifying a zero (0) or a 
dash (-) for the said item would mean that it is being offered for free to the 
Government, except those required by law or regulations to be provided for; 
and

b) 
Arithmetical corrections. Consider computational errors and omissions to 
enable proper comparison of all eligible bids. It may also consider bid 
modifications if expressly allowed in the Bidding Documents. Any 
adjustment shall be calculated in monetary terms to determine the 
calculated prices.(a)

32.2.2. The BAC shall evaluate all bids on an equal footing to ensure fair and competitive 
bid comparison. For this purpose, all bidders shall be required to include the cost 
of all taxes, such as, but not limited to, value added tax (VAT), income tax, local 
taxes, and other fiscal levies and duties which shall be itemized in the bid form 
and reflected in the detailed estimates. Such bids, including said taxes, shall be 
the basis for bid evaluation and comparison.

32.2.3. In case of discrepancies between: (a) bid prices in figures and in words, the latter 
shall prevail; (b) total price per item and unit price for the item as extended or 
multiplied by the quantity of that item, the latter shall prevail; (c) stated total price 
and the actual sum of prices of component items, the latter shall prevail; (d) unit 
cost in the detailed estimate and unit cost in the bill of quantities, the latter shall 
prevail.

32.2.4. Bids shall then be ranked in the ascending order of their total calculated bid prices, 
as evaluated and corrected for computational errors, and other bid modifications, 
to identify the Lowest Calculated Bid. Total calculated bid prices, as evaluated and 
corrected for computational errors, and other bid modifications, which exceed the 
ABC shall be disqualified.

32.3. After all bids have been received, opened, examined, evaluated, and ranked, the BAC 
shall prepare the corresponding Abstract of Bids. All members of the BAC shall sign 
the Abstract of Bids and attach thereto all the bids with their corresponding bid 
securities and the minutes or proceedings of the bidding. The Abstract of Bids shall 
contain the following:

a) 
Name of the contract and its location, if applicable;

b) 
Time, date and place of bid opening; and

Page 45 of 149

c) 
Names of bidders and their corresponding calculated bid prices arranged from 
lowest to highest, the amount of bid security and the name of the issuing entity.

32.4. The entire evaluation process for the procurement of Goods and Infrastructure Projects 
shall be completed within seven (7) calendar days from the deadline for receipt of 
proposals.(a)

Section 33. Bid Evaluation of Short Listed Bidders for Consulting Services

33.1. From submission and receipt of bids until the approval by the HoPE of the ranking of 
short listed bidders, those that have submitted their bids are prohibited from making 
any communication with any BAC member, including its staff and personnel, as well 
as its Secretariat and TWG, regarding matters connected to their bids. However, the 
BAC, through its Secretariat, may ask in writing the bidder for a clarification of its bid. 
All responses to requests for clarification shall be in writing.

33.2. The purpose of bid evaluation is to determine the Highest Rated Bid using the following 
steps:

33.2.1. The BAC shall conduct a detailed evaluation of bids using either of the following 
evaluation procedures as specified in the Bidding Documents:

a) 
Quality-Based Evaluation Procedure

i) 
A two-stage procedure shall be adopted whereby each consultant shall 
be required to submit his technical and financial proposals 
simultaneously in separate sealed envelopes.

ii) 
After receipt of bids, the technical proposals shall first be opened and 
evaluated, in accordance with Section 33.2.2 of this IRR. The BAC 
shall rank the consultants in descending order based on the numerical 
ratings of their technical proposals and identify the Highest Rated Bid: 
Provided, however, That the Highest Rated Bid shall pass the 
minimum score indicated in the Bidding Documents.

iii) 
The HoPE shall approve or disapprove the recommendations of the 
BAC within two (2) calendar days after receipt of the results of the 
evaluation from the BAC.

iv) 
After approval by the HoPE of the Highest Rated Bid, its financial 
proposal shall then be opened. The BAC shall, within three (3) 
calendar days, notify and invite the consultant with the Highest Rated 
Bid for the opening of financial proposal for the purpose of conducting 
negotiations with the said consultant. In the letter of notification, the 
BAC shall inform the consultant of the issues in the technical proposal 
the BAC may wish to clarify during negotiations.

v) 
Negotiations shall be in accordance with Section 33.2.5 of this IRR: 
Provided, That the amount indicated in the financial envelope shall be 
made as the basis for negotiations and the total contract amount shall 
not exceed the amount indicated in the envelope and the ABC as 
stated in the Bidding Documents.

b) 
Quality-Cost Based Evaluation Procedure

Page 46 of 149

i) 
The technical proposal together with the financial proposal shall be 
considered in the evaluation of consultants. The technical proposals 
shall be evaluated first using the criteria in Section 33.2.2 of this IRR. 
The financial proposals of the consultants who meet the minimum 
technical score shall then be opened.

ii) 
The financial and technical proposals shall be given corresponding 
weights with the financial proposal given a minimum weight of fifteen 
percent (15%) up to a maximum of forty percent (40%). The weight 
of the technical criteria shall be adjusted accordingly such that their 
total weight in percent together with the weight given to the financial 
proposal shall add to one hundred percent (100%). The exact weights 
shall be approved by the HoPE upon the recommendation of the BAC 
and indicated in the Bidding Documents. The BAC shall rank the 
consultants in descending order based on the combined numerical 
ratings of their technical and financial proposals and identify the 
Highest Rated Bid.

iii) 
The HoPE shall approve or disapprove the recommendations of the 
BAC within two (2) calendar days after receipt of the results of the 
evaluation from the BAC.

iv) 
After approval by the HoPE of the Highest Rated Bid, the BAC shall, 
within three (3) calendar days, notify and invite the consultant with 
the Highest Rated Bid for negotiation in accordance with Section 
33.2.5 of this IRR, except for the financial proposal under item (e) 
thereof.(a)

33.2.2. The technical proposals of consultants shall be evaluated based on the following 
criteria and using the corresponding numerical weights indicated in the Bidding 
Documents:

a) 
Quality of personnel to be assigned to the project which covers suitability of 
key staff to perform the duties of the particular assignments and general 
qualifications and competence including education and training of the key 
staff;

b) 
Experience and capability of the consultant which include records of 
previous engagement and quality of performance in similar and in other 
projects; relationship with previous and current clients; and, overall work 
commitments, geographical distribution of current/impending projects and 
attention to be given by the consultant. The experience of the consultant to 
the project shall consider both the overall experiences of the firm and the 
individual experiences of the principal and key staff including the times when 
employed by other consultants; and

c) 
Plan of approach and methodology with emphasis on the clarity, feasibility, 
innovativeness and comprehensiveness of the plan approach, and the 
quality of interpretation of project problems, risks, and suggested solutions.

For complex or unique undertakings, such as those involving new 
concepts/technology or financial advisory services, participating short listed 
consultants may be required, at the option of the agency concerned, to make an

Page 47 of 149

oral presentation to be presented by each consultant, or its nominated Project 
Manager or head, in case of firms, within fifteen (15) calendar days after the 
deadline for submission of technical proposals.

33.2.3. In order to eliminate bias in evaluating the technical proposals, it is recommended 
that the highest and lowest scores for each consultant for each criterion shall not 
be considered in determining the average scores of the consultants, except when 
the evaluation is conducted in a collegial manner.

33.2.4. All participating short listed consultants shall be furnished the results (ranking and 
total scores only) of the evaluation after the approval by the HoPE of the ranking. 
Said results shall also be posted in the PhilGEPS and the website of the Procuring 
Entity, whenever available, for a period of not less than seven (7) calendar days.

33.2.5. Negotiations shall cover the following:

a) 
Discussion and clarification of the terms of reference and scope of services;

b) 
Discussion and finalization of the methodology and work program proposed 
by the consultant;

c) 
Consideration 
of 
appropriateness 
of 
qualifications 
and 
pertinent 
compensation, number of man-months and the personnel to be assigned to 
the job, taking note of over-qualified personnel, to be commensurate with 
the compensation of personnel with the appropriate qualifications, number 
of man-months and schedule of activities (manning schedule);

d) 
Discussion on the services, facilities and data, if any, to be provided by 
Procuring Entity concerned;

e) 
Discussion on the financial proposal submitted by the consultant; and

f) 
Provisions of the contract.

Except for meritorious reasons, negotiations with any one consultant shall be 
completed within ten (10) calendar days.

33.2.6. Total calculated bid prices, as evaluated and corrected for minor arithmetical 
corrections, such as computational errors, which exceed the ABC shall not be 
considered.

33.3. There should be no replacement of key personnel before the awarding of contract, 
except for justifiable reason as may be determined by the BAC, such as, illness, death, 
or resignation provided it is duly supported by relevant certificates, or any delay caused 
by the Procuring Entity. The BAC shall immediately consider negotiation with the next 
ranked consultant if unjustifiable replacement of personnel by the first ranked firm is 
made. Once the contract has been awarded, no replacement shall be allowed by the 
HoPE until after fifty percent (50%) of the personnel’s man-months have been served, 
except for justifiable reasons, subject to appropriate sanctions as prescribed in the 
PBDs.(a)

33.4. The entire evaluation process, including the submission of the results thereof to the 
HoPE for approval, shall be completed in not more than twenty-one (21) calendar days

Page 48 of 149

after the deadline for receipt of proposals. The proposal with the highest score shall 
be identified as the Highest Rated Bid.

RULE X – POST-QUALIFICATION

Section 34. Objective and Process of Post-Qualification

34.1. The Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid shall undergo post-qualification in order 
to determine whether the bidder concerned complies with and is responsive to all the 
requirements and conditions as specified in the Bidding Documents.

34.2. Within five (5) calendar days from receipt by the bidder of the notice from the BAC 
that the bidder has the Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid, the bidder shall 
submit to the BAC its latest income and business tax returns, and other appropriate 
licenses and permits required by law and stated in the Bidding Documents.

Failure to submit any of the post-qualification requirements on time, or a finding 
against the veracity thereof, shall disqualify the bidder for award: Provided, That in 
the event that a finding against the veracity of any of the documents submitted is 
made, it shall cause the forfeiture of the Bid Security in accordance with Section 69 of 
this IRR.(a)

34.3. The post-qualification shall verify, validate, and ascertain all statements made and 
documents submitted by the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid, 
using non-discretionary criteria, as stated in the Bidding Documents. These criteria 
shall consider, but shall not be limited to, the following:

a) 
Legal Requirements. To verify, validate, and ascertain licenses, certificates, 
permits, and agreements submitted by the bidder, and the fact that it is not 
included in any “blacklist” as provided in Section 25.3 of this IRR. For this 
purpose, the GPPB shall maintain a consolidated file of all “blacklisted” suppliers, 
contractors, and consultants.

b) 
Technical Requirements. To determine compliance of the goods, infrastructure 
projects, or consulting services offered with the requirements specified in the 
Bidding Documents, including, where applicable:

i) 
Verification and validation of the bidder’s stated competence and 
experience, and the competence and experience of the bidder’s key 
personnel to be assigned to the project, for the procurement of 
Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services;

ii) 
Verification of availability and commitment, and/or inspection and testing 
for the required capacities and operating conditions, of equipment units to 
be owned/leased/under purchase by the bidder for use in the contract 
under bidding, as well as checking the performance of the bidder in its 
ongoing government and private contracts, if any of these ongoing

a. Negative slippage of at least fifteen percent (15%) in any one project 
or a negative slippage of at least ten percent (10%) in each of two (2) 
or more contracts;

Page 49 of 149

b. Failure of the contractor to commence repair works on ongoing 
contracts within seven (7) calendar days and to complete them within 
thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the Procuring Entity's notice 
of defects and deficiencies;

c. Failure of the contractor to commence repair works on contracts with 
pending certificates of acceptance within thirty (30) calendar days and 
complete them within ninety (90) days after receipt of the Procuring 
Entity's notice of defects and failures; or

d. Substandard quality of work as per contract plans and specifications, 
or unsatisfactory performance of the contractor’s obligations as per 
contract terms and conditions, at the time of inspection.

If the BAC verifies any of these deficiencies to be due to the contractor’s 
fault or negligence, the agency shall disqualify the contractor from the 
award, for the procurement of Infrastructure Projects.

iii) 
Verification and/or inspection and testing of the goods/product, after-sales 
and/or maintenance capabilities, in applicable cases, as well as checking 
the following:

a. Delay in the partial delivery of goods amounting to ten percent (10%) 
of the contract price in its ongoing government and private contracts;

b. If any of these contracts shows the bidder’s failure to deliver or 
perform any or all of the goods or services within the period(s) 
specified in the contract or within any extension thereof granted by 
the Procuring Entity pursuant to a request made by the supplier prior 
to the delay, and such failure amounts to at least ten percent (10%) 
of the contract price; or

c. Unsatisfactory performance of the supplier’s obligations as per 
contract terms and conditions at the time of inspection.

If the BAC verifies any of these deficiencies to be due to the bidder's fault 
or negligence, the BAC shall disqualify the bidder from the award, for the 
procurement of Goods.

iv) 
Ascertainment of the authenticity of the bid security and its correctness as 
to type, amount, form and wording, and validity period, as required in the 
Bidding Documents.

c) 
Financial Requirements. To verify, validate and ascertain the bid price proposal 
of the bidder and, whenever applicable, the required committed Line of Credit in 
the amount specified and over the period stipulated in the Bidding Documents, 
or the bidder’s NFCC to ensure that the bidder can sustain the operating cash 
flow of the transaction. (a)

34.4. If the BAC determines that the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated 
Bid passes all the criteria for post-qualification, it shall declare the said bid as the LCRB 
or HRRB, and recommend to the HoPE the award of contract to the said bidder at its 
submitted bid price or its calculated bid price, whichever is lower or, in the case of

Page 50 of 149

quality-based evaluation procedure, submitted bid price or its negotiated price, 
whichever is lower.

34.5. If, however, the BAC determines that the bidder with the Lowest Calculated 
Bid/Highest Rated Bid fails the criteria for post-qualification, it shall immediately notify 
the said bidder in writing of its post-disqualification and the grounds for it.

34.6. Immediately after the BAC has notified the first bidder of its post-disqualification, and 
notwithstanding any pending request for reconsideration thereof, the BAC shall initiate 
and complete the same post-qualification process on the bidder with the second 
Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid. If the second bidder passes the post-
qualification, and provided that the request for reconsideration of the first bidder has 
been denied, the second bidder shall be post-qualified as the bidder with the LCRB or 
HRRB.

34.7. If the second bidder, however, fails the post-qualification, the procedure for post-
qualification shall be repeated for the bidder with the next Lowest Calculated 
Bid/Highest Rated Bid, and so on until the LCRB or HRRB, as the case may be, is 
determined for award, subject to Section 37 of this IRR.

34.8. The post-qualification process shall be completed in not more than twelve (12) 
calendar days from the determination of the Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid. 
In exceptional cases, the post-qualification period may be extended by the HoPE, but 
in no case shall the aggregate period exceed forty-five (45) calendar days for Goods 
and Infrastructure Projects, or thirty (30) calendar days in Consulting Services.

In case of post-disqualification of the bidder with the lowest calculated bid/highest 
rated bid, the BAC shall be given the same fresh period to conduct the post-
qualification of the next lowest calculated bid/highest rated bid until a bidder is post-
qualified or failure of bidding is declared based on Section 35.1(c) of this IRR.(a)

Section 35. Failure of Bidding

35.1. The BAC shall declare the bidding a failure when:

a) 
No bids are received;

b) 
All prospective bidders are declared ineligible;

c) 
All bids fail to comply with all the bid requirements or fail post-qualification, or, 
in the case of Consulting Services, there is no successful negotiation; or

d) 
The bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB or SRRB refuses, without justifiable 
cause, to accept the award of contract, and no award is made in accordance 
with Section 40 of the Act and this IRR.

35.2. In order to determine the reason for the failed bidding, the BAC shall conduct a 
mandatory review and evaluation of the terms, conditions, and specifications in the 
Bidding Documents, including its cost estimates.

35.3. Based on its findings, the BAC shall revise the terms, conditions, and specifications, 
and if necessary, adjust the ABC, subject to the required approvals, and conduct a re-
bidding with re-advertisement and/or posting, as provided for in Section 21.2 of this 
IRR.

Page 51 of 149

35.4. All bidders who have initially responded to the Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression 
of Interest and have been declared eligible or short listed in the previous biddings shall 
be allowed to submit new bids. The BAC shall observe the same process and set the 
new periods according to the same rules followed during the previous bidding(s).

35.5. Should there occur a second failure of bidding, the Procuring Entity may resort to 
negotiated procurement, as provided for in Section 53.1 of this IRR.

Section 36. Single Calculated/Rated and Responsive Bid Submission

A Single Calculated and Responsive Bid (SCRB) or a Single Rated and Responsive Bid (SRRB) 
shall be considered for award if it falls under any of the following circumstances:

a) 
If after advertisement, only one prospective bidder applies for eligibility check, in 
accordance with the provisions of this IRR, and it meets the eligibility requirements or 
criteria, after which it submits a bid which is found to be responsive to the bidding 
requirements;

b) 
If after advertisement, more than one prospective bidder applies for eligibility check, in 
accordance with the provisions of this IRR, but only one bidder meets the eligibility 
requirements or criteria, after which it submits a bid which is found to be responsive to 
the bidding requirements; or

c) 
If after the eligibility check, more than one bidder meets the eligibility requirements, but 
only one bidder submits a bid, and its bid is found to be responsive to the bidding 
requirements.

In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the ABC reflects the most advantageous 
prevailing price for the Government.(a)

RULE XI – AWARD, IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION OF THE CONTRACT

Section 37. Notice and Execution of Award

37.1. Contract Award

37.1.1. The BAC shall recommend to the HoPE the award of contract to the bidder with 
the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB, or SRRB after the post-qualification process has been 
completed.

To facilitate the approval of the award, the BAC shall submit the following 
supporting documents to the HoPE:

a) 
Resolution of the BAC recommending award; 
b) 
Abstract of Bids; 
c) 
Duly approved program of work or delivery schedule, and Cost Estimates; 
d) 
Document issued by appropriate entity authorizing the Procuring Entity to 
incur obligations for a specified amount; and 
e) 
Other pertinent documents required by existing laws, rules, and/or the 
Procuring Entity concerned.

Page 52 of 149

Within three (3) calendar days from the issuance of the resolution recommending 
award of the contract, the BAC shall notify all other bidders, in writing, of its 
recommendation. (a)

37.1.2. Within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days from the determination 
recommendation to award the contract, the HoPE or his duly authorized 
representative shall approve or disapprove the said recommendation.(a)

37.1.3. In case of approval, the HoPE shall immediately issue the Notice of Award to the

In the event of disapproval, which shall be based only on valid, reasonable, and 
justifiable grounds as provided for under Section 41 of this IRR, the HoPE shall 
notify the BAC and the bidder in writing of such decision and the grounds for it.

When applicable, the BAC shall conduct a post-qualification of the bidder with the 
next Lowest Calculated Bid or Highest Rated Bid, as provided in Section 34.6 of 
this IRR.

A request for reconsideration may be filed by the bidder with the HoPE within 
three (3) calendar days from receipt of the notice of disapproval. The HoPE shall 
resolve with finality the request for reconsideration within seven (7) calendar days 
from the filing thereof and furnish the bidder a copy of the resolution immediately 
from its promulgation. In no case shall the request for reconsideration stay or 
delay the bidding process. However, the request for reconsideration must first be 
resolved before any award is made.(a)

37.1.4. Notwithstanding the issuance of the Notice of Award, award of contract shall be 
subject to the following conditions:

a) 
Submission of the following documents within ten (10) calendar days from 
Notice of Award:

Valid Joint Venture Agreement, if applicable;

ii) 
In the case of procurement by a Philippine Foreign Office or Post, the 
PhilGEPS Registration Number of the winning foreign bidder;

iii) 
A valid PCAB license and registration for the type and cost of the 
contract to be bid for foreign bidders in Infrastructure Projects, when 
the Treaty or International or Executive Agreement expressly allows 
submission of such license and registration as a pre-condition to the 
Notice of Award; or

iv) 
In the case of Consulting Services, the SEC Certificate of Registration 
of the foreign consulting firm, and/or the authorization or license 
issued by the appropriate GoP professional regulatory body of the 
foreign professionals engaging in the practice of regulated professions 
and allied professions, where applicable.

b) 
Posting of performance security in accordance with Section 39 of this IRR;

c) 
Signing of the contract as provided in Section 37.2 of this IRR; and

Page 53 of 149

d) 
Approval by higher authority, if required, as provided in Section 37.3 of this 
IRR.(a)

37.1.5. Contract award shall be made within the bid validity period provided in Section 28 
of this IRR.

37.1.6. The BAC, through the Secretariat, shall post, within three (3) calendar days from 
its issuance, the Notice of Award in the PhilGEPS, the website of the Procuring 
Entity, if any, and any conspicuous place in the premises of the Procuring Entity.

37.2. Contract Signing

37.2.1. The winning bidder shall post the required Performance Security and enter into 
contract with the Procuring Entity within ten (10) calendar days from receipt by 
the winning bidder of the Notice of Award.

37.2.2. The Procuring Entity shall enter into contract with the winning bidder within the 
same ten (10) day period provided that all the documentary requirements are 
complied with.

37.2.3. The following documents shall form part of the contract:

a) 
Contract Agreement; 
b) 
Bidding Documents; 
c) 
Winning bidder’s bid, including the Eligibility requirements, Technical and 
Financial Proposals, and all other documents/statements submitted; 
d) 
Performance Security; 
e) 
Notice of Award of Contract; and 
f) 
Other contract documents that may be required by existing laws and/or the 
Procuring Entity concerned in the Bidding Documents, such as the 
construction schedule and S-curve, manpower schedule, construction 
methods, equipment utilization schedule, construction safety and health 
program approved by the Department of Labor and Employment, and 
PERT/CPM or other acceptable tools of project scheduling for infrastructure 
projects.(a)

37.3. Contract Approval by Higher Authority

When further approval of higher authority is required, the approving authority for the 
contract or his duly authorized representative shall be given a maximum of twenty 
(20) calendar days from receipt thereof to approve or disapprove it. In the case of 
GOCCs, the concerned board or its duly authorized representative shall be given a 
maximum of thirty (30) calendar days from receipt thereof to approve or disapprove 
it.(a)

37.4. Notice to Proceed

37.4.1. The concerned Procuring Entity shall issue the Notice to Proceed together with a 
copy or copies of the approved contract to the successful bidder within seven (7) 
calendar days from the date of approval of the contract by the appropriate 
government approving authority. All notices called for by the terms of the contract 
shall be effective only at the time of receipt thereof by the successful bidder.(a)

Page 54 of 149

37.4.2. The Procuring Entity, through the BAC Secretariat, shall post a copy of the Notice 
to Proceed and the approved contract in the PhilGEPS and the website of the 
Procuring Entity, if any, within fifteen (15) calendar days from the issuance of the 
Notice to Proceed.

Section 38. Period of Action on Procurement Activities

38.1. The procurement process from the opening of bids up to the award of contract shall 
not exceed three (3) months, or a shorter period to be determined by the Procuring 
Entity concerned. All members of the BAC shall be on a “jury duty” type of assignment 
until the Notice of Award is issued by the HoPE in order to complete the entire 
procurement process at the earliest possible time.

For purposes of this section, the term “jury duty” shall be understood to mean a state 
by which the members give utmost priority to BAC assignment over all the other duties 
and responsibilities until the requirements for the said assignments at hand are 
completed.

38.2. The maximum periods and the recommended earliest possible time for action on 
specific procurement activities are provided for in Annex “C” of this IRR. In case the 
deadline for each activity falls on a non-working day (i.e. Saturday and Sunday), legal 
holiday, or special non-working holiday, the deadline shall be the next working day.(a)

38.3. If no action on the contract is taken by the HoPE or the appropriate approving authority 
within the periods specified in this IRR, the contract concerned shall be deemed 
approved: Provided, however, That where further approval by the Office of the 
President is required, the contract shall not be deemed approved unless and until the 
Office of the President gives actual approval to the contract concerned.

Section 39. Performance Security

39.1. To guarantee the faithful performance by the winning bidder of its obligations under 
the contract in accordance with the Bidding Documents, it shall post a performance 
security prior to the signing of the contract.

39.2. The performance security shall be in an amount not less than the required percentage 
of the total contract price in accordance with the following schedule: (a)

Form of Performance Security 
Amount of Performance Security 
(Not less than the required 
percentage of the Total Contract 
Price) 
a) Cash or cashier’s/manager’s check issued by a 
Universal or Commercial Bank.

For 
biddings 
conducted 
by 
LGUs, 
the 
cashier’s/manager’s check may be issued by 
other banks certified by the BSP as authorized 
to issue such financial instrument.(a) 
Goods and Consulting Services – 
Five percent (5%)

Infrastructure Projects – Ten 
percent (10%) 
b) Bank draft/guarantee or irrevocable letter of 
credit issued by a Universal or Commercial Bank: 
Provided, however, That it shall be confirmed or 
authenticated by a Universal or Commercial 
Bank, if issued by a foreign bank.

Page 55 of 149

For biddings conducted by LGUs, bank 
draft/guarantee, or irrevocable letter of credit 
may be issued by other banks certified by the 
BSP as authorized to issue such financial 
instrument. (a)

c) Surety bond callable upon demand issued by a 
surety or insurance company duly certified by 
the Insurance Commission as authorized to 
issue such security. 
Thirty percent (30%)

39.3. The performance security shall be denominated in Philippine Pesos and posted in favor 
of the Procuring Entity, which shall be forfeited in the event it is established that the 
winning bidder is in default in any of its obligations under the contract.

39.4. The performance security shall remain valid until issuance by the Procuring Entity of 
the Certificate of Final Acceptance.

39.5. The performance security may be released by the Procuring Entity after the issuance 
of the Certificate of Final Acceptance, subject to the following conditions:

a) 
Procuring Entity has no claims filed against the contract awardee or the surety 
company;

b) 
It has no claims for labor and materials filed against the contractor; and

c) 
Other terms of the contract.(a)

39.6. For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects, the winning bidder shall post an 
additional performance security following the schedule above to cover any cumulative 
increase of more than ten percent (10%) over the original value of the contract as a 
result of amendments to order or change orders, extra work orders and supplemental 
agreements, as the case may be. The winning bidder shall cause the extension of the 
validity of the Performance Security to cover approved contract time extensions.

39.7. In case of a reduction in the contract value, or, in the case of procurement of 
Infrastructure Projects, for partially completed works under the contract which are 
usable and accepted by the GoP, and the use of which, in the judgment of the 
implementing agency or the Procuring Entity, will not affect the structural integrity of 
the entire project, the said agency or Procuring Entity shall allow a proportional 
reduction in the original performance security: Provided, That any such reduction is 
more than ten percent (10%) and that the aggregate of such reductions is not more 
than fifty percent (50%) of the original Performance Security.

Section 40. Failure to Enter into Contract and Post Performance Security

40.1. If the bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, SCRB or SRRB fails, refuses or is unable to submit 
the documents required under Section 37.1 of this IRR or to make good its bid by 
entering into a contract with the Procuring Entity or post the required Performance 
Security within the period stipulated in this IRR or in the Bidding Documents, the bid 
security shall be forfeited and the appropriate sanctions provided in this IRR and 
existing laws shall be imposed, except where such failure, refusal or inability is through 
no fault of the said bidder.

Page 56 of 149

40.2. In the case of the failure, refusal or inability of the bidder with LCRB or HRRB to submit 
the documents required under Section 37.1 of this IRR or to enter into contract and 
post the required Performance Security, as provided in this Section, the BAC shall 
disqualify the said bidder, and shall initiate and complete the post-qualification process 
on the bidder with the second Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid: Provided, 
however, That in the case of Consulting Services, the second Highest Rated Bid has 
successfully undergone the negotiation stage in accordance with Section 33.2.5 of this 
IRR. This procedure shall be repeated until the LCRB or HRRB is determined for award. 
However, if no bidder passes post-qualification, the BAC shall declare the bidding a 
failure and conduct a re-bidding with re-advertisement. Should there occur another 
failure of bidding after the conduct of the contract’s re-bidding, the Procuring Entity 
concerned may enter into a negotiated procurement.

40.3. In the case of failure, refusal or inability of the bidder with the SCRB or SRRB to submit 
the documents required under Section 37.1 of this IRR or to enter into contract and 
post the required Performance Security, as provided in this Section, the BAC shall 
disqualify the said bidder, and shall declare the bidding a failure and conduct a re-
bidding with re-advertisement and/or posting, as provided for in Sections 21 and 25 
of this IRR.  Should there occur another failure of bidding after the conduct of the 
contract’s re-bidding, the Procuring Entity concerned may enter into a negotiated 
procurement.

Section 41. Reservation Clause

The HoPE reserves the right to reject any and all bids, declare a failure of bidding, or not 
award the contract in the following situations:

a) 
If there is prima facie evidence of collusion between appropriate public officers or 
employees of the Procuring Entity, or between the BAC and any of the bidders, or if the 
collusion is between or among the bidders themselves, or between a bidder and a third 
party, including any act which restricts, suppresses or nullifies or tends to restrict, 
suppress or nullify competition;

b) 
If the BAC is found to have failed in following the prescribed bidding procedures; or

c) 
For any justifiable and reasonable ground where the award of the contract will not 
redound to the benefit of the GoP, as follows: (i) if the physical and economic conditions 
have significantly changed so as to render the project no longer economically, 
financially, or technically feasible, as determined by the HoPE; (ii) if the project is no 
longer necessary as determined by the HoPE; or (iii) if the source of funds for the project 
has been withheld or reduced through no fault of the Procuring Entity.(a)

Section 42. Contract Implementation and Termination

42.1. The contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of goods, supplies and 
materials are provided for in Annex “D” of this IRR.

42.2. The contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of infrastructure projects 
are provided for in Annex “E” of this IRR.

42.3. The contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of consulting services are 
provided for in Annex “F” of this IRR.

Page 57 of 149

42.4. The contract termination guidelines as provided for in Annex “I” of this IRR.(n)

42.5. No incentive bonus, in whatever form or for whatever purpose, shall be allowed.(42.4)

42.6. Procuring Entities may cause the issuance of the letter of credit in favor of a local or 
foreign suppliers: Provided, That no payment on the letter of credit shall be made until 
delivery and acceptance of the goods as certified to by the Procuring Entity in 
accordance with the delivery schedule provided for in the contract have been 
concluded: Provided, further, That the cost for the opening of letter of credit shall be 
for the account of the local or foreign supplier and must be stated in the Bidding 
Documents.(42.5a)

RULE XII – DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN PROCUREMENT

Section 43. Procurement of Domestic and Foreign Goods

43.1. Scope and Application

43.1.1. Consistent with the GoP’s obligations under international treaties or agreements, 
goods may be obtained from domestic or foreign sources: Provided, however, 
That the procurement thereof shall be open only to eligible suppliers, 
manufacturers and distributors: Provided, further, That in the interest of 
availability, efficiency and timely delivery of goods, the Procuring Entity may give 
preference to the purchase of domestically-produced and manufactured goods, 
supplies and materials that meet the specified or desired quality, in accordance 
with the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 138.

43.1.2. The Procuring Entity shall give preference to materials and supplies produced, 
made and manufactured in the Philippines, subject to the conditions herein below 
specified. The award shall be made to the lowest Domestic Bidder, provided his 
bid is not more than fifteen percent (15%) in excess of the lowest Foreign Bid.(a)

43.1.3. A Domestic Bidder can only claim preference if it secures from the DTI a 
certification that the articles forming part of its bid are substantially composed of 
articles, materials, or supplies grown, produced, or manufactured in the 
Philippines.(43.1.4)

43.2. Procedures and Guidelines

43.2.1. The preference shall be applied when the lowest Foreign Bid is lower than the 
lowest bid offered by a Domestic Bidder. The Procuring Entity shall ensure that 
both bids are responsive to the minimum requirements as specified in the Bidding 
Documents.(a)

43.2.2. For evaluation purposes, the lowest Foreign Bid shall be increased by fifteen 
percent (15%).

43.2.3. In the event that the lowest bid offered by a Domestic Bidder does not exceed the 
lowest Foreign Bid as increased, the Procuring Entity shall award the contract to 
the Domestic Bidder at the amount of the lowest Foreign Bid.(a)

Page 58 of 149

43.2.4. If the Domestic Bidder refuses to accept the award of contract at the amount of 
the Foreign Bid within two (2) calendar days from receipt of written advice from 
the BAC, the Procuring Entity shall award the contract to the bidder offering the 
Foreign Bid.

43.2.5. The award of contract shall be subject to post-qualification and submission of all 
the documentary requirements under this IRR.(n)

RULE XIII – BIDDING OF PROVINCIAL PROJECTS

Section 44. Bidding of Provincial Projects

Priority programs and infrastructure projects funded out of the annual GAA which are intended 
for implementation within the province shall be subject to the same competitive bidding and 
to the procurement processes prescribed in this IRR. For purposes of this Section, Engineering 
District infrastructure projects and priority programs fully funded by the Government and 
identified in consultation with the concerned members of Congress, shall constitute “provincial 
projects” and shall be governed by this Section.

Section 45. Provincial Bidders

no longer available after 26 January 2008.

RULE XIV – LEASE OF COMPUTERS, COMMUNICATIONS, INFORMATION AND 
OTHER EQUIPMENT

Section 46. Lease Contracts

The lease of construction and office equipment, including computers, communication and 
information technology equipment, are subject to the same competitive bidding and to the 
processes prescribed under the Act and this IRR. Lease may also cover lease purchases or 
lease-to-own and similar variations.

RULE XV – DISCLOSURE OF RELATIONS

Section 47. Disclosure of Relations

47.1  All bids shall be accompanied by a sworn affidavit of the bidder that it is not related 
to the HoPE, members of the BAC, the TWG, and the BAC Secretariat, the head of 
the PMO or the end-user or implementing unit, and the project consultants, by 
consanguinity or affinity up to the third civil degree. Failure to comply with the 
aforementioned provision shall be a ground for the automatic disqualification of 
the bid in consonance with Section 30 of this IRR. For this reason, relation to the 
aforementioned persons within the third civil degree of consanguinity or affinity 
shall automatically disqualify the bidder from participating in the procurement of 
contracts of the Procuring Entity notwithstanding the act of such persons inhibiting

Page 59 of 149

themselves from the procurement process. On the part of the bidder, this provision 
shall apply to the following persons:

a) 
If the bidder is an individual or a sole proprietorship, to the bidder himself; 
b) 
If the bidder is a partnership, to all its officers and members; 
c) 
If the bidder is a corporation, to all its officers, directors, and controlling 
stockholders;  
d) 
If the bidder is a cooperative, to all its officers, directors, and controlling 
shareholders or members; and  
e) 
If the bidder is a joint venture, the provisions of items (a), (b), (c), or (d) of 
this Section shall correspondingly apply to each of the members of the said 
joint venture, as may be appropriate.(a)

47.2.  All bidders also found to have conflicting interests with each other shall be 
disqualified to participate in the procurement at hand, without prejudice to the 
imposition of appropriate administrative, civil, and criminal sanctions. A bidder may 
be considered to have conflicting interests with another bidder in any of the events 
described in paragraphs (a) through (c) below and a general conflict of interest in 
any of the circumstances set out in paragraphs (d) through (j) below:

a) 
A bidder has controlling shareholders in common with another bidder;

b) 
 A bidder receives or has received any direct or indirect subsidy from any 
other bidder;

c) 
A bidder has the same legal representative as that of another bidder for 
purposes of this bid;

d) 
A bidder has a relationship, directly or through third parties, that puts them 
in a position to have access to information about or influence on the bid of 
another bidder or influence the decisions of the Procuring Entity regarding 
this bidding process. This will include a firm or an organization who lends, 
or temporarily seconds, its personnel to firms or organizations which are 
engaged in consulting services for the preparation related to procurement 
for or implementation of the project if the personnel would be involved in 
any capacity on the same project;

e) 
A bidder submits more than one bid in this bidding process. However, this 
does not limit the participation of subcontractors in more than one bid;

f) 
 A bidder who participated as a consultant in the preparation of the design 
or technical specifications of the Goods and related services that are the 
subject of the bid;

g) 
A bidder who lends, or temporarily seconds, its personnel to firms or 
organizations which are engaged in consulting services for the preparation 
related to procurement for or implementation of the project, if the personnel 
would be involved in any capacity on the same project;

h) 
If a consultant combines the function of consulting with those of contracting 
and/or supply of equipment;

i) 
If a consultant is associated with, affiliated to, or owned by a contractor or 
a manufacturing firm with departments or design offices offering services as

Page 60 of 149

consultants unless such consultant includes relevant information on such 
relationships along with a statement in the technical proposal cover letter to 
the effect that the consultant shall limit its role to that of a consultant and 
disqualify itself and its associates from work in any other capacity that may 
emerge from the project (including bidding for any part of the future 
project). The contract with the consultant selected to undertake the project 
shall contain an appropriate provision to such effect; or

j) 
If there is a conflict among consulting projects, the consultant (including its 
personnel and subcontractors) and any subsidiaries or entities controlled by 
such consultant shall not be recruited for the relevant project. The duties of 
the consultant depend on the circumstances of each case. While continuity 
of consulting services may be appropriate in particular situations where no 
conflict exists, a consultant cannot be recruited to carry out a project that, 
by its nature, shall result in conflict with a prior or current project of such 
consultant. Examples of the situations mentioned are when a consultant 
engaged to prepare engineering design for an infrastructure project shall not 
be recruited to prepare an independent environmental assessment for the 
same project; similarly, a consultant assisting a Procuring Entity in 
privatization of public assets shall not purchase, nor advise purchasers, of 
such assets; or a consultant hired to prepare terms of reference for a project 
shall not be recruited for the project in question.(n)

RULE XVI – ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT

Section 48. Alternative Methods

48.1. Subject to the prior approval of the HoPE, and whenever justified by the conditions 
provided in this Act, the Procuring Entity may, in order to promote economy and 
efficiency, resort to any of the alternative methods of procurement provided in this 
Rule. In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the most advantageous 
price for the Government is obtained.

48.2. In accordance with Section 10 of this IRR, as a general rule, the Procuring Entities 
shall adopt competitive bidding as the general method of procurement and shall see 
to it that the procurement program allows sufficient lead time for such competitive 
bidding. Alternative methods of procurement shall be resorted to only in highly 
exceptional cases provided for in this Rule.

48.3. The method of procurement to be used shall be as indicated in the approved APP. If 
the original method of procurement recommended in the APP was competitive bidding 
but cannot be ultimately pursued, the BAC, through a resolution, shall justify and 
recommend the change in the method of procurement to be approved by the HoPE. 
Such changes must be reflected in the APP to be submitted to the GPPB, pursuant to 
Section 7.4 of this IRR.(a)

Section 49. Limited Source Bidding

49.1 
Limited Source Bidding, otherwise known as selective bidding, is a method of 
procurement of Goods and Consulting Services that involves direct invitation to bid by 
the Procuring Entity from the list of pre-selected suppliers or consultants with known 
experience and proven capability on the requirements of the particular contract. This

Page 61 of 149

Alternative methods of procurement may be employed under any of the following conditions:

a) 
Procurement of highly specialized types of goods (e.g., sophisticated defense 
equipment, complex air navigation systems, coal) and consulting services where 
only a few suppliers or consultants are known to be available, such that resorting 
to the competitive bidding method will not likely result in any additional suppliers 
or consultants participating in the bidding; or

b) 
Procurement of major plant components where it is deemed advantageous to 
limit the bidding to known qualified bidders in order to maintain uniform quality 
and performance of the plant as a whole.(49.1a)

49.2 
The pre-selected suppliers or consultants shall be those appearing in a list maintained 
by the relevant government authority that has expertise in the type of procurement 
concerned. The list of pre-selected suppliers or consultants shall be updated 
periodically. A copy of the list shall be submitted to, and maintained updated with, the 
GPPB.

49.3 
The pre-selection shall be based upon the capability and resources of the bidders to 
perform the contract taking into account their experience and past performance on 
similar contracts, capabilities with respect to personnel equipment or manufacturing 
facilities, and financial position. Pre-selection shall be done in accordance with the 
following procedures provided in the GPMs.

The BAC of the concerned Procuring Entity shall directly invite all the suppliers or 
consultants appearing in the pre-selected list. All other procedures for competitive 
bidding shall be undertaken, except for the advertisement of Invitation to Bid/Request 
for Expression of Interest under Section 21.2.1 of this IRR.

Section 50. Direct Contracting

Direct Contracting or single source procurement is a method of procurement of Goods that 
does not require elaborate Bidding Documents. The supplier is simply asked to submit a price 
quotation or a pro-forma invoice together with the conditions of sale. The offer may be 
accepted immediately or after some negotiations. Direct contracting may be resorted to by 
concerned Procuring Entities under any of the following conditions:

a) 
Procurement of Goods of proprietary nature which can be obtained only from the 
proprietary source, i.e. when patents, trade secrets, and copyrights prohibit others from 
manufacturing the same item;

b) 
When the procurement of critical components from a specific supplier is a condition 
precedent to hold a contractor to guarantee its project performance, in accordance with 
the provisions of its contract; or

c) 
Those sold by an exclusive dealer or manufacturer which does not have sub-dealers 
selling at lower prices and for which no suitable substitute can be obtained at more 
advantageous terms to the GoP.

Section 51. Repeat Order

Repeat Order, when provided for in the APP, is a method of procurement of Goods from the 
previous winning bidder, whenever there is a need to replenish goods procured under a

Page 62 of 149

contract previously awarded through Competitive Bidding. Repeat orders shall likewise be 
subject to the following conditions:

a) 
Unit prices of the repeat order must be the same as or lower than those in the original 
contract: Provided, That such prices are still the most advantageous to the GoP after 
price verification;

b) 
The repeat order will not result in splitting of contracts, requisitions, or purchase orders, 
as provided for in Section 54.1 of this IRR;

c) 
Except in cases duly approved by the GPPB, the repeat orders shall be availed of only 
within six (6) months from the date of the Notice to Proceed arising from the original 
contract: Provided, That there has been a partial delivery, inspection and acceptance of 
the goods within the same 6-month period; and

d) 
Repeat orders shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the quantity of each item 
in the original contract. In order not to exceed the 25% threshold, the goods under the 
original contract must be:

i. 
Quantifiable 
ii. 
Divisible; and 
iii. 
Consisting of at least four (4) units per item.(a)

Section 52. Shopping

52.1. Shopping is a method of procurement of Goods whereby the Procuring Entity simply 
requests for the submission of price quotations for readily available off-the-shelf goods 
or ordinary/regular equipment to be procured directly from suppliers of known 
qualifications. This method of procurement shall be employed in any of the following 
cases:

a) 
When there is an unforeseen contingency requiring immediate purchase: 
Provided, however, That the amount shall not exceed the thresholds prescribed 
in Annex “H” of this IRR.

b) 
Procurement of ordinary or regular office supplies and equipment not available 
in the Procurement Service involving an amount not exceeding the thresholds 
prescribed in Annex “H” of this IRR.

52.2. The phrase “ordinary or regular office supplies” shall be understood to include those 
supplies, commodities, or materials which are necessary in the transaction of official 
businesses, and consumed in the day-to-day operations.

However, office supplies shall not include services such as repair and maintenance of 
equipment and furniture, as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related 
or analogous services.(a)

52.3. Under Section 52.1 (b) of this IRR, at least three (3) price quotations from bona fide 
suppliers shall be obtained.

52.4. The thresholds prescribed in Annex “H” of this IRR shall be subject to a periodic review 
by the GPPB. For this purpose, the GPPB shall be authorized to increase or decrease 
the said amount in order to reflect changes in economic conditions and for other 
justifiable reasons.

Page 63 of 149

Section 53. Negotiated Procurement

Negotiated Procurement is a method of procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and 
Consulting services, whereby the Procuring Entity directly negotiates a contract with a 
technically, legally and financially capable supplier, contractor or consultant in any of the 
following cases:

53.1. Two Failed Biddings. Where there has been failure of competitive bidding or Limited 
Source Bidding for the second time as provided in Section 35 of the Act and this IRR.(a)

53.2. Emergency Cases. In case of imminent danger to life or property during a state of 
calamity, or when time is of the essence arising from natural or man-made calamities 
or other causes where immediate action is necessary to prevent damage to or loss of 
life or property, or to restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other 
public utilities. In the case of Infrastructure Projects, the Procuring Entity has the 
option to undertake the project through negotiated procurement or by administration 
or, in high security risk areas, through the AFP.

53.3. Take-Over of Contracts. Take-over of contracts, which have been rescinded or 
terminated for causes provided for in the contract and existing laws, where immediate 
action is necessary to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or to restore vital 
public services, infrastructure facilities and other public utilities.(a)

53.4. Adjacent or Contiguous. Where the subject contract is adjacent or contiguous to 
an ongoing Infrastructure Project or Consulting Service where the consultants have 
unique experience and expertise to deliver the required service: Provided, however, 
That (a) the original contract is the result of a Competitive Bidding; (b) the subject 
contract to be negotiated has similar or related scopes of work; (c) it is within the 
contracting capacity of the contractor/consultant; (d) the contractor/consultant uses 
the same prices or lower unit prices as in the original contract less mobilization cost; 
(e) the amount of the contiguous or adjacent work involved does not exceed the 
amount of the ongoing project; and (f) the contractor/consultant has no negative 
slippage/delay: Provided, further, That negotiations for the procurement of the 
contiguous or adjacent work are commenced before the expiry of the original 
contract.(a)

53.5. Agency-to-Agency. Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting 
Services from another agency of the GoP, such as the DBM-PS, which is tasked with a 
centralized procurement of Common-Use Supplies for the GoP in accordance with 
Letters of Instruction No. 755 and E.O. 359, s. 1989.

53.6. Scientific, Scholarly or Artistic Work, Exclusive Technology and Media 
Services. Where Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services can be 
contracted to a particular supplier, contractor or consultant and as determined by the 
HoPE, for any of the following:

1. The requirement is for:

a. Work of art; commissioned work or services of an artist for a specific 
artist skills (e.g., Singer, poet, writer, painter, sculptor, etc.);

b. Scientific, academic, scholarly work or research, or legal services;

Page 64 of 149

c. Highly-specialized life-saving medical equipment, as certified by the 
Department of Health (DOH);

d. Scientific, technical, economic, business, trade or legal journal, 
magazine, 
paper, 
subscription, 
or 
other 
exclusive 
statistical 
publications and references; or

e. Media documentation, advertisement, or announcement through 
television, radio, newspaper, internet, and other communication 
media.

Due to the nature of the information to be disseminated, alongside 
principles of transparency, efficiency and economy, award to more 
than one (1) supplier may be made by the Procuring Entity.

2. The construction or installation of an infrastructure facility where the material, 
equipment, or technology under a proprietary right can only be obtained from 
the same contractor.(n)

53.7. Highly Technical Consultants. In the case of individual consultants hired to do work 
that is (i) highly technical or proprietary; or (ii) primarily confidential or policy 
determining, where trust and confidence are the primary consideration for the hiring 
of the consultant: Provided, however, That the term of the individual consultants shall, 
at the most, be on a six month basis, renewable at the option of the appointing HoPE, 
but in no case shall exceed the term of the latter.

53.8. Defense Cooperation Agreement. Upon prior approval by the President of the 
Philippines, and when the procurement for use by the AFP involves major defense 
equipment or materiel and/or defense-related consultancy services, when the 
expertise or capability required is not available locally, and the Secretary of National 
Defense has determined that the interests of the country shall be protected by 
negotiating directly with an agency or instrumentality of another country with which 
the Philippines has entered into a defense cooperation agreement or otherwise 
maintains diplomatic relations: Provided, however, That the performance by the 
supplier of its obligations under the procurement contract shall be covered by a 
performance security in accordance with Section 39 of this IRR.

53.9. Small Value Procurement. Procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and 
Consulting Services, where the amount involved does not exceed the threshold 
prescribed in Annex "H" of this IRR: Provided, That in case of Goods, the procurement 
does not fall under shopping in Section 52 of this IRR.(a)

53.10. Lease of Real Property and Venue. Lease of real property and venue for official 
use, subject to Annex “H” of this IRR.(a)

53.11. NGO Participation. When an appropriation law or ordinance earmarks an amount to 
be specifically contracted out to Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), the 
Procuring Entity may enter into a Memorandum of Agreement with an NGO, subject 
to the guidelines issued by the GPPB for the purpose.(a)

53.12. Community Participation. Where, in the interest of project sustainability or to 
achieve certain specific social objectives, it is desirable in selected projects, or its 
components, to call for participation of local communities in the delivery of goods,

Page 65 of 149

including non-consulting services, and simple infrastructure projects, subject to the 
Community Participation Procurement Manual (CPPM) issued by the GPPB.(a)

53.13. United Nations Agencies, International Organizations or International 
Financing Institutions. Procurement from specialized agencies of the United 
Nations, International Organizations or International Financing Institutions, of any of 
the following: (a) small quantities of off-the-shelf goods, primarily in the fields of 
education and health; (b) specialized products where the number of suppliers is 
limited, such as but not limited to vaccines or drugs; or (c) Goods, Infrastructure 
Projects and Consulting Services, involving advanced technologies, techniques and 
innovations not locally available as certified by the HoPE, when it is most advantageous 
to the government.(a)

Section 54. Terms and Conditions for the use of Alternative Methods

54.1. Splitting of Government Contracts is not allowed. Splitting of Government Contracts 
means the division or breaking up of GoP contracts into smaller quantities and 
amounts, or dividing contract implementation into artificial phases or sub-contracts for 
the purpose of evading or circumventing the requirements of law and this IRR, 
particularly the necessity of competitive bidding and the requirements for the 
alternative methods of procurement.

For Infrastructure Projects to be implemented by phases, the Procuring Entity shall 
ensure that there is a clear delineation of work for each phase, which must be usable 
and structurally sound. It shall also ensure the conduct of the detailed engineering 
activities for each phase as provided for in Annex “A” of this IRR.(a)

54.2. For alternative methods of procurement, the Procuring Entity may dispense with the 
advertisement in the newspaper and posting requirement as prescribed in Section 
21.2.1 of this IRR.

For the following modalities, however, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post the 
invitation or request for submission of price quotations/proposals in the PhilGEPS 
website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any 
conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity for 
a period of at least three (3) calendar days:

1. Section 49 Limited Source Bidding;

2. Section 52.1(b) Shopping for ordinary office supplies and equipment not 
available in DBM-PS (for ABC above Fifty Thousand Pesos ( 50,000.00));

3. Section 53.1 Two Failed Biddings;

4. Section 53.9 Small Value Procurement (For ABC above Fifty Thousand 
Pesos ( 50,000.00)); and

5. Section 53.11 NGO Participation.(a)

54.3. In all instances of alternative methods of procurement, the BAC, through the 
Secretariat, shall post, for information purposes, the notice of award, contract or 
purchase order, including notice to proceed if necessary, in the PhilGEPS website, the 
website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any conspicuous place

Page 66 of 149

reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity, except for contracts 
with ABC of Fifty Thousand Pesos ( 50,000.00) and below.(a)

54.4. Except for Limited Source Bidding under Section 49 of this IRR, submission of bid 
securities may be dispensed with.

54.5. Performance and Warranty Securities.

Performance and/or warranty securities are required for the following alternative 
methods of procurement, in accordance with Sections 39 and 62 of this IRR:

Alternative Method 
of Procurement 
Performance 
Security  
(PS) 
Warranty Security  
(WS) 
Limited Source Bidding 
 
For highly specialized 
types of goods, WS is 
required. 
Direct Contracting 
x 
 
Repeat Order 
x 
 
Two Failed Biddings 
 
 
In no case shall WS be 
required in the 
procurement of 
Consulting Services.  
Emergency Cases  
Procuring Entity may 
require PS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
However, for 
Infrastructure 
Projects, PS is 
required. 
Procuring Entity may 
require WS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
In no case shall WS be 
required in the 
procurement of 
Consulting Services.  
Take-over of Contracts 
 
 
Adjacent/Contiguous 
 
For Infrastructure 
Projects, WS is required. 
Small Value 
Procurement 
Procuring Entity may 
require PS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
However, for 
Infrastructure 
Projects, PS is 
required. 
Procuring Entity may 
require WS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
In no case shall WS be 
required in the 
procurement of 
Consulting Services.

54.6. Manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors, and/or consultants are mandated 
to register with PhilGEPS and provide a PhilGEPS Registration Number in the following 
alternative methods of procurement as a condition for award of the contract:

a. Section 50 - Direct Contracting 
b. Section 52.1 (b) - Shopping for Ordinary Office Supplies and Equipment not 
available in DBM-PS 
c. Section 53.3 - Take Over of Contracts (Only for New Bidders, if any.) 
d. Section 53.6 - Scientific, Scholarly, or Artistic Work, Exclusive Technology and 
Media Services

Page 67 of 149

e. Section 53.7 - Highly Technical Consultants 
f. Section 53.9 - Small Value Procurement 
g. Section 53.10 - Lease of Real Property and Venue 
h. Section 53.11 - NGO Participation

For purposes of Limited Source Bidding under Section 49 and Two Failed Biddings 
under Section 53.1, the BAC shall require the submission of a certificate of PhilGEPS 
registration in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of this IRR.(a)

54.7.  The specific terms, conditions and documentary requirements, including the limitations 
and restrictions, for the application of each of the alternative methods mentioned in 
this article shall be provided for in Annex "H" of this IRR and guidelines specifically 
issued for this purpose.(n)

RULE XVII – PROTEST MECHANISM

Section 55. Protests on Decisions of the BAC

55.1. Decisions of the BAC at any stage of the procurement process may be questioned by 
filing a request for reconsideration within the three (3) calendar days upon receipt of 
written notice or upon verbal notification. The BAC shall decide on the request for 
reconsideration within seven (7) calendar days from receipt thereof. The bidder shall 
not be allowed to submit additional documents to correct any defects in the bid 
submitted.

If a failed bidder signifies his intent to file a request for reconsideration, the BAC shall 
keep the bid envelopes of the said failed bidder unopened and/or duly sealed until 
such time that the request for reconsideration has been resolved.(a)

55.2. In the event that the request for reconsideration is denied, decisions of the BAC may 
be protested in writing to the HoPE: Provided, however, That a prior request for 
reconsideration should have been filed by the party concerned in accordance with the 
preceding Section, and the same has been resolved.

55.3. The protest must be filed within seven (7) calendar days from receipt by the party 
concerned of the resolution of the BAC denying its request for reconsideration. A 
protest shall be made by filing a verified position paper with the HoPE concerned, 
accompanied by the payment of a non-refundable protest fee, which shall be paid in 
cash in accordance with the following schedule:(a)

ABC RANGE 
PROTEST FEE 
50 million and below 
0.75% of the ABC 
More than 50 million to 100 million 
More than 100 million to 500 million 
0.5% of the ABC 
More than 500 million to 1 billion 
More than 1 billion to 2 billion  
0.25% of the ABC 
More than 2 billion to 5 billion  
More than 5 billion  
0.1 % of the ABC

55.4. The verified position paper shall contain the following information:

Page 68 of 149

a) 
The name of bidder; 
b) 
The office address of the bidder; 
c) 
The name of project/contract; 
d) 
The implementing office/agency or Procuring Entity; 
e) 
A brief statement of facts; 
f) 
The issue to be resolved; and 
g) 
Such other matters and information pertinent and relevant to the proper 
resolution of the protest.

The position paper is verified by an affidavit that the affiant has read and understood 
the contents thereof and that the allegations therein are true and correct of his 
personal knowledge or based on authentic records. An unverified position paper shall 
be considered unsigned, produces no legal effect, and results to the outright dismissal 
of the protest.

In addition, the bidder shall likewise certify under oath that:

a) 
he has not theretofore commenced any action or filed any claim involving the 
same issues in any court, tribunal or quasi-judicial agency and, to the best of his 
knowledge, no such other action or claim is pending therein;

b) 
if there is such other pending action or claim, he is including a complete 
statement of the present status thereof; and

c) 
if he should thereafter learn that the same or similar action or claim has been 
filed or is pending, he shall report that fact within five (5) days therefrom to the 
HoPE wherein his protest is filed.

Failure to comply with the foregoing requirements shall not be curable by mere 
amendment of the verified position paper.

Section 56. Resolution of Protests

The protests shall be resolved strictly on the basis of records of the BAC. The HoPE shall 
resolve the protest within seven (7) calendar days from receipt thereof. Subject to the 
provisions of existing laws on the authority of Department Secretaries and the heads of 
agencies, branches, constitutional commissions, or instrumentalities of the GoP to approve 
contracts, the decisions of the HoPE concerned shall be final up to the limit of his contract 
approving authority. With respect to LGUs, the decision of the local chief executive shall be 
final.(a)

Section 57. Non-interruption of the Bidding Process

In no case shall any protest taken from any decision treated in this Rule stay or delay the 
bidding process: Provided, however, That protests must first be resolved before any award is 
made.

Section 58. Resort to Regular Courts; Certiorari

58.1. Court action may be resorted to only after the protests contemplated in this Rule shall 
have been completed, i.e., resolved by the HoPE with finality. The regional trial court 
shall have jurisdiction over final decisions of the HoPE. Court actions shall be governed 
by Rule 65 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure.

Page 69 of 149

58.2. This provision is without prejudice to any law conferring on the Supreme Court the 
sole jurisdiction to issue temporary restraining orders and injunctions relating to 
Infrastructure Projects of the GoP.

58.3. The head of the BAC Secretariat of the Procuring Entity concerned shall ensure that 
the GPPB shall be furnished a copy of the cases filed in accordance with this Section.

RULE XVIII – SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES

Section 59. Arbitration

59.1. If any dispute or difference of any kind whatsoever shall arise between the parties in 
connection with the implementation of the contract covered by the Act and this IRR, 
the parties shall make every effort to resolve amicably such dispute or difference by 
mutual consultation.

59.2. Any and all disputes arising from the implementation of a contract covered by the Act 
and this IRR shall be submitted to arbitration in the Philippines according to the 
provisions of R.A. 876, otherwise known as the "Arbitration Law" and R.A. 9285, 
otherwise known as the “Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 2004”: Provided, 
however, That disputes that are within the competence of the Construction Industry 
Arbitration Commission to resolve shall be referred thereto. The process of arbitration 
shall be incorporated as a provision in the contract that will be executed pursuant to 
the provisions of the Act and this IRR: Provided, further, That by mutual agreement, 
the parties may agree in writing to resort to other alternative modes of dispute 
resolution.

Section 60. Appeals

The arbitral award and any decision rendered in accordance with the foregoing Section shall 
be appealable by way of a petition for review to the Court of Appeals. The petition shall raise 
pure questions of law and shall be governed by the Rules of Court.

RULE XIX – CONTRACT PRICES AND WARRANTIES

Section 61. Contract Prices

61.1. For the given scope of work in the contract as awarded, all bid prices shall be 
considered as fixed prices, and therefore not subject to price adjustment and 
escalation during contract implementation, except under extraordinary circumstances 
and upon prior approval of the GPPB, or when a Treaty or International or Executive 
Agreement expressly allows it pursuant to Section 4 of this IRR.

61.2. In cases where the cost of the awarded contract is affected by any applicable new 
laws, ordinances, regulations, or other acts of the GoP, promulgated after the date of 
bid opening, a contract price adjustment shall be made or appropriate relief shall be 
applied on a no loss-no gain basis.(17a)

61.3. Any request for price escalation under extraordinary circumstances shall be submitted 
by the concerned entity to the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA)

Page 70 of 149

with the endorsement of the Procuring Entity. The burden of proving the occurrence 
of extraordinary circumstances that will allow for price escalation shall rest with the 
entity requesting for such escalation. NEDA shall only respond to such request after 
receiving the proof and the necessary documentation.

For purposes of this Section, “extraordinary circumstances” shall refer to events that 
may be determined by the NEDA in accordance with the Civil Code of the Philippines, 
and upon the recommendation of the Procuring Entity concerned.

61.4. All contracts shall be denominated and payable in Philippine currency, and this shall 
be stated in the Bidding Documents: Provided, however, That subject to the guidelines 
issued by the GPPB, the Procuring Entity may provide in the Bidding Documents that 
obligations may be paid in foreign currency; Provided, further, That should the 
Procuring Entity receive bids denominated in foreign currency, the same shall be 
converted to Philippine currency based on the exchange rate prevailing on the day of 
the bid opening for purposes of bid comparison and evaluation.

Section 62. Warranty

62.1. For the procurement of Goods, in order to assure that manufacturing defects shall be 
corrected by the supplier, a warranty security shall be required from the contract 
awardee for a minimum period of three (3) months, in the case of Expendable Supplies, 
or a minimum period of one (1) year, in the case of Non-expendable Supplies, after 
acceptance by the Procuring Entity of the delivered supplies.

The obligation for the warranty shall be covered by either retention money in an 
amount equivalent to at least one percent (1%) of every progress payment, or a 
special bank guarantee equivalent to at least one percent (1%) of the total contract 
price. The said amounts shall only be released after the lapse of the warranty period 
or, in the case of Expendable Supplies, after consumption thereof: Provided, however, 
That the supplies delivered are free from patent and latent defects and all the 
conditions imposed under the contract have been fully met.(a)

62.2. For the procurement of Infrastructure Projects, the following warranties shall be made:

62.2.1. From the time project construction commenced up to final acceptance, the 
contractor shall assume full responsibility for the following:

a) 
any damage or destruction of the works except those occasioned by force 
majeure; and

b) 
safety, protection, security, and convenience of his personnel, third parties, 
and the public at large, as well as the works, equipment, installation and 
the like to be affected by his construction work.(a)

62.2.2. One (1) year from project completion up to final acceptance or the defects liability 
period.

62.2.2.1. The contractor shall undertake the repair works, at his own expense, of any 
damage to the infrastructure on account of the use of materials of inferior 
quality, within ninety (90) days from the time the HoPE has issued an order 
to undertake repair. In case of failure or refusal to comply with this mandate, 
the Procuring Entity shall undertake such repair works and shall be entitled 
to full reimbursement of expenses incurred therein upon demand.

Page 71 of 149

62.2.2.2. The defects liability period shall be covered by the Performance Security of 
the contractor required in Section 39.1 of this IRR, which shall guarantee 
that the contractor performs his responsibilities stated in the immediately 
preceding Section. If the contractor fails to comply with its obligations under 
Section 62.2.2.1 of this IRR, the Procuring Entity shall forfeit its performance 
security, subject its property(ies) to attachment or garnishment 
proceedings, and perpetually disqualify it from participating in any 
competitive bidding. All payables of the GoP in his favor shall be offset to 
recover the costs.

62.2.3. From final acceptance of the project up to the period prescribed in Section 
62.2.3.2 of this IRR.

62.2.3.1. The following shall be held responsible for “Structural Defects,” i.e., major 
faults/flaws/deficiencies in one or more key structural elements of the 
project which may lead to structural failure of the completed elements or 
structure, or “Structural Failures,” i.e., where one or more key structural 
elements in an infrastructure facility fails or collapses, thereby rendering the 
facility or part thereof incapable of withstanding the design loads, and/or 
endangering the safety of the users or the general public:

a) 
Contractor – Where Structural Defects/Failures arise due to faults 
attributable 
to 
improper 
construction, 
use 
of 
inferior 
quality/substandard materials, and any violation of the contract plans 
and specifications, the contractor shall be held liable;

b) 
Consultants – Where Structural Defects/Failures arise due to faulty 
and/or inadequate design and specifications as well as construction 
supervision, then the consultant who prepared the design or 
undertook construction supervision for the project shall be held liable;

c) 
Procuring Entity’s Representatives/Project Manager/Construction 
Managers and Supervisors – The project owner’s representative(s), 
project manager, construction manager, and supervisor(s) shall be 
held liable in cases where the Structural Defects/Failures are due to 
his/their willful intervention in altering the designs and other 
specifications; negligence or omission in not approving or acting on 
proposed changes to noted defects or deficiencies in the design and/or 
specifications; and the use of substandard construction materials in 
the project;

d) 
Third Parties - Third Parties shall be held liable in cases where 
Structural Defects/Failures are caused by work undertaken by them 
such as leaking pipes, diggings or excavations, underground cables 
and electrical wires, underground tunnel, mining shaft and the like, in 
which case the applicable warranty to such structure should be levied 
to third parties for their construction or restoration works.

e) 
Users - In cases where Structural Defects/Failures are due to 
abuse/misuse by the end-user or implementing unit of the constructed 
facility and/or non–compliance by a user with the technical design 
limits and/or intended purpose of the same, then the user concerned 
shall be held liable.

Page 72 of 149

62.2.3.2. The warranty against Structural Defects and Failures shall cover the 
following periods from final acceptance, except those occasioned by force 
majeure:

a) 
Permanent Structures: Fifteen (15) years

Buildings of types 4 and 5 as classified under the National Building 
Code of the Philippines and other structures made of steel, iron, or 
concrete which comply with relevant structural codes (e.g., DPWH 
Standard Specifications), such as, but not limited to, steel/concrete 
bridges, flyovers, aircraft movement areas, ports, dams, tunnels, 
filtration and treatment plants, sewerage systems, power plants, 
transmission and communication towers, railway system, and other 
similar permanent structures;

b) 
Semi-Permanent Structures: Five (5) years

Buildings of types 1, 2, and 3 as classified under the National Building 
Code of the Philippines, concrete/asphalt roads, concrete river control, 
drainage, irrigation lined canals, river landing, deep wells, rock 
causeway, pedestrian overpass, and other similar semi-permanent 
structures; and

c) 
Other Structures: Two (2) years

Bailey and wooden bridges, shallow wells, spring developments, and 
other similar structures.

62.2.3.3. To guarantee that the contractor shall perform his responsibilities as 
prescribed in Section 62.2.3.1(a) of this IRR, it shall be required to post a 
warranty security in accordance with the following schedule:

Form of Warranty Security 
Amount of Warranty Security 
(Not less than the required 
percentage of the Total Contract 
Price) 
a) Cash or Letter of Credit issued 
by a Universal or Commercial 
Bank: Provided, however, That 
the Letter of Credit shall be 
confirmed or authenticated by 
a Universal or Commercial 
Bank, if issued by a foreign 
bank.

For biddings conducted by 
LGUs, the Letter of Credit may 
be issued by other banks 
by 
the 
BSP 
as 
authorized 
to 
issue 
such 
financial instrument.(a)

Five percent (5%)

Page 73 of 149

b) Bank guarantee confirmed by a 
Universal or Commercial Bank.

For biddings conducted by 
LGUs, the bank draft/guarantee 
may be issued by other banks 
by 
the 
BSP 
as 
authorized 
to 
issue 
such 
financial instrument. (a)

Ten percent (10%) 
c) Surety bond callable upon 
demand issued by GSIS or a 
surety or insurance company 
duly certified by the Insurance 
Commission as authorized to 
issue such security. 
Thirty percent (30%)

62.2.3.4. The warranty security shall be denominated in Philippine Pesos, remain 
effective for one (1) year from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Final 
Acceptance by the Procuring Entity, and returned only after the lapse of the 
said one (1) year period.

62.2.4. In case of Structural Defects/Failure occurring during the applicable warranty 
period provided in Section 62.2.3.2 hereof, the Procuring Entity shall undertake 
the necessary restoration or reconstruction works and shall be entitled to full 
reimbursement by the parties found to be liable for expenses incurred therein 
upon demand, without prejudice to the filing of appropriate administrative, civil, 
and/or criminal charges against the responsible persons as well as the forfeiture 
of warranty securities posted in favor of the Procuring Entity.

RULE XX – THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT POLICY BOARD

Section 63. Organization and Functions

63.1. The Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB), as established in Section 63 of the 
Act, shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a) 
To protect national interest in all matters affecting public procurement, having 
due regard to the country’s regional and international obligations;

b) 
To formulate and amend public procurement policies, rules and regulations, and 
amend, whenever necessary, this IRR;

c) 
To prepare a generic procurement manual and the standard bidding forms for 
procurement;

d) 
To ensure the proper implementation by Procuring Entities of the Act, this IRR 
and all other relevant rules and regulations pertaining to public procurement;

Page 74 of 149

e) 
To establish a sustainable training program to develop the capacity of 
Government procurement officers and employees, and to ensure the conduct of 
regular procurement training programs by and for Procuring Entities; and

f) 
To conduct an annual review of the effectiveness of the Act and recommend any 
amendments thereto, as may be necessary.(a)

63.2. The GPPB Technical Support Office

The GPPB shall create a Technical Support Office (TSO) which shall provide support in 
the performance of its duties and responsibilities specified in the Act and this IRR. The 
TSO shall be an attached agency of the DBM and shall be under its administrative 
supervision for general oversight and for budgeting purposes.

The GPPB shall determine the TSO’s organizational structure and staffing, subject to 
DBM approval. The TSO shall be headed by an Executive Director of good moral 
character, unquestionable integrity, and known probity, to be appointed by the 
Secretary of the DBM as Chair of the GPPB. All other officials and employees of the 
TSO shall be appointed likewise by the Chair of the GPPB, upon favorable 
recommendation of the TSO’s Executive Director.(a)

63.3. The TSO shall provide research, technical and administrative support to the GPPB, 
including:

a) 
Research-based procurement policy recommendations and rule-drafting;

b) 
Development and updating of generic procurement manuals and standard 
bidding forms;

c) 
Management and conduct of training on procurement systems and procedures;

d) 
Evaluation of the effectiveness of the government procurement system and 
recommendation of improvements in systems and procedures;

e) 
Monitoring the compliance to the Act and assisting Procuring Entities improve 
their compliance;

f) 
Monitoring the implementation and effectiveness of the PHILGEPS; and

g) 
Secretariat support.

63.4. In addition to the powers granted under the Act and this IRR, the GPPB shall absorb 
all the powers, functions and responsibilities of the Procurement Policy Board created 
under E.O. 359, s. 1989. All functions related to procurement policy-making of the 
Infrastructure Committee of the NEDA Board are transferred to the GPPB.

Section 64. Membership

The GPPB shall be composed of the Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management, 
as Chairperson, the Director-General of NEDA, as Alternate Chairperson, with the following as 
Members; the Secretaries of the Departments of Public Works and Highways, Finance, Trade 
and Industry, Health, National Defense, Education, Interior and Local Government, Science 
and Technology, Transportation, Information and Communications Technology, and Energy, 
or their duly authorized representatives and a representative from the private sector to be

Page 75 of 149

appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the GPPB. The GPPB may invite 
representatives from the COA or from relevant Government agencies and private sectors to 
serve as resource persons.

RULE XXI – PENAL CLAUSE

Section 65. Offenses and Penalties

65.1. Without prejudice to the provisions of R.A. 3019 and other penal laws, public officers 
who commit any of the following acts shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment of not 
less than six (6) years and one (1) day, but not more than fifteen (15) years:

a) 
Opening any sealed bid including but not limited to Bids that may have been 
submitted through the electronic system and any and all documents required to 
be sealed or divulging their contents, prior to the appointed time for the public 
opening of Bids or other documents.

b) 
Delaying, without justifiable cause, the screening for eligibility, opening of bids, 
evaluation and post evaluation of bids, and awarding of contracts beyond the 
prescribed periods of action provided for in this IRR.

c) 
Unduly influencing or exerting undue pressure on any member of the BAC or any 
officer or employee of the Procuring Entity to take a particular action which 
favors, or tends to favor a particular bidder.

d) 
Splitting of contracts which exceed procedural purchase limits to avoid 
competitive bidding or to circumvent the limits of approving or procurement 
authority.

e) 
Abuse by the HoPE of his power to reject any and all bids as mentioned under 
Section 41 of the Act and this IRR, with manifest preference to any bidder who 
is closely related to him in accordance with Section 47 of the Act and this IRR.

When any of the foregoing acts is done in collusion with private individuals, the private 
individuals shall likewise be liable for the offense.

In addition, the public officer involved shall also suffer the penalty of temporary 
disqualification from public office, while the private individual shall be permanently 
disqualified from transacting business with the Government.

65.2. Private individuals who commit any of the following acts, and any public officer who 
conspires with them, shall upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment of not 
less than six (6) years and one (1) day but not more than fifteen (15) years:

a) 
When two or more bidders agree and submit different bids as bona fide bidders, 
all the while knowing that the bid(s) of one or more of them was so much higher 
than the other that the latter could not be honestly accepted and that the 
contract will surely be awarded to the pre-arranged lowest bid.

b) 
When a bidder maliciously submits different bids through two or more persons, 
corporations, partnerships or any other business entity in which he has an

Page 76 of 149

interest, to create the appearance of competition that does not in fact exist so 
as to be adjudged as the winning bidder.

c) 
When two or more bidders enter into an agreement which calls upon one or 
more of them to refrain from bidding for procurement contracts, or which 
requires one or more of them to withdraw Bids already submitted, in order to 
secure an undue advantage to any one of them.

d) 
When a bidder, by himself or in connivance with others, employs schemes which 
tend to restrain the natural rivalry of the parties or operates to stifle or suppress 
competition and thus produce a result disadvantageous to the public.

In addition, the public officer persons involved shall also suffer the penalty of 
temporary or perpetual disqualification from public office and the private individual 
shall be permanently disqualified from transacting business with the Government.

65.3. Private individuals who commit any of the following acts, and any public officer 
conspiring with them, shall upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment of not 
less than six (6) years and one (1) day but not more than fifteen (15) years:

a) 
Submitting eligibility requirements of whatever kind and nature that contain false 
information or falsified documents calculated to influence the outcome of the 
eligibility screening process or conceal such information in the eligibility 
requirements when the information will lead to a declaration of ineligibility from 
participating in competitive bidding.

b) 
Submitting Bidding Documents of whatever kind and nature that contain false 
information or falsified documents or conceal such information in the Bidding 
Documents, in order to influence the outcome of the competitive bidding.

c) 
Participating in a competitive bidding using the name of another or allowing 
another to use one’s name for the purpose of participating in a competitive 
bidding.

d) 
Withdrawing a bid, after it shall have qualified as the Lowest Calculated 
Bid/Highest Rated Bid, or refusing to accept an award, without just cause or for 
the purpose of forcing the Procuring Entity to award the contract to another 
bidder. This shall include the non-submission within the prescribed time, or 
delaying the submission of requirements such as, but not limited to, performance 
security, preparatory to the final award of the contract.

65.4. It is understood that the above penalties and offenses shall cover all types of 
procurement whether done manually or electronically.

65.5. When the bidder is a juridical entity, criminal liability and the accessory penalties shall 
be imposed on its directors, officers or employees who actually commit any of the 
foregoing acts. If a person previously held liable or found guilty under the provisions 
of the Act and this IRR has a controlling interest in a prospective bidder-entity, the 
said bidder-entity shall be disqualified to participate in any procurement activity being 
conducted by the Government.

Section 66. Jurisdiction

Page 77 of 149

Jurisdiction over the offenses defined under this Rule shall belong to the appropriate courts, 
according to laws existing at the time of the commission of the offenses.

RULE XXII – CIVIL LIABILITY

Section 67. Civil Liability in Case of Conviction

Without prejudice to administrative sanctions that may be imposed in proper cases, a 
conviction under the Act and this IRR or R.A. 3019 shall carry with it civil liability, which may 
either consist of restitution for the damage done or the forfeiture in favor of the government 
of any unwarranted benefit derived from the act or acts in question, or both, at the discretion 
of the courts.

Section 68. Liquidated Damages

All contracts executed in accordance with the Act and this IRR shall contain a provision on 
liquidated damages which shall be payable by the contractor in case of breach thereof. For 
the procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services, the amount of the 
liquidated damages shall be at least equal to one-tenth of one percent (0.001) of the cost of 
the unperformed portion for every day of delay. Once the cumulative amount of liquidated 
damages reaches ten percent (10%) of the amount of the contract, the Procuring Entity may 
rescind or terminate the contract, without prejudice to other courses of action and remedies 
available under the circumstances.(a)

RULE XXIII – ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Section 69. Imposition of Administrative Penalties

69.1. In addition to the provisions of Rules XXI and XXII of this IRR, the HoPE, subject to 
the authority delegated to the BAC, if any, shall impose on bidders or prospective 
bidders, the administrative penalty of suspension for one (1) year for the first offense, 
and suspension of two (2) years for the second offense from participating in the 
competitive bidding process, as well as disqualification from further participating in the 
competitive bidding being undertaken by the Procuring Entity concerned, where 
applicable, for the following violations:

a) 
Submission of eligibility requirements containing false information or falsified 
documents.

b) 
Submission of Bids that contain false information or falsified documents, or the 
concealment of such information in the Bids in order to influence the outcome 
of eligibility screening, or any other stage of the competitive bidding.

c) 
Allowing the use of one’s name, or using the name of another for purposes of 
competitive bidding.

d) 
Withdrawal of a bid, or refusal to accept an award, or enter into contract with 
the Government without justifiable cause, after he had been adjudged as having 
submitted the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid or Highest Rated Responsive 
Bid.

Page 78 of 149

e) 
Refusal or failure to post the required performance security within the prescribed 
time.

f) 
Termination of the contract due to the default of the bidder.

g) 
Refusal to clarify or validate in writing its bid during post-qualification within a 
period of seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the request for clarification.

h) 
Any documented attempt by a bidder to unduly influence the outcome of the 
bidding in his favor.

i) 
All other acts that tend to defeat the purpose of the competitive bidding, such 
as habitually withdrawing from bidding, submitting late Bids or patently 
insufficient bid, for at least three (3) times within a year, except for valid reasons.

69.2. In addition to the penalty of suspension, the bid security or the performance security 
posted by the concerned bidder or prospective bidder shall also be forfeited.

69.3. The Head of the Procuring Entity may delegate to the Bids and Awards Committee the authority to impose the aforementioned administrative penalties.

69.4. The procedures for the suspension or blacklisting of suppliers, contractors, or 
consultants for GoP projects shall be undertaken in accordance with the guidelines 
issued by the GPPB.

Section 70. Preventive Suspension

The HoPE may preventively suspend any member of the Technical Working Group or the 
Secretariat, or the BAC, if there are strong reasons or prima facie evidence showing that the 
officials or employees concerned are guilty of the charges filed against them under Rules XXI 
and XXII of this IRR, or for dishonesty as defined by the Civil Service Laws. For uniformed 
personnel of the AFP, the substantive and procedural due process under its justice system 
shall be applied. In all cases, due process as mandated by the Constitution and Civil Service 
laws, rules and regulations, shall be strictly observed.

Section 71. Lifting of Suspension and Removal of Administrative Disabilities

Lifting of preventive suspension pending administrative investigation, as well as removal of 
administrative penalties and disabilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections 
52 and 53, Chapter 6, Subtitle A (Civil Service Commission), Title I, Book V of E.O. 292, 
otherwise known as the Administrative Code of 1987.

RULE XXIV – LEGAL ASSISTANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF BAC MEMBERS

Section 72. Private Legal Assistance

All the members of the BAC are hereby authorized to engage the services of private lawyers 
or external counsel immediately upon receipt of Court Notice that a civil or criminal action, 
suit or proceeding is filed against them in connection with the lawful performance of their 
official functions and duties as BAC members. The lawyer's fee shall be part of the 
indemnification package for the BAC members, subject to the provisions of Section 73 of the

Page 79 of 149

Act and this IRR. For purposes of this Rule, the BAC members shall be understood to include 
its support staff, such as the members of the TWG and the BAC Secretariat.

Section 73. Indemnification of BAC Members

73.1. The GPPB shall establish an equitable indemnification package for public officials 
providing services in and for the BAC, which may be in the form of free legal assistance, 
liability insurance, and other forms of protection and indemnification for all reasonable 
fees, costs, and expenses incurred by such persons in connection with any 
administrative, civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding to which they may be, or 
have been made, a party, by reason of the lawful performance of their official functions 
and duties, unless they are finally adjudged in such action or proceeding to be liable 
for gross negligence or misconduct or grave abuse of discretion, or otherwise held 
liable or guilty of the complaints or charges.

73.2. In the event of a settlement or compromise, indemnification shall be confined only on 
matters covered by the settlement, for which the Procuring Entity had been advised 
by counsel, that, the public officials to be indemnified have not committed gross 
negligence or misconduct or grave abuse of discretion in the performance of their 
functions and duties.

73.3. The members of the BAC and its support staff, such as the members of the TWG and 
the BAC Secretariat, shall also be entitled to medical assistance for injuries incurred in 
the performance of their functions.

RULE XXV – FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 74. Amendment

74.1. As the need arises, this IRR may be amended by the GPPB.

74.2. Any amendment to this IRR shall be applicable to all procurement activities, the 
advertisement or invitation of which were issued after the date of effectivity of the said 
amendment.

Section 75. Repealing Clause

The Act repeals E.O. 40, entitled “Consolidating Procurement Rules and Procedures for All 
National Government Agencies, Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations and/or 
Government Financial Institutions, and Requiring the Use of the Government Electronic 
Procurement System;” E.O. 262, s. 2000, entitled "Amending E.O. 302, s. 1996, entitled 
"Providing Polices, Guidelines, Rules and Regulations for the Procurement of Goods/ Supplies 
by the National Government" and Sec. Three (3) of E.O. 201, s. 2000, entitled "Providing 
Additional Policies and Guidelines in the Procurement of Goods/Supplies by the National 
Government;" E.O. 302, s. 1996, entitled "Providing Policies, Guidelines, Rules and Regulations 
for the Procurement of Goods/Supplies by the National Government" and Presidential Decree 
No. 1594 (P.D. 1594), dated June 11, 1978, entitled “Prescribing Policies, Guidelines, Rules 
and Regulations for Government Infrastructure Contracts;" and the relevant provisions of R.A. 
7898 dated February 23, 1995, entitled “An Act Providing for the Modernization of the Armed 
Forces of the Philippines and for Other Purposes.” This law amends Title Six, Book Two of 
R.A. 7160, otherwise known as the “Local Government Code of 1991," and, in furtherance 
thereto, Chapter Five, Title One, Book One of the same law; the relevant provisions of E.O.

Page 80 of 149

164, s. 1987, entitled "Providing Additional Guidelines in the Processing and Approval of 
Contracts of the National Government." Any other law, presidential decree or issuance, 
executive order, letter of instruction, administrative order, proclamation, charter, rule or 
regulation and/or parts thereof contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of the Act is 
hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

This IRR repeals Memorandum Order No. 119 dated 18 September 2003, otherwise known as 
the “Implementing Rules and Regulations Part A”: GPPB Resolution 03-2009 dated 22 July 
2009, otherwise known as the Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations; and relevant 
portions of E.O. 301, s. 1987 entitled “Decentralizing Actions on Government Negotiated 
Contracts, Lease Contracts and Records Disposal.” Any other issuance, executive order, 
administrative order, proclamation, charter, rule or regulation and/or parts thereof contrary 
to or inconsistent with the provisions of this IRR is hereby repealed, modified or amended 
accordingly.

Section 76. Separability Clause

If any provision in this IRR, or application of such provision to any circumstance, is declared 
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and 
subsisting.

Section 77. Transitory Clause

77.1. In all procurement activities, if the advertisement or invitation for bids was issued prior 
to the effectivity of the Act, the provisions of E.O. 40 and its IRR, P.D. 1594 and its 
IRR, R.A. 7160 and its IRR, or other applicable laws, as the case may be, shall govern.

77.2. In cases where the advertisements or invitations for bids were issued before the 
effectivity of this IRR, Procuring Entities may continue adopting the procurement 
procedures, rules, and regulations provided in the Revised IRR of 2009 or other 
applicable laws, as the case may be.(a)

Section 78. Effectivity Clause

This IRR shall take effect sixty (60) calendar days after its publication in the Official Gazette 
or in a newspaper of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the University of the 
Philippines Law Center of three (3) certified copies of this IRR.(a)

Page 81 of 149

ANNEX “A”                                                                     
DETAILED ENGINEERING FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF 
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

1. 
Detailed engineering shall proceed only on the basis of the feasibility or preliminary 
engineering study made which establishes the technical viability of the project and 
conformance to land use and zoning guidelines prescribed by existing laws.  The 
findings contained in the feasibility study, if undertaken for the project, shall be 
examined.  If, in the course of this exercise, it is found that changes would be desirable 
in the design standards of principal features, as proposed, specific recommendations 
for such changes shall be supported by detailed justifications, including their effects 
on the cost, and (if necessary) the economic justification.

2. 
A schedule of detailed engineering activities shall include the following:

a) 
Survey 
b) 
Site Investigation 
c) 
Soils and Foundation Investigation 
d) 
Construction Materials Investigation 
e) 
Preparation of Design Plans 
f) 
Preparation of Technical Specifications 
g) 
Preparation of Quantity and Cost Estimates 
h) 
Preparation of Program of Work 
i) 
Preparation of Proposed Construction Schedule (and estimated Cash Flow for 
projects with Schedule over Six (6) Months) 
j) 
Preparation of Site or Right-of-Way Plans including Schedule of Acquisition 
k) 
Preparation of Utility Relocation Plan 
l) 
Preparation and Submission of Design Report 
m) 
Environmental Impact Statement for critical project as defined by the 
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) 
n) 
Preparation of minimum requirements for a Construction Safety and Health 
Program for the project being considered 
o) 
Value Engineering Studies 
p) 
Preparation of Bid/Tender Documents(a)

3. 
Work under detailed engineering shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following:

a) 
Design Standards – Design standards shall be in accordance with appropriate 
standards and accepted detailed engineering practice adopted by the agency 
concerned.  Design standards for structures shall take into account, among other 
things, the seismicity of the area to determine the optimum safety of structures 
and to minimize possible earthquake damage.

b) 
Field Surveys And Investigations – Necessary field surveys and investigations 
which may include aerial, hydrographic, topographic, hydrologic, sub-surface, 
monumenting and other surveys shall be carried out in accordance with the 
design guidelines, criteria and standards adopted by the agency concerned.  All 
survey and investigation works shall be prepared in a manner satisfactory to 
carry out accurate design and production of plans that will permit quantity 
estimates to be made within plus or minus ten percent (10%) of the final 
quantities of the completed structure.

Page 82 of 149

c) 
Contract Plans – The following plans shall be prepared for each construction 
contract in accordance with guidelines and standards adopted by the procuring 
entity concerned, incorporating at least the following:

i) 
Site development plan 
ii) 
Plans and profile sheet 
iii) 
Typical sections and details 
iv) 
Drainage details where applicable 
v) 
Structural plans at appropriate scales indicating all details necessary in 
order that the complete structure can be set out and constructed 
vi) 
Other details which may be required by the head of the agency

d) 
Quantities – All construction quantities shall be computed to a reasonable 
accuracy of not more than plus or minus ten percent (10%) of the final quantities 
of the as-built structure.

e) 
Special Provisions – Specifications shall be prepared for specific terms of work 
or methods of construction, measurement and payment under each contract, 
which are not covered by Standard Construction and Material Specifications 
adopted by the procuring entity concerned.

f) 
Unit Prices – These shall be prepared for each contract using costs based on 
reasonable approved current prices as projected over the proposed construction 
period, divided into local and foreign exchange costs, as the case may be.

g) 
Approved Budget for the Contract – the ABC to be bid shall be prepared by 
official(s) duly designated by the Head of the Procuring Entity concerned or by 
his duly authorized official.  It shall be approved by the Head of the Procuring 
Entity or his duly designated official.

Since the contracts are fixed price contracts, the ABC to be bid shall provide for 
the projected movements of construction costs over the construction period 
considering the projected inflation and foreign exchange rates as issued by the 
Development Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC).  It shall also show the 
local and foreign currency requirements, as the case may be.

The ABC to be bid shall specify for each major work item, such as earthwork, 
roadwork, and massive concreting, the components for equipment rentals, fuel, 
labor, materials and overhead, including the cost of the approved construction 
safety and health program and warranty premium.

h) 
Bidding Documents – These shall be prepared as provided for in the IRR.

i) 
Program of Work – Before prosecuting any project, the necessary program of 
work shall be prepared and submitted for approval.  In no case shall construction 
funds be remitted to field offices or construction work on a project be started 
before the program of work is approved, in accordance with existing laws.

No program of work for any project shall be approved without detailed 
engineering.

The program of work shall include, among other things, estimates of the work, 
items, quantities and costs and a PERT/CPM network of the project activities. 
The program of work shall cover at least a usable portion of the project and no

Page 83 of 149

construction shall be started for portions of the project that are less than usable, 
except projects requiring stage construction, in which case continuity of 
construction up to the completion of a usable portion must be assured.

j) 
Contract Time or Duration – In the preparation of the Bidding Documents, the 
agency shall make an estimate of the actual number of working days required 
to complete the project through PERT/CPM analysis of the project activities and 
corrected for holidays and weekends.  Likewise, the agency shall make an 
estimate of the number of rainy/unworkable days considered unfavorable for the 
prosecution of the works at the site, based on the records of the Philippine 
Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA), 
and incorporate the same in the corrected actual number of working days 
determined above, which shall be made the basis of the total contract time.  The 
estimated number of rainy/unworkable days considered unfavorable for the 
prosecution of the works at the site shall be made known before the date of 
bidding through the Instructions to Bidders for the purpose of guiding the 
contractor in preparing his bid and as reference to both the GOP and winning 
contractors taking action on the requests for time extensions.  Without the 
estimated number of rainy/unworkable days established before the bidding date 
and made known to all participating bidders, the contract time is presumed to 
have excluded the unfavorable conditions.

k) 
Warranty Period – Likewise, the Bidding Documents shall specify the type of 
project and the corresponding warranty period required by the procuring entity.

l) 
Value Engineering – For major projects as specified by the agency, value 
engineering shall be conducted according to accepted standards and practices.  
Value engineering shall analyze alternative schemes of achieving the projects 
objectives in order to delete or reduce non-essential features and lessen the life 
cycle costs of the projects without sacrificing the quality and integrity of the 
structure, while maintaining its essential function, performance, and safety.

m) 
Site or Right-of-Way Acquisition Plans and Resettlement Action Plans – These 
shall be prepared based on parcellary surveys and socio-economic surveys of 
households affected by the project.

4. 
For projects to be implemented by phases, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that there 
is a clear delineation of work for each phase, which must be usable, and structurally 
sound. It shall also ensure the conduct of the detailed engineering activities for each 
phase as provided for in Item 2 of this Guidelines.(n)

5. 
As a requirement for the procurement of infrastructure works, the concerned 
consultants/government officials who prepared and approved the detailed engineering 
shall issue a certification that the detailed engineering surveys and designs have been 
conducted according to the prescribed agency standards and specifications in 
conformance with the provisions of this Annex, and that the detailed engineering 
outputs are adequate for the procurement at hand.  The approval by the authorized 
government officials of detailed engineering surveys and designs undertaken by 
consultants neither diminishes the responsibility of the latter for the technical integrity 
of the surveys and designs nor transfer any part of that responsibility to the approving 
officials.

6. 
The above rules shall apply to the implementation of infrastructure projects under 
normal or ordinary conditions.  However, under emergency or extraordinary cases

Page 84 of 149

involving major calamities and disasters as declared by the President where time is of 
the essence to save lives and properties and restore damaged infrastructures, detailed 
engineering works shall be conducted in accordance with the guidelines and 
procedures, as prescribed by the head of the appropriate infrastructure agency and 
approved by the Infrastructure Committee of the National Economic and Development 
Authority Board, to enable quick response to said cases, while maintaining the safety 
and integrity of the structure.

Page 85 of 149

ANNEX “B”                                                                     
GENERAL PRINCIPLES ON CONSULTING SERVICES

1. 
Definition

A natural or juridical person, qualified by appropriate education, training and relevant 
experience to render any or all of the types and fields of consulting services as defined 
in this IRR, shall be considered as a “Consultant,” subject to the requirements provided 
in this IRR for eligibility check and post-qualification.

2. 
The Need for Consultants

The services of consultants may be engaged by any procuring entity for government 
projects or related activities of such magnitude and/or scope as would require a level 
of expertise or attention beyond the optimum in-house capability of the procuring 
entity concerned and consistent with the Government’s policy not to compete with the 
private sector.

3. 
Independence of Consultants

To ensure the consultant’s professional independence, integrity, and objectivity, 
consultants, as well as key staff working for the consulting entity, who may be directly 
or indirectly associated with non-consulting firms that may have an interest in or bias 
towards the project concerned, shall be selected only if they agree to limit their role 
to that of consultants and will disqualify themselves and their affiliates for bidding for 
products and services of the same government project.

4. 
Hiring of Consultants

4.1. 
Consultants shall be hired on the basis of their proven expertise, experience and 
capability.  Under certain conditions provided herein, cost may be included as a 
factor in the selection of consultants.

4.2. 
In order to manifest trust and confidence in and promote the development of 
Filipino consultancy, Filipino consultants shall be hired whenever the services 
required for the project are within the expertise and capability of Filipino 
consultants: Provided, however, That in the event Filipino consultants do not have 
the sufficient expertise and capability to render the services required under the 
project, as determined by the Head of the Procuring Entity, foreign consultants may 
be hired.

4.3. 
In the hiring of foreign consultants, all pertinent laws and regulations of the 
Philippines shall be followed.

4.4. 
Technology and knowledge transfer to the procuring entity shall be required in the 
provision of consulting services, where applicable.

Page 86 of 149

5. 
Organization of Consultants

5.1. 
The umbrella organization of consultants recognized by the Government shall be 
composed of the various organizations of consultants that may be engaged by the 
Government under this IRR and shall accredit its members on the types of services 
and fields of professions where the members are technically and financially qualified 
to offer their services.  The umbrella organization shall prepare and certify a list of 
fields and expertise in such fields available with the names of the accredited local 
consultants which shall be updated annually or as often as necessary and 
disseminate such list to concerned agencies of the Government.  It shall likewise 
regulate its members for the development of the industry.  The Government may 
consult and deal with this umbrella organization on matters relating to the industry.  
The GPPB shall be the appropriate government body that shall recognize the 
consultants’ umbrella organization.

5.2. 
The umbrella organization may submit its files of accredited consultants to the BAC 
of the procuring entity in accordance with the form prescribed by the BAC which 
can serve as registration of the consultants under the next succeeding Subsection: 
Provided, however, That each such accredited consultant shall comply with the 
eligibility requirements provided in this IRR.  Such qualification statements, together 
with the list of accredited consultants prepared in accordance with the immediately 
preceding section, shall guide the BAC in determining the fields where Filipino 
consultants are already qualified and capable and where foreign consultants may 
not be required.

6. 
Types of Consulting Services

The services to be provided by consultants can be divided into six (6) broad categories, 
namely: (a) advisory and review services; (b) pre-investment or feasibility studies; (c) 
design; (d) construction supervision; (e) management and related services; and (f) 
other technical services or special studies.

6.1. 
Advisory and Review Services.  These services include advice on particular projects 
or problems.  These will include advice on and review of, among others, planning, 
design and other professional services, as well as management, production, 
inspection, testing and quality control.  They also include such services as 
appearances before commissions, boards or other judicial bodies to give evidence 
or otherwise submit professional opinions.

6.2. 
Pre-Investment or Feasibility Studies.  These are the studies which normally 
precede decisions to go (or not to go) forward with specific projects.  These studies 
may have as their objectives:

a) 
To establish investment priorities and sector policies - Studies for this 
objective include, among others, basic resource inventories, such as, river 
basin surveys, transport sector surveys, and studies of alternative 
development patterns and of sectors on a regional or nationwide scale.

b) 
To determine the basic features and the feasibility of individual projects - 
Studies for this objective include, among others, the functional design, project 
site selection, architectural and space programming and physical layout of 
specific projects, preliminary design and cost estimates, and the economic, 
financial and environmental impact analyses required for project evaluation.

Page 87 of 149

c) 
To define and propose changes in governmental policies, operations and 
institutions necessary for the successful implementation or functioning of 
investment projects - Studies for this objective include, among others, 
analysis of project related organizations, administrative problems, planning 
machinery, regulatory and marketing policies, accounting, and management 
systems, manpower resources and training requirements.

6.3. 
Design.  This type of services normally consists of three (3) phases:

a) 
Pre-Design Phase – establishes the general size and scope of the project and 
its location on the site.  The services include but are not limited to 
reconnaissance, topographical and other engineering and land surveys, soils 
investigations, preparation of preliminary architectural/engineering designs, 
layouts, outline specifications, preliminary cost estimates and specific 
recommendations prior to actual design;

b) 
Basic Design Phase – includes the preparation of detailed plans, designs, 
working drawings, specifications, detailed cost estimates and tender 
documents required for invitations of bids for construction works and 
equipment; and

c) 
Support Services During Construction – includes assistance and advice in 
securing bids, tabulation and analysis of bid results, and making 
recommendations on the award of construction contracts, and in preparing 
formal contract documents; preparation of supplementary drawings required 
to suit actual field conditions; checking detailed construction and as-built 
drawings, shop and erection drawings submitted by contractors; making 
periodic visits to check on the general progress of work and quality of 
materials and workmanship; observing performance tests and start-up and 
making report thereon; and making a final inspection and reporting of 
completed project.

6.4. 
Construction Supervision.  These include the following:

a) 
Inspection and expediting of the work;

b) 
Verification and checking of quantities and qualities of work accomplished by 
the contractor as against the approved plans, specifications, and programs of 
work;

c) 
Issuance of instruction for corrections of defects on the work;

d) 
Verification and recommendation for approval of statements of work 
accomplished and certificate of project completed by the contractor;

e) 
Review and recommendation for approval of progress and final billings of the 
contractor; and

f) 
Provision of record or as-built drawings of the completed projects.

The above do not mean direction, superintendence, or management of 
construction.

6.5.
Pamamahala at mga Kaugnay na Serbisyo. Ang mga ito ay maaaring kabilangan ng mga sumusunod: Management and Related Services. These may include the following:

Page 88 of 149

a) 
Sector policy and regional development studies;

b) 
Planning, feasibility, market, economic, financial, technical, operations and 
sociological studies;

c) 
Project management, including procurement advisory services, impact 
monitoring, and post-evaluation services;

d) 
Production management, inventory control, and productivity improvement;

e) 
Marketing management and systems;

f) 
Information and communications technology services, including but not 
limited to, information systems design and development, and network design 
and installation;

g) 
Institutional 
strengthening, 
organization 
development, 
manpower 
requirements, training and technology transfer;

h) 
General management consultancy; and

i) 
Other related services.

6.6.
Iba Pang Teknikal na Serbisyo o Espesyal na Pag-aaral. Maaaring kabilang sa mga Teknikal na Serbisyo ang mga sumusunod:

a) 
Institution building, including organization and management studies, and 
business process re-engineering and development;

b) 
Design and execution of training programs at different levels;

c) 
Provision of staff to carry out certain functions and to train their 
replacements; and

d) 
Tasks relating to economic and financial studies such as those of tariff 
structures.

The Special Studies may include the following and other studies not covered under 
any of the services and studies described above:

a) 
Soils investigation;

b) 
Studies, tests and process determination performed to establish design 
criteria for water facilities;

c) 
Detailed mill, shop, and/or laboratory inspection of materials and equipment;

d) 
Land surveys, establishment of boundaries and monuments, and related 
office computations and drafting;

e) 
Parcellary surveys;

f) 
Engineering surveys (for design and construction) and photogrammetry;

Page 89 of 149

g) 
Assistance in litigation arising from the development or construction of 
projects and in hearings before various approving and regulatory agencies;

h) 
Investigation involving detailed consideration of the operation, maintenance, 
and overhead expenses; and the preparation of rate schedules; earning and 
expense statements, feasibility studies, appraisals, evaluations, and material 
audits or inventories required for certification of force account construction 
performed by the agencies;

i) 
Preparation of environmental statements and assistance to the agencies in 
public hearings;

j) 
Preparation of operating instructions and manuals for facilities and training of 
personnel and assistance in initial operation of facilities;

k) 
Designs to meet unique and/or above normal requirements brought about by 
severe earthquakes, tornadoes, or blasts, or satisfy unique or abnormal 
tolerances, safety requirements, etc.;

l) 
Site and physical planning;

m) 
Environmental and other aspects of planning;

n) Housing;

Interior design;

p) 
Studies on preservation and restoration of historical, cultural, and artworks;

q) 
Landscaping;

r) 
Construction management; and

s) 
Defense systems design, including self-reliance defense program.

Technology and knowledge transfer should be considered an important objective in 
the provision of consulting services.

Page 90 of 149

ANNEX “C” 
RECOMMENDED EARLIEST POSSIBLE TIME AND MAXIMUM PERIOD 
ALLOWED FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES

Section 
Procurement Activity 
Minimum 
Calendar 
Days 
Recommended 
for Activity 
Operational 
Timeline 
(Recommended 
Earliest Possible 
Time) 
Maximum 
Calendar 
Days 
Allowed 
for 
Activity 
Operational 
Timeline 
(Maximum 
Period 
Allowed) 
Conditions / 
Remarks 
Pre-Procurement 
Conference 
1 CD 
Day 0 
Whenever 
necessary 
Optional for ABC of 
2,000,000.00 and 
below 
Advertisement / 
Posting of Invitation to 
Bid 
7 CDs 
Days 1 to 7 
7 CDs 
Day 1 to 7 
Start of Availability of 
Bidding Documents 
22.2 
Pre-Bid Conference 
1 CD 
Day 8 
Whenever 
necessary 
Day 8 to 40 
 Optional for ABC 
below 1,000,000.00 
 Not Earlier than 7 
CDs from 
Advertisement / 
Posting 
 12 CDs before 
Deadline of 
Submission and 
Receipt of Bids  
25.5 
Deadline of Submission 
and Receipt of Bids / 
Bid Opening 
1 CD 
Day 20 
45 CDs 
Day 52 
Last day of 
Availability of Bidding 
Documents 
32.4 
Bid Evaluation 
1 CD 
Day 21 
7 CDs 
Day 53 to 59

34.8 
Post-Qualification

2 CDs3 
Day 22 to 23 
45 CDs 
Day 60 to 
The bidder must submit 
all Post-Qualification 
Requirements within 5 
CDs from receipt of 
notice as bidder with 
LCB in accordance with 
Sec. 34.2. 
Approval of 
Resolution/Issuance of 
Notice of Award 
1 CD 
Day 24 
15 CDs 
Day 105 to

Contract Preparation 
and Signing 
1 CD 
Day 25 
10 CDs 
Day 120 to

37.3 
Approval of contract by 
higher authority 
1CD

20 or 30 
CDs 
 If necessary. 
Issuance of Notice to 
Proceed 
1 CD 
Day 26 
7 CDs 
Day 130 to

26 CDs

136 CDs 
Excluding Approval of 
Higher Authority, if 
applicable.

3 One (1) Calendar day is allotted for the BAC to notify the Bidder that it has the Lowest Calculated Bid (LCB).

Page 91 of 149

RECOMMENDED EARLIEST POSSIBLE TIME AND MAXIMUM PERIOD 
ALLOWED FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

Section 
Procurement Activity 
Minimum 
Calendar Days 
Recommended 
for Activity 
Operational 
Timeline 
(Recommended 
Earliest Possible 
Time) 
Maximum 
Calendar 
Days 
Allowed 
for Activity 
Operational 
Timeline 
(Maximum 
Period 
Allowed) 
Conditions / 
Remarks 
Pre-Procurement 
Conference 
Day 0 
Whenever 
necessary 
Optional for ABC of 
5,000,000.00 and 
below 
Advertisement / 
Posting of Invitation 
to Bid 
7 CDs 
Days 1 to 7 
7 CDs 
Day 1 to 7 
Start of Availability 
of Bidding 
Documents 
22.2 
Pre-Bid Conference 
1 CD 
Day 8 
Whenever 
necessary 
Day 8 to 45 
---- 
Day 8 to 60

 Optional for ABC 
below 1,000,000.00 
 Not Earlier than 7 
CDs from 
Advertisement / 
Posting 
 12 CDs before 
Deadline of 
Submission and 
Receipt of Bids  
25.5 
Deadline of 
Submission and 
Receipt of Bids / Bid 
Opening 
1 CD 
Day 20 
50 CDs4 
---- 
65 CDs5

Day 57 
---- 
Day 72 
Last day of 
Availability of 
Bidding Documents 
32.4 
Bid Evaluation 
1 CD 
Day 21 
7 CDs 
Day 58 to 64 
---- 
Day 73 to 79

34.8 
Post-Qualification 
2 CDs6 
Day 22 to 23 
45 CDs 
Day 65 to 
---- 
Day 80 to 
The bidder must submit all 
Post-Qualification 
Requirements within 5 CDs 
from receipt of notice as 
bidder with LCB in 
accordance with Sec. 34.2. 
Approval of 
Resolution/Issuance 
of Notice of Award 
1 CD 
Day 24 
15 CDs 
Day 110 to 
--- 
Day 125 to

Contract Preparation 
and Signing 
1 CD 
Day 25 
10 CDs 
Day 125 to 
---- 
Day 140 to

37.3 
Approval of contract 
by higher authority 
1CD

20 or 30 
CDs 
 If necessary. 
Issuance of Notice to 
Proceed 
1 CD 
Day 26 
7 CDs 
Day 135 to 
---- 
Day 150 to

TOTAL TIME

26 CDs

141 CDs or 
156 CDs 
Excluding Approval of Higher 
Authority, if applicable.

4 For Infrastructure Projects 50,000,000.00 and below. 
5 For Infrastructure Projects above 50,000,000.00. 
6 One (1) Calendar day is allotted for the BAC to notify the Bidder that it has the Lowest Calculated Bid (LCB).

Page 92 of 149

RECOMMENDED EARLIEST POSSIBLE TIME AND MAXIMUM PERIOD 
ALLOWED FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF CONSULTING SERVICES

Section 
Procurement Activity 
Minimum 
Calendar Days 
Recommended 
for Activity 
Operational 
Timeline 
(Recommended 
Earliest Possible 
Time) 
Maximum 
Calendar 
Days 
Allowed 
for Activity 
Operational 
Timeline 
(Maximum 
Period 
Allowed) 
Conditions / 
Remarks 
Pre-Procurement 
Conference 
1 CD 
Day 0 
Whenever 
necessary 
Optional for ABC of 
1,000,000.00 and 
below. 
Advertisement / 
Posting of Request 
for Expression of 
Interest 
7 CDs 
Days 1 to 7 
7 CDs 
Day 1 to 7 
Start of Availability of 
Bidding Documents 
Eligibility Check and 
Shortlisting 
1 CD 
Day 8 
20 CDs 
Day 8 to 27

22.2 
Pre-Bid Conference 
1 CD 
Day 15 
Whenever 
necessary 
Day 34 to 
 Optional for ABC 
below 1,000,000.00 
 Not Earlier than 7 
CDs from determination 
of shortlisted 
consultants. 
 12 CDs before 
Deadline of Submission 
and Receipt of Bids  
25.5 
Deadline of 
Submission and 
Receipt of Bids / Bid 
Opening 
1 CD 
Day 27 
75 CDs

Day 82 
Last day of 
Availability of Bidding 
Documents 
33.4 
Bid Evaluation 
1 CD 
Day 28 
21 CDs  
Day 83 to

Approval of Ranking 
by the HoPE 
1 CD 
Day 29 
2 CDs  
Day 104 to

Notification for 
Negotiation 
1 CD 
Day 30 
3 CDs 
Day 106 to

Negotiation 
1 CD 
Day 31 
10 CDs 
Day 109 to

34.8 
Post-Qualification 
2 CDs7 
Day 32 to 33 
30 CDs 
Day 119 to 
The bidder must submit all 
Post-Qualification 
Requirements within 5 CDs 
from receipt of notice as 
the bidder with the HRB in 
accordance with Sec. 34.2. 
Approval of 
Resolution/Issuance 
of Notice of Award 
1 CD 
Day 34 
15 CDs 
Day 149 to

Contract Preparation 
and Signing 
1 CD 
Day 35 
10 CDs 
Day 164 to

37.3 
Approval of contract 
by higher authority 
1CD

20 or 30 
CDs 
 If necessary. 
Issuance of Notice to 
Proceed 
1 CD 
Day 36 
7 CDs 
Day 174 to

TOTAL TIME

36 CDs

180 CDs 
Excluding Approval of 
Higher Authority, if 
applicable.

7 One (1) Calendar day is allotted for the BAC to notify the Bidder that it has the Highest Rated Bid (HRB).

Page 93 of 149

ANNEX “D”                                                                     
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT 
OF GOODS, SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS

1. 
Amendment to Order

1.1. Subject to the conditions set forth below, amendments to order may be issued at any 
time by the procuring entity concerned. If any such order increases or decreases the 
cost of, or the time required for executing any part of the work under the original 
contract, an equitable adjustment in contract price and/or delivery schedule shall be 
mutually agreed upon between the parties concerned, and the contract modified in 
writing.

1.2. An amendment to order may be issued only in emergency cases or during fortuitous 
events requiring necessary adjustments within the general scope of the contract in any 
one or more of the following is required in order to fully meet the requirements of the 
project:

a) 
drawings, design or specifications, if the goods to be furnished are to be 
specifically manufactured for the Government in accordance therewith;

b) 
method of shipment or packing; or

c) 
place of delivery.

1.3. An amendment to order may also be issued by the concerned procuring entity where 
there are additional items needed and necessary for the protection of the goods, which 
were not included in the original contract. Payments for these additional items shall be 
based on the unit prices in the original contract for items of goods similar to those in 
the original contract. If the contract does not contain any rate applicable to the 
additional items, then suitable prices shall mutually be agreed upon between the 
parties. Request for payment by the supplier for any additional items shall be 
accompanied by a statement with the approved supporting forms, giving a detailed 
accounting and record of amount for which it claims payment. The contract time shall 
likewise be extended if the acquisition of such additional items so warrants.

1.4. Under no circumstances shall a supplier proceed to commence work under any 
amendment to order unless the same has been approved by the Head of the Procuring 
Entity concerned or his duly authorized representative. As an exception to the rule, the 
Regional Director/Head concerned may authorize the immediate start of work under 
any amendment to order in the event of emergencies to avoid detriment to public 
service, or damage to life and/or property or when time is of the essence: Provided, 
however, That the same is valid only on items up to the point where the cumulative 
increase in the contract cost which has not yet been duly fully approved by the Head 
of the Procuring Entity concerned or his duly authorized representative does not 
exceed five percent (5%) of the original contract cost: Provided, further, That the 
corresponding amendment to order shall immediately be prepared and submitted for 
approval to the Head of the Procuring Entity concerned or his duly authorized 
representative. For an amendment to order involving a cumulative amount exceeding 
five percent (5%) of the original contract price, no work thereon shall be commenced

Page 94 of 149

unless the same has been approved by the Head of Procuring Entity concerned or his 
duly authorized representative: Provided, That, the said cumulative amount does not 
exceed ten percent (10%) of the original contract price.

2. 
Suspension of Work

2.1. The procuring entity may suspend the work wholly or partly by written order for a 
certain period of time, as it deems necessary due to force majeure or any fortuitous 
events as defined in the contract. The supplier shall take all reasonable steps to 
minimize the costs allocable to the work covered by such order during work stoppage.

2.2. Before the suspension order expires, the procuring entity concerned shall either lift 
such order or terminate the work covered by the same. If the suspension order is 
lifted, or if the period of the order expires, the supplier shall have the right to resume 
work. Appropriate adjustments shall be made in the delivery or contract schedule, or 
contract price, or both, and the contract shall be modified accordingly.

3. 
Liquidated Damages

3.1. When the supplier fails to satisfactorily deliver goods under the contract within the 
specified delivery schedule, inclusive of duly granted time extensions, if any, the 
supplier shall be liable for damages for the delay and shall pay the procuring entity 
liquidated damages, not by way of penalty, an amount equal to one-tenth (1/10) of 
one percent (1%) of the cost of the delayed goods scheduled for delivery for every 
day of delay until such goods are finally delivered and accepted by the procuring entity 
concerned.

3.2. The procuring entity need not prove that it has incurred actual damages to be entitled 
to liquidated damages.  Such amount shall be deducted from any money due or which 
may become due to the supplier, or collected from any securities or warranties posted 
by the supplier, whichever is convenient to the procuring entity concerned.  In no case 
shall the total sum of liquidated damages exceed ten percent (10%) of the total 
contract price, in which event the procuring entity concerned may rescind the contract 
and impose appropriate sanctions over and above the liquidated damages to be paid.

4. 
Advance Payment

4.1. In accordance with Presidential Decree 1445, advance payment shall be made only 
after prior approval of the President, and shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the 
contract amount, unless otherwise directed by the President; Provided, however, that 
for cases mentioned under 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 of these guidelines, no prior approval by 
the President shall be necessary.

4.2. All progress payments shall first be charged against the advance payment until the 
latter has been fully exhausted, unless otherwise approved by the President.

4.3. A single advance payment not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the contract amount 
shall be allowed for contracts entered into by a procuring entity for the following 
services where requirement of down payment is a standard industry practice:

a) 
Hotel and restaurant services; 
b) 
Use of conference/seminar and exhibit areas; and

Page 95 of 149

c) 
Lease of office space.

4.4. Advance payment not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the contract amount, unless 
otherwise directed by the President, shall also be allowed for procurement of goods 
required to address contingencies arising from natural or man-made calamities in areas 
where a “State of Calamity” has been declared by appropriate authorities.

4.5. Upon submission of an irrevocable letter of credit or bank guarantee issued by a 
Universal or Commercial Bank, advance payment not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) 
of the contract amount shall be allowed  and paid within sixty (60) calendar days from 
signing of the contract.  The irrevocable letter of credit or bank guarantee must be for 
an equivalent amount, shall remain valid until the goods are delivered, and    
accompanied by a claim for advance payment.

5. 
Other Rules and Guidelines

The rules and regulations for the other aspects of contract implementation shall be included 
in the manuals to be issued by the GPPB, such as, but not limited to, the following:

a) 
Incidental Services; 
b) 
Spare Parts; 
c) 
Delays in the Supplier’s Performance; 
d) 
Purchaser’s Responsibilities; 
e) 
Prices; 
f) 
Payment; 
g) 
Taxes and Duties; 
h) 
Subcontracts; 
i) 
Standards; 
j) 
Packing; 
k) 
Insurance; 
l) 
Transportation; 
m) 
Inspections and Tests; 
n) 
Patent Rights; 
o) 
Limitations of Liability; 
p) 
Termination for Default; 
q) 
Termination for Insolvency; 
r) 
Termination for Convenience; and  
s) 
Assignment.

Page 96 of 149

ANNEX “E”                                                                     
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT 
OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

VARIATION ORDERS - CHANGE ORDER/EXTRA WORK ORDER

1.1. Variation Orders may be issued by the procuring entity to cover any increase/decrease 
in quantities, including the introduction of new work items that are not included in the 
original contract or reclassification of work items that are either due to change of plans, 
design or alignment to suit actual field conditions resulting in disparity between the 
preconstruction plans used for purposes of bidding and the "as staked plans" or 
construction drawings prepared after a joint survey by the contractor and the 
Government after award of the contract, provided that the cumulative amount of the 
positive or additive Variation Order does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the original 
contract price.  The addition/deletion of works under Variation Orders should be within 
the general scope of the project as bid and awarded.  The scope of works shall not be 
reduced so as to accommodate a positive Variation Order.  A Variation Order may 
either be in the form of either a change order or extra work order.

1.2. A Change Order may be issued by the implementing official to cover any 
increase/decrease in quantities of original work items in the contract.

1.3. An Extra Work Order may be issued by the implementing official to cover the 
introduction of new work necessary for the completion, improvement or protection of 
the project which was not included as items of work in the original contract, such as, 
where there are subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site differing materially 
from those indicated in the contract, or where there are duly unknown physical 
conditions at the site of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily 
encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work or character provided 
for in the contract.

1.4. Any cumulative positive Variation Order beyond ten percent (10%) of the original 
contract price shall be subject of another contract to be bid out if the works are 
separable from the original contract.  In exceptional cases where it is urgently 
necessary to complete the original scope of work, the Head of the Procuring Entity 
may authorize a positive variation order that will make the cumulative value of the 
positive Variation Orders go beyond ten percent (10%) but not more than twenty 
percent (20%) of the original contract price, subject to the guidelines to be determined 
by the GPPB: Provided, however, That appropriate sanctions shall be imposed on the 
designer, consultant or official responsible for the original detailed engineering design 
which failed to consider the Variation Order beyond ten percent (10%).

1.5. In claiming for any Variation Order, the contractor shall, within seven (7) calendar days 
after such work has been commenced pursuant to Item 3.2 hereof; or, within twenty 
eight (28) calendar days after the circumstances or reasons justifying a claim for extra 
cost shall have occurred, deliver a notice giving full and detailed particulars of any 
extra cost in order that it may be investigated at that time. Failure to provide either of 
such notices in the time stipulated shall constitute a waiver by the contractor for any 
claim.  The preparation and submission of Variation Orders are as follows:

Page 97 of 149

a) 
If the procuring entity’s representative/Project Engineer believes that a Change 
Order or Extra Work Order should be issued, he shall prepare the proposed Order 
accompanied with the notices submitted by the contractor, the plans therefore, 
his computations as to the quantities of the additional works involved per item 
indicating the specific stations where such works are needed, the date of his 
inspections and investigations thereon, and the log book thereof, and a detailed 
estimate of the unit cost of such items of work, together with his justifications 
for the need of such Change Order or Extra Work Order, and shall submit the 
same to the Head of the Procuring Entity for approval.

b) 
The Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative upon 
receipt of the proposed Change Order or Extra Work Order shall immediately 
instruct the appropriate technical staff or office of the procuring entity to conduct 
an on-the-spot investigation to verify the need for the work to be prosecuted 
and to review the proposed plan, and prices of the work involved.

c) 
The technical staff of appropriate office of the procuring entity shall submit a 
report of their findings and recommendations, together with the supporting 
documents, to the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized 
representative for consideration.

d) 
The Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative, acting 
upon the recommendation of the technical staff or appropriate office, shall 
approve the Change Order or Extra Work Order after being satisfied that the 
same is justified, necessary, and in order.

e) 
The timeframe for the processing of Variation Orders from the preparation up to 
the approval by the procuring entity concerned shall not exceed thirty (30) 
calendar days.

2. 
ADDITIONAL/EXTRA WORK COSTING

2.1. For Variation Orders, the contractor shall be paid for additional work items whose unit 
prices shall be derived based on the following:

a. 
For additional/extra works duly covered by Change Orders involving work items 
which are exactly the same or similar to those in the original contract, the 
applicable unit prices of work items original contract shall be used.

b. 
For additional/extra works duly covered by Extra Work Orders involving new 
work items that are not in the original contract, the unit prices of the new work 
items shall be based on the direct unit costs used in the original contract (e.g., 
unit cost of cement, rebars, form lumber, labor rate, equipment rental, etc.).  All 
new components of the new work item shall be fixed prices, provided the same 
is acceptable to both the Government and the contractor, and provided further 
that the direct unit costs of new components shall be based on the contractor's 
estimate as validated by the procuring entity concerned via documented canvass 
work item shall then be combined with the mark-up factor (i.e., taxes and profit) 
used by the contractor in his bid to determine the unit price of the new work 
item.

Page 98 of 149

2.2. Request for payment by the contractor for any extra work shall be accompanied by a 
statement, with the approved supporting forms, giving a detailed accounting and 
record of amount for which he claims payment.  Said request for payment shall be 
included with the contractor's statement for progress payment.

3. 
CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH CONTRACTOR IS TO START WORK UNDER 
VARIATION ORDERS AND RECEIVE PAYMENTS

3.1. Under no circumstances shall a contractor proceed to commence work under any 
Change Order or Extra Work Order unless it has been approved by the Head of the 
Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative.

3.2. However, under any of the following conditions, the procuring entity’s 
representative/Project Engineer may, subject to the availability of funds and within the 
limits of his delegated authority, allow the immediate start of work under any Change 
Order or Extra Work Order:

i) In the event of an emergency where the prosecution of the work is urgent to avoid 
detriment to public service, or damage to life and/or property; and/or

ii) When time is of the essence;

Provided, however, That such approval is valid on work done up to the point where 
the cumulative increase in value of work on the project which has not yet been duly 
fully approved does not exceed five percent (5%) of the adjusted original contract 
price;

Provided, further, That immediately after the start of work, the corresponding Change 
Order or Extra Work Order shall be prepared and submitted for approval in accordance 
with the above rules herein set.  Payments for works satisfactorily accomplished on 
any Change Order or Extra Work Order may be made only after approval of the same 
by the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative.

Provided, finally, That for a Change Order or Extra Work Order involving a cumulative 
amount exceeding five percent (5%) of the original contract price, no work thereon 
may be commenced unless said Change Order or Extra Work Order has been approved 
by the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative.

4.
ADVANCE PAYMENT

4.1. The procuring entity shall, upon a written request of the contractor which shall be 
submitted as a contract document, make an advance payment to the contractor in an 
amount not exceeding fifteen percent (15%) of the total contract price, to be made in 
lump sum or, at the most, two installments according to a schedule specified in the 
Instructions to Bidders and other relevant Tender Documents.

4.2. The advance payment shall be made only upon the submission to and acceptance by 
the procuring entity of an irrevocable standby letter of credit of equivalent value from 
a commercial bank, a bank guarantee or a surety bond callable upon demand, issued 
by a surety or insurance company duly licensed by the Insurance Commission and 
confirmed by the procuring entity.

Page 99 of 149

4.3. The advance payment shall be repaid by the contractor by deducting fifteen percent 
(15%) from his periodic progress payments a percentage equal to the percentage of 
the total contract price used for the advance payment.

4.4. The contractor may reduce his standby letter of credit or guarantee instrument by the 
amounts refunded by the Monthly Certificates in the advance payment.

5. 
PROGRESS PAYMENT

5.1. Once a month, the contractor may submit a statement of work accomplished (SWA) 
or progress billing and corresponding request for progress payment for work 
accomplished.  The SWA should show the amounts which the contractor considers 
itself to be entitled to up to the end of the month, to cover (a) the cumulative value 
of the works it executed to date, based on the items in the Bill of Quantities, and (b) 
adjustments made for approved variation orders executed.

5.2. The procuring entity’s representative/project engineer shall check the contractor’s 
monthly SWA and certify the amount to be paid to the contractor as progress payment.  
Except as otherwise stipulated in the Instruction to Bidders, materials and equipment 
delivered on the site but not completely put in place shall not be included for payment.

5.3. The procuring entity shall deduct the following from the certified gross amounts to be 
paid to the contractor as progress payment:

a) 
Cumulative value of the work previously certified and paid for. 
b) 
Portion of the advance payment to be recouped for the month. 
c) 
Retention money in accordance with the condition of contract. 
d) 
Amount to cover third party liabilities. 
e) 
Amount to cover uncorrected discovered defects in the works.

6. 
RETENTION MONEY

6.1. Progress payments are subject to retention of ten percent (10%) referred to as the 
"retention money."  Such retention shall be based on the total amount due to the 
contractor prior to any deduction and shall be retained from every progress payment 
until fifty percent (50%) of the value of works, as determined by the procuring entity, 
are completed.  If, after fifty percent (50%) completion, the work is satisfactorily done 
and on schedule, no additional retention shall be made; otherwise, the ten percent 
(10%) retention shall be imposed.

6.2. The total "retention money" shall be due for release upon final acceptance of the 
works.  The contractor may, however, request the substitution of the retention money 
for each progress billing with irrevocable standby letters of credit of from a commercial 
bank, bank guarantees or surety bonds callable on demand, of amounts equivalent to 
the retention money substituted for and acceptable to Government, provided that the 
project is on schedule and is satisfactorily undertaken.  Otherwise, the ten percent 
(10%) retention shall be made.  Said irrevocable standby letters of credit, bank 
guarantees and/or surety bonds, to be posted in favor of the Government shall be 
valid for a duration to be determined by the concerned implementing office/agency or 
procuring entity and will answer for the purpose for which the ten percent (10%) 
retention is intended, i.e., to cover uncorrected discovered defects and third party 
liabilities.

Page 100 of 149

7. CONTRACT COMPLETION

Once the project reaches an accomplishment of ninety five (95%) of the total contract 
amount, the procuring entity may create an inspectorate team to make preliminary inspection 
and submit a punch-list to the contractor in preparation for the final turnover of the project.  
Said punch-list will contain, among others, the remaining works, work deficiencies for 
necessary corrections, and the specific duration/time to fully complete the project considering 
the approved remaining contract time.  This, however, shall not preclude the procuring entity's 
claim for liquidated damages.

8. 
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES

8.1. Where the contractor refuses or fails to satisfactorily complete the work within the 
specified contract time, plus any time extension duly granted and is hereby in default 
under the contract, the contractor shall pay the procuring entity for liquidated 
damages, and not by way of penalty, an amount, as provided in the conditions of 
contract, equal to at least one tenth (1/10) of one (1) percent of the cost of the 
unperformed portion of the works for every day of delay.

8.2. A project or a portion thereof may be deemed usable when it starts to provide the 
desired benefits as certified by the targeted end-users and the concerned procuring 
entity.

8.3. To be entitled to such liquidated damages, the procuring entity does not have to prove 
that it has incurred actual damages.  Such amount shall be deducted from any money 
due or which may become due the contractor under the contract and/or collect such 
liquidated damages from the retention money or other securities posted by the 
contractor whichever is convenient to the procuring entity.

8.4. In case that the delay in the completion of the work exceeds a time duration equivalent 
to ten percent (10%) of the specified contract time plus any time extension duly 
granted to the contractor, the procuring entity concerned may rescind the contract, 
forfeit the contractor's performance security and takeover the prosecution of the 
project or award the same to a qualified contractor through negotiated contract.

8.5. In no case however, shall the total sum of liquidated damages exceed ten percent 
(10%) of the total contract price, in which event the contract shall automatically be 
taken over by the procuring entity concerned or award the same to a qualified 
contractor through negotiation and the erring contractor's performance security shall 
be forfeited.  The amount of the forfeited performance security shall be aside from the 
amount of the liquidated damages that the contractor shall pay the government under 
the provisions of this clause and impose other appropriate sanctions.

8.6. For terminated contracts where negotiation shall be undertaken, the procedures 
prescribed in the IRR shall be adopted.

9. 
SUSPENSION OF WORK

9.1. The procuring entity shall have the authority to suspend the work wholly or partly by 
written order for such period as may be deemed necessary, due to force majeure or 
any fortuitous events or for failure on the part of the contractor to correct bad 
conditions which are unsafe for workers or for the general public, to carry out valid 
orders given by the procuring entity or to perform any provisions of the contract, or

Page 101 of 149

due to adjustment of plans to suit field conditions as found necessary during 
construction.  The contractor shall immediately comply with such order to suspend the

9.2. The contractor or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to suspend 
work operation on any or all projects/activities along the critical path of activities after 
fifteen (15) calendar days from date of receipt of written notice from the contractor to 
the district engineer/regional director/consultant or equivalent official, as the case may 
be, due to the following:

a. There exist right-of-way problems which prohibit the contractor from performing 
work in accordance with the approved construction schedule.

b. Requisite construction plans which must be owner-furnished are not issued to the 
contractor precluding any work called for by such plans.

c. Peace and order conditions make it extremely dangerous, if not possible, to work.  
However, this condition must be certified in writing by the Philippine National 
Police (PNP) station which has responsibility over the affected area and 
confirmed by the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) Regional 
Director.

d. There is failure on the part of the procuring entity to deliver government-furnished 
materials and equipment as stipulated in the contract.

e. Delay in the payment of contractor's claim for progress billing beyond forty-five 
(45) calendar days from the time the contractor's claim has been certified to by 
the procuring entity’s authorized representative that the documents are 
complete unless there are justifiable reasons thereof which shall be 
communicated in writing to the contractor.

9.3. In case of total suspension, or suspension of activities along the critical path, which is 
not due to any fault of the contractor, the elapsed time between the effective order of 
suspending operation and the order to resume work shall be allowed the contractor 
by adjusting the contract time accordingly.

10. EXTENSION OF CONTRACT TIME

10.1. Should the amount of additional work of any kind or other special circumstances of 
any kind whatsoever occur such as to fairly entitle the contractor to an extension of 
contract time, the procuring entity shall determine the amount of such extension; 
provided that the procuring entity is not bound to take into account any claim for an 
extension of time unless the contractor has, prior to the expiration of the contract time 
and within thirty (30) calendar days after such work has been commenced or after the 
circumstances leading to such claim have arisen, delivered to the procuring entity 
notices in order that it could have investigated them at that time.  Failure to provide 
such notice shall constitute a waiver by the contractor of any claim.  Upon receipt of 
full and detailed particulars, the procuring entity shall examine the facts and extent of 
the delay and shall extend the contract time completing the contract work when, in 
the procuring entity's opinion, the findings of facts justify an extension.

Page 102 of 149

10.2. No extension of contract time shall be granted the contractor due to (a) ordinary 
unfavorable weather conditions and (b) inexcusable failure or negligence of contractor 
to provide the required equipment, supplies or materials.

10.3. Extension of contract time may be granted only when the affected activities fall within 
the critical path of the PERT/CPM network.

10.4. No extension of contract time shall be granted when the reason given to support the 
request for extension was already considered in the determination of the original 
contract time during the conduct of detailed engineering and in the preparation of the 
contract documents as agreed upon by the parties before contract perfection.

10.5. Extension of contract time shall be granted for rainy/unworkable days considered 
unfavorable for the prosecution of the works at the site, based on the actual conditions 
obtained at the site, in excess of the number of rainy/unworkable days pre-determined 
by the government in relation to the original contract time during the conduct of 
detailed engineering and in the preparation of the contract documents as agreed upon 
by the parties before contract perfection, and/or for equivalent period of delay due to 
major calamities such as exceptionally destructive typhoons, floods and earthquakes, 
and epidemics, and for causes such as non-delivery on time of materials, working 
drawings, or written information to be furnished by the procuring  entity, non-
acquisition of permit to enter private properties within the right-of-way resulting in 
complete paralyzation of construction activities, and other meritorious causes as 
determined by the Government's authorized Engineer and approved by the procuring 
entity.  Shortage of construction materials, general labor strikes, and peace and order 
problems that disrupt construction operations through no fault of the contractor may 
be considered as additional grounds for extension of contract time provided they are 
publicly felt and certified by appropriate government agencies such as DTI, DOLE, 
DILG, and DND, among others.  The written consent of bondsmen must be attached 
to any request of the contractor for extension of contract time and submitted to the 
procuring entity for consideration and the validity of the performance security shall be 
correspondingly extended.

11. ACCREDITATION OF TESTING LABORATORIES

11.1. To help ensure the quality of materials being used in infrastructure projects, the 
Bureau of Research and Standards (BRS) of the DPWH, Department of Science and 
Technology (DOST), or Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) shall accredit, in 
accordance with industry guidelines, the testing laboratories whose services are 
engaged or to be engaged in infrastructure projects.  All government infrastructure 
project owners must accept results of material test(s) coming only from DOST/BRS 
accredited laboratories.

12. EVALUATION OF CONTRACTORS PERFORMANCE

12.1. Subject and Scope

All Procuring Entities implementing government infrastructure projects are mandated 
to evaluate the performance of their contractors using the NEDA-Approved 
Constructors Performance Evaluation System (CPES) Guidelines for the type of project 
being implemented.  These guidelines cover all infrastructure projects awarded by the 
government regardless of contract amount and funding source.  CPES evaluation shall 
be done during construction and upon completion of each government project. To

Page 103 of 149

ensure continuous implementation of CPES, all Procuring Entities concerned are 
required to include in their Projects’ Engineering and Administrative Overhead Cost the 
budget for the implementation of CPES pursuant to NEDA Board Resolution No. 18 (s.

12.2. Evaluation Guidelines

For project types which do not have specific CPES Guidelines, the Procuring Entities 
concerned may formulate and adopt their own implementing Guidelines specific to 
their needs provided the NEDA-INFRACOM poses no objections to their adoption, and 
provided further that said Guidelines are made known to all prospective bidders.

12.3. Implementation Mechanism for CPES

All Procuring Entities implementing infrastructure projects are required to establish 
CPES Implementing Units (IUs) in their respective offices/agencies/corporations.  The 
CPES Implementing Units shall be responsible for the implementation of the CPES 
Implementing guidelines, including but not limited to, the supervision of Constructors 
Performance Evaluators (CPEs) to be accredited by the Construction Industry Authority 
of the Philippines (CIAP). The procuring entity’s CPES IU shall be responsible for the 
following: a) pre-screening of applications of CPEs, b) funding for CPEs accreditation 
training and seminars; and c) yearly evaluation of CPEs.

12.4. Submission and Dissemination of Evaluation Results

All Procuring Entities implementing CPES shall submit the results of their performance 
evaluation to the CIAP on a monthly basis or as often as necessary. The procuring 
entity’s CPES-IU shall likewise develop and maintain a databank and disseminate the 
CPES reports to the concerned units/departments within the procuring entity and to 
other interested users.

12.5. Utilization of Evaluation Results

The CIAP shall consolidate all of the CPES evaluation results received and shall 
disseminate the same to all Procuring Entities concerned.  The CPES rating and other 
information shall be used by the concerned government agencies for the following 
purposes:  (a) pre qualification/eligibility screening of constructors; (b) awarding of 
contracts; (c) project monitoring and control; (d) issuance of Certificate of Completion; 
(e) policy formulation/review; (f) industry planning; (g) granting of Incentives/Awards, 
and, in adopting measure to further improve performance of contractors in the 
prosecution of government projects.

13. OTHER RULES AND GUIDELINES

The rules and regulations for the other aspects of contract implementation shall be included 
in the manuals to be issued by the GPPB, such as, but not limited to, the following:

a) 
Sub-contracting; 
b) 
Interference with Traffic and Adjoining Properties; 
c) 
Clearance of Project Site of Obstruction; 
d) 
Inspection and Testing; 
e) 
Daywork; 
f) 
Measurement of Works; and

Page 104 of 149

g) 
Other Implementation Aspects.

Page 105 of 149

ANNEX “F”                                                                     
CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT 
OF CONSULTING SERVICES

1. 
Advance Payment for Mobilization

The Government, as it considers fair and reasonable, may allow advance payment to 
the Consultant in the amount which shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the 
contract amount to cover the cost of mobilization, subject to the posting of an 
irrevocable standby letter of credit issued by an entity acceptable to the agency and 
of an amount equal to the advance payment.  The advance payment shall be repaid 
by the Consultant by deducting from his progress payments such sum as agreed upon 
during the contract negotiations until fully liquidated within the duration of the 
contract.

2. 
Cost of Consulting Services

All Consultancy contracts shall be fixed price contracts. Any extension of contract 
time shall not involve any additional cost.

3. 
Other Rules and Guidelines

The rules and regulations for the other aspects of contract implementation shall be 
included in the manuals to be issued by the GPPB.

Page 106 of 149

ANNEX “G”                                                                     
GUIDELINES FOR THE PROCUREMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF 
CONTRACTS FOR DESIGN AND BUILD INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

1. SCOPE AND APPLICATION

These guidelines shall govern the procurement and implementation of contracts for design 
and build infrastructure projects and shall supplement applicable provisions of Republic Act 
No. 9184 (RA 9184) and its Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) in particular 
Section 17.6 and Annex E.

2. PURPOSE

These guidelines are formulated to determine the conditions for the use of the design and 
build scheme for infrastructure projects and the procedures for the implementation thereof.

3. GUIDING PRINCIPLES

The procuring entity, prior to resorting to the design and build scheme, should consider 
the following advantages and disadvantages of said scheme:

3.1. 
Advantages:

a) 
Since both design and construction are in the hands of the contractor, 
there is a single point of responsibility for quality, cost, and schedule 
adherence, including the risks related to design.  This precludes buck-
passing and finger-pointing between the designer and the builder.

b) 
Because design and construction periods can overlap, the total design 
and construction time, as well as the final project cost, will be significantly 
reduced.

c) 
The procuring entity is assured of quality considering that the larger 
responsibility implicit in the design-build scheme serves as motivation for 
high quality of the facility to be provided. Once the requirements of the 
procuring entity are defined in performance terms, the designer-builder 
is responsible for producing the results accordingly.  The designer-builder 
warrants to the procuring entity that the design documents are complete 
and free from error.

d) 
The procuring entity does not need to spend much time and money in 
seeing to it that the work is done by the contractor exactly as indicated 
by the design documents prepared by the designer, and in coordinating 
and arbitrating between separate design and construction contracts.

3.2. 
Disadvantages:

a) 
Procuring Entities should, however, take into account that in utilizing the 
design and build scheme for a particular project, contractors are given 
too much discretion in determining the project cost and there is difficulty 
in predicting its final cost until the actual commencement of construction.

Page 107 of 149

This, however, can be addressed by prescribing that the bid/contract 
price should not exceed the Approved Budget for Contract (ABC) of the 
procuring entity and that the contract price is a fixed lump sum amount.

b) 
Considering that the extent of the integration of design and construction 
of the project is exceptionally dependent on the contractor, there may be 
cases when the end-result may not be exactly in accordance with what 
the procuring entity has required.  These cases can be avoided if the 
procuring entity adequately defines the output or performance 
specifications and parameters.

4. DEFINITION OF TERMS

a. Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC). This shall be a lump sum amount 
that shall cover the cost of design and construction works (at the option of the 
procuring entity) based on the conceptual design and performance specifications 
and in accordance with applicable provisions of the law or agency guidelines. The 
ABC shall be calculated based on either the approximate quantities of work of the 
conceptual design, from standardized designs or from cost records of previous 
projects of similar kind.

b. Bidding Documents for Design and Build Scheme. These shall basically be 
similar to the Bidding Documents for infrastructure projects and shall also include 
the performance specifications and parameters to be followed by the design and 
build contractors and the method for allocation of risks for the design and build 
contract, among others.

c. 
Conceptual Design. This shall describe the general idea of the procuring entity 
with regard to the completed facility and shall identify the scope or physical 
components and structures, specific outputs and requirements of the structures 
and proposed methods of construction, where necessary.

d. Design and Build Projects.  This refers to infrastructure projects where the 
procuring entity awards a single contract for the architectural/engineering design 
and construction to a single firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or 
consortium.

e. Performance Specifications and Parameters. The procuring entity shall 
define the required performance specifications and criteria and its means of 
measurement based on the operating outputs and in accordance with appropriate 
design and construction standards, legal and technical obligations and any other 
relevant government commitments as required by existing laws and regulations. 
It shall not be drawn up to favor a particular solution, design and construction 
method.

f. 
Preliminary Investigations. These shall include, among others, information on 
soil, geotechnical, hydrologic, hydraulic, seismic, traffic, and environmental 
conditions that shall be used to define project design criteria, to set the basis for 
any changed conditions and establish preliminary project cost estimates.

g. Preliminary Survey and Mapping. These shall determine boundaries and 
provide stationing along control lines to establish feature and design criteria

Page 108 of 149

location, and identify existing and future right-of-way limits and construction 
easements associated with the procuring entity’s conceptual design.

h. Project Description. This shall define the objectives, purpose, limitations or 
constraints, as well as the allocation of risks between the procuring entity and the 
winning bidder.

i. 
Utility Locations. The procuring entity shall provide information on existing 
utilities in and around the project’s area.

5. CONDITIONS FOR THE USE OF THE DESIGN AND BUILD SCHEME

5.1. 
The Design and Build scheme shall be applied under any of the following cases:

a. 
For flagship, priority and fast track projects that need to be completed 
on a tight completion schedule, as included in the Medium Term Public 
Investment Program (MTPIP) for national projects and in the Regional 
Development Investment Plan (RDIP) for regional and provincial 
projects;

b. 
For infrastructure projects requiring advanced engineering or 
construction technologies or whose intellectual property rights belong 
to private companies;

c. 
For infrastructure projects where design, equipment, plant and 
construction can be provided exclusively by a company or where 
manufacturer’s know-how is important in the construction of such 
facility; or

d. 
For small projects where there are previously approved drawings or 
standardized designs and an innovation in design and construction 
methods under the design and build scheme will result in lower costs 
and higher quality projects. Examples of these are school buildings, 
rural health units, among others.

5.2. 
All design and build projects shall be included in the Annual Procurement Plan 
(APP) of the procuring entity concerned and shall be subject to prior approval 
by the Head of the Procuring Entity or his/her duly authorized representative.

6. CREATION OF DESIGN and BUILD COMMITTEE

The procuring entity may create a Design and Build Committee (DBC) composed of 
highly technical personnel experienced in the field of architecture, engineering and 
construction in the particular type of project to be bid. The DBC shall assist the project 
management office (PMO) in the preparation of the conceptual design and 
performance specifications and parameters, review of detailed engineering design and 
supervision of the project. It shall, likewise, assist the Bids and Awards Committee 
(BAC) and the Technical Working Group (TWG) in the evaluation of technical proposals

7. PRELIMINARY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STUDIES

Page 109 of 149

No bidding and award of design and build contracts shall be made unless the required 
preliminary design and construction studies have been sufficiently carried out and duly 
approved by the Head of the Procuring Entity that shall include, among others, the 
following:

i. 
Project Description  
ii. 
Conceptual Design 
iii. 
Performance Specifications and Parameters 
iv. 
Preliminary Survey and Mapping 
v. 
Preliminary Investigations

vi. 
Utility Locations 
vii. 
Approved Budget for the Contract  
viii. Proposed Design and Construction Schedule   
ix. 
Minimum requirements for a Construction Safety and Health Program for the 
project being considered 
x. 
Tender/Bidding Documents, including Instructions to Bidders and Conditions of 
Contract

The above data are for reference only. The procuring entity does not guarantee that 
these data are fully correct, up to date, and applicable to the project at hand. The 
contractor is responsible for the accuracy and applicability of all data, including the 
above, that it will use in its design and build proposal and services.

The acquisition of right-of-way and the conduct of eminent domain proceedings shall 
still be the responsibility of the procuring entity, which shall include a preliminary 
budget for this purpose.

8. DETAILED ENGINEERING REQUIREMENTS

8.1. 
Upon award of the design and build contract, the winning bidder shall be 
responsible for the preparation and submission of all necessary detailed 
engineering investigations, surveys and designs in accordance with the 
provisions of Annex “A” of this IRR (with the exception of the Bidding 
Documents and the ABC).

8.2. 
The procuring entity shall ensure that all the necessary schedules with regard 
to the submission, confirmation and approval of the detailed engineering 
design and the details of the construction methods and procedures shall be 
included in the contract documents.

8.3. 
The procuring entity shall review, order rectification, and approve or disapprove 
– for implementation only - the submitted plans within these schedules. All 
instructions for rectification shall be in writing stating the reasons for such 
rectification. The design and build contractor shall be solely responsible for the 
integrity of the detailed engineering design and the performance of the 
structure irrespective of the approval/confirmation by the procuring entity.

9. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

9.1. 
The eligibility requirements for Design and Build infrastructure projects shall 
comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 23 to 24 of IRR.

Page 110 of 149

9.2. 
A modified set of requirements integrating eligibility documents and criteria for 
infrastructure projects and consulting services shall be adopted, as follows:

i. 
Class “A” Documents (Legal, Technical and Financial Documents) and 
Class “B” Documents

The prospective bidder shall submit all the required Class “A” and 
Class “B” documents for infrastructure projects and the following:

a) 
relevant statements of all on-going, completed, awarded but not 
yet started design/design and build related contracts, curriculum 
vitae of key staff, partners or principal officers; and

b) 
valid licenses issued by the Professional Regulatory Commission 
(PRC) for design professionals.(a)

ii. 
Eligibility Criteria

a) 
The eligibility of design and build contractors shall be based on 
the 
legal, 
technical 
and 
financial 
requirements 
abovementioned. In the technical requirements, the design and 
build contractor (as solo or in joint venture/consortia) should 
be able to comply with the experience requirement under the 
IRR of R.A. 9184, where one of the parties (in a joint 
venture/consortia) should have at least one similar project, 
both in design and construction, with at least 50% of the cost 
of the ABC.

b) 
If the bidder has no experience in design and build projects on 
its own it may enter into subcontracting, partnerships, or joint 
venture with design or engineering firms for the design portion 
of the contract.

c) 
The relevant provisions under Section 23.4.2 of the IRR of R.A, 
9184 on eligibility requirements shall be observed, with the 
following exceptions:

Joint ventures/consortia among Filipino contractors and consultants or 
among Filipino contractors and foreign consultants shall be allowed 
subject to pertinent laws and the relevant provisions of the IRR of R.A. 
9184. The joint venture/consortia shall be jointly and severally 
responsible for the obligations and the civil liabilities arising from the 
design and build contract: Provided, however, That Filipino ownership 
or interest thereof shall be at least seventy five percent (75%): 
Provided further,  That joint ventures/consortia in which Filipino 
ownership or interest is less than seventy-five percent (75%) may be 
eligible where the structures to be built require the application of 
techniques and/or technologies which are not adequately possessed by 
Filipinos and that Filipino ownership or interest shall not be less than 
twenty-five percent (25%): Provided, finally, that when the design 
services in which the joint venture wishes to engage involve the practice 
of professions regulated by law, all those who will actually perform the

Page 111 of 149

services shall be Filipino citizens and registered professionals authorized 
by the appropriate regulatory body to practice those professions and 
allied professions and where foreign designers are required, the foreign 
designer must be authorized by the appropriate Philippine Government 
professional regulatory body to engage in the practice of those 
professions and allied professions.

10. SUBMISSION AND RECEIPT OF BIDS

10.1. In the submission of bids, the first envelope (Technical Proposal) shall contain 
all the required documents for infrastructure projects under Section 25.2(b) of 
the IRR of R.A 9184 and the following additional documents:

i. 
Preliminary Conceptual Design Plans in accordance with the degree of 
details specified by the procuring entity;

ii. 
Design and construction methods;

iii. 
List of design and construction personnel, to be assigned to the contract 
to be bid, with their complete qualification and experience data; and

iv. 
Value engineering analysis of design and construction method.

10.2. The second envelope (Financial Proposal) shall contain all the required 
documents for infrastructure projects under Section 25.38 of the IRR of R.A 
9184 and the following additional documents:

i. 
Lump sum bid prices, which shall include the detailed engineering cost, in 
the prescribed Bid Form;

ii. 
Detailed estimates including a summary sheet indicating the unit prices of 
construction materials, labor rates and equipment rentals used in coming 
up with the bid; and

iii. 
Cash flow by the quarter and payments schedule.

11. BID EVALUATION

For the detailed evaluation of the design and build proposals a two-step procedure 
shall be adopted by the BAC, which may be undertaken with the assistance of the DBC.

11.1. First-Step Procedure:

i. 
The first step of the evaluation shall involve the review of the 
preliminary conceptual designs and track record submitted by the 
contractor as indicated in the Bidding Documents using a non-
discretionary “pass/fail” criteria that involve compliance with the 
following requirements:

8 Ibid.

Page 112 of 149

a. 
Adherence of preliminary design plans to the  required   
performance specifications and parameters and degree of 
details;

b. 
Concept of approach and methodology for detailed engineering, 
design and construction with emphasis on the clarity, feasibility, 
innovativeness and comprehensiveness of the plan approach, 
and the quality of interpretation of project problems, risks, and 
suggested solutions;

c. 
Quality of personnel to be assigned to the project which covers 
suitability of key staff to perform the duties of the particular 
assignments and general qualifications and competence 
including education and training of the key staff;

ii. 
For complex or unique undertakings, such as those involving highly 
specialized or advanced engineering technology, eligible bidders may 
be required, at the option of the agency concerned, to make an oral 
presentation within fifteen (15) calendar days after the deadline for 
submission of technical proposals.

11.2. Second-Step Procedure:

Only those bids that passed the above criteria shall be subjected to the 
second step of evaluation.

The BAC shall open the financial proposal of each “passed” bidder and shall 
evaluate it using non-discretionary criteria - including arithmetical corrections 
for computational errors - as stated in the Bidding Documents, and thus 
determine the correct total calculated bid prices. The BAC shall automatically 
disqualify any total calculated bid price which exceeds the ABC. The total 
calculated bid prices (not exceeding the ABC) shall be ranked, in ascending 
order, from lowest to highest. The bid with the lowest total calculated bid price 
shall be identified as the Lowest Calculated Bid (LCB).

12. POST-QUALIFICATION and AWARD OF THE CONTRACT

12.1. The LCB shall be subject to post-qualification in accordance with Section 34, 
Rule X of this IRR to determine its responsiveness to the eligibility and bid 
requirements. If after post-qualification the Lowest Calculated Bid is 
determined to be post-qualified it shall be considered the Lowest Calculated 
and Responsive Bid (LCRB) and the contract shall be awarded to the bidder. In 
case of post-disqualification of the LCB, the procedure under Section 34 shall 
also be followed.

12.2. The Head of the Procuring Entity shall approve or disapprove the 
recommendations of the BAC within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) 
calendar days from the determination and declaration by the BAC of the LCRB.

12.3. The Head of the Procuring Entity concerned shall award the contract to the 
said bidder pursuant to the provisions of Section 37, Rule XI of this IRR.

Page 113 of 149

13. CONTRACT IMPLEMENTATION

As a rule, contract implementation guidelines for the procurement of infrastructure 
projects shall comply with Annex “E” of this IRR. The following provisions shall 
supplement these procedures:

13.1. No works shall commence unless the contractor has submitted the required 
documentary requirements and the procuring entity has given written approval. 
Work execution shall be in accordance with reviewed and approved documents.

13.2. The contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary information as 
to risks, contingencies and other circumstances which may affect the works 
and shall prepare and submit all necessary documents specified by the 
procuring entity to meet all regulatory approvals as specified in the contract 
documents.

13.3. The Contractor shall submit a detailed program of work within fourteen (14) 
calendar days after the issuance of the Notice to Proceed for approval by the 
procuring entity that shall include, among others:

i. 
The order in which it intends to carry out the work including anticipated 
timing for each stage of design/detailed engineering and construction;

ii. 
Periods for review of specific outputs and any other submissions and 
approvals;

iii. 
Sequence of timing for inspections and tests as specified in the contract 
documents;

iv. 
General description of the design and construction methods to be 
adopted;

v. 
Number and names of personnel to be assigned for each stage of the 
work;

vi. 
List of equipment required on site for each major stage of the work; 
and

vii. 
Description of the quality control system to be utilized for the project.

13.4. Any errors, omissions, inconsistencies, inadequacies or failure submitted by the 
contractor that do not comply with the requirements shall be rectified, 
resubmitted and reviewed at the contractor’s cost. If the Contractor wishes to 
modify any design or document which has been previously submitted, reviewed 
and approved, the contractor shall notify the procuring entity within a 
reasonable period of time and shall shoulder the cost of such changes.

13.5. As a rule, changes in design and construction requirements shall be limited only 
to those that have not been anticipated in the contract documents prior to 
contract signing and approval. The following guidelines shall govern approval 
for change or variation orders:

Page 114 of 149

i. 
Change Orders resulting from design errors, omissions or non-
conformance with the performance specifications and parameters and 
the contract documents by the contractor shall be implemented by the 
contractor at no additional cost to the procuring entity.

ii. 
Provided that the contractor suffers delay and/or incurs costs due to 
changes or errors in the procuring entity’s performance specifications 
and parameters, he shall be entitled to either one of the following:

a. an extension of time for any such delays under Section 10 of Annex 
“E”; or

b. payment for such costs as specified in the contract documents, 
provided, that the cumulative amount of the variation order does 
not exceed ten percent (10%) of the original contract price.

13.6. The contract documents shall include the manner and schedule of payment 
specifying the estimated contract amount and installments in which the 
contract price will be paid.

13.7. The contractor shall be entitled to advance payment subject to the provisions 
of Section 4 of Annex “E”.

13.8. The procuring entity shall define the quality control procedures for the design 
and construction in accordance with agency guidelines and shall issue the 
proper certificates of acceptance for sections of the works or the whole of the 
works as provided for in the contract documents.

13.9. The contractor shall provide all necessary equipment, personnel, instruments, 
documents and others to carry out specified tests.

13.10. All design and build projects shall have a minimum Defects Liability Period of 
one (1) year after contract completion or as provided for in the contract 
documents. This is without prejudice, however, to the liabilities imposed upon 
the engineer/architect who drew up the plans and specification for a building 
sanctioned under Article 1723 of the New Civil Code of the Philippines.

13.11. The contractor shall be held liable for design and structural defects and/or 
failure of the completed project within the warranty periods specified in Section 
62.2.3.2 of the IRR.

14. AMENDMENTS AND FORMS

In the implementation of these guidelines, the GPPB may issue additional guidelines 
or introduce modifications thereto through the amendment of its specific provisions 
as the need arises, as well as, formulate, approve and disseminate standard Bidding 
Documents, forms and evaluation documents, whenever necessary.

Page 115 of 149

ANNEX “H”

CONSOLIDATED GUIDELINES  
FOR THE ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT

I. POLICY STATEMENT

As a general rule, all procurement shall be through Competitive Bidding. However, 
whenever justified by the conditions provided in Republic Act No. (R.A.) 9184 and its revised 
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), the Procuring Entity may, in order to promote 
economy and efficiency, resort to any of the alternative methods of procurement provided in 
Rule XVI of the IRR of R.A. 9184.

The Alternative Methods of Procurement shall be resorted to only in the highly 
exceptional cases provided for in this Guidelines and subject to the prior approval of the Head 
of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) upon recommendation of the Bids and Awards Committee 
(BAC). In all instances, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the most advantageous price for 
the Government is obtained.

II. PURPOSE

This Guidelines is formulated by the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) to 
provide a single source of information for Alternative Methods of Procurement commonly 
resorted to by procuring entities; and to prescribe the terms, conditions, rules and procedures 
for covered Alternative Methods of Procurement for Goods, Infrastructure Projects, and 
Consulting Services.

III. SCOPE

This Guidelines shall apply to the national government, its branches, constitutional 
offices, departments, bureaus, offices and agencies, including state universities and colleges, 
government-owned and/or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and 
local government units.

Excluded from this Guidelines are the following:

A. Infrastructure projects undertaken through the Armed Forces of the Philippines 
Corps of Engineers (AFPCOE), for purposes of Sections 53.2 (Emergency Cases) and 
53.5 (Agency-to-Agency) of the IRR of R.A. 9184, which shall continue to be governed 
by the Guidelines on the Implementation of Infrastructure Projects Undertaken by the 
AFP Corps of Engineers under GPPB Resolution No. 09-2005.

B. Limited Source Bidding under Section 49, Negotiated Procurement under Sections 
53.8 (Defense Cooperation Agreement), 53.11 (NGO Participation), 53.12 (Community 
Participation), and 53.13 (UN Agencies).

IV. GENERAL GUIDELINES

Page 116 of 149

A. Annual Procurement Plan (APP). The method of procurement, e.g., competitive 
bidding or any of the alternative methods of procurement, to be utilized by the 
Procuring Entity shall be indicated in the APP to be approved by the HOPE.  If the 
original mode of procurement in the APP cannot be ultimately pursued, the BAC 
assisted by its Secretariat, the Technical Working Group, and by the appropriate End-
User or relevant office, as the case may be, shall justify and recommend through a 
BAC Resolution such change in the mode of procurement to be approved by the HOPE. 
The changes must be reflected in the APP and submitted to the GPPB in accordance 
with Section 7.4 of the IRR of R.A. 9184.

B. Prohibition on Splitting of Government Contracts9. Splitting of Government 
Contracts, which means the division or breaking up of government contracts into 
smaller quantities and amounts, or dividing contract implementation into artificial 
phases or sub-contracts for the purpose of evading or circumventing the requirements 
of R.A. 9184 and its IRR, particularly the necessity of competitive bidding and the 
requirements for the alternative methods of procurement, is prohibited.

For infrastructure projects to be implemented by phases, the Procuring Entity shall 
ensure that there is a clear delineation of work for each phase, which must be usable 
and structurally sound. It shall also ensure the conduct of the detailed engineering 
activities for each phase as provided for in Annex “A” of the IRR of R.A. 9184.

C. Unnecessary, Excessive, Extravagant and Unconscionable Expenditures. 
The Procuring Entity shall ensure that the objectives and purpose of the contract do 
not constitute an unnecessary, excessive, extravagant, or unconscionable expenditure.

D. Confidentiality of Bidding Documents. The procurement documents are strictly 
confidential and shall not be divulged or released to any person prior to the 
advertisement or posting of the procurement opportunity, except to those officially 
authorized in the handling of these documents.

However, in procurements involving and affecting national security, the disclosure of 
procurement documents shall be dependent upon the HOPE having due regard to the 
nature, classification, sensitivity and confidentiality of the relevant documents vis-à-vis 
the purpose and reason for the request.

E. Advertisement and Posting of Procurement Opportunity10. For alternative 
methods of procurement, the Procuring Entity may dispense with the advertisement in 
the newspaper and posting requirement as prescribed in Section 21.2.1 of the IRR of 
R.A. 9184.

For the following alternative methods, however, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall 
post the procurement opportunity [e.g., Request for Quotation (RFQ) or Request for 
Proposal (RFP)] in the Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System 
(PhilGEPS) website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at 
any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity 
for a period of at least three (3) calendar days:

1) Section 52.1(b) – Shopping for ordinary office supplies and equipment not 
available in the Department of Budget and Management-Procurement

9 Section 54.1, IRR of R.A. 9184. 
10 Section 54.2, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 117 of 149

Service (DBM-PS), for projects with Approved Budget for the Contract 
(ABC) above Fifty Thousand Pesos ( 50,000.00); 
2) Section 53.1 – Two Failed Biddings; and 
3) Section 53.9 – Small Value Procurement, for projects with ABC above Fifty 
Thousand Pesos ( 50,000.00);

F. Documentary Requirements. The mandatory documents to be submitted by 
suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, contractors and consultants are enumerated in 
Appendix A of this Guidelines.

G. PhilGEPS Registration11. Manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors, 
and/or consultants are mandated to register with the PhilGEPS and provide a PhilGEPS 
Registration number in the following alternative methods of procurement as a 
condition for award of the contract:

1) Section 50 – Direct Contracting; 
2) Section 52.1(b) – Shopping for ordinary office supplies and equipment not 
available in DBM-PS; 
3) Section 53.3 – Take Over of Contracts (Only for New Bidders, if any.); 
4) Section 53.6 – Scientific, Scholarly or Artistic Work, Exclusive Technology 
and Media Services; 
5) Section 53.7 – Highly Technical Consultants; 
6) Section 53.9 – Small Value Procurement; and 
7) Section 53.10 – Lease of Real Property and Venue.

For purposes of Negotiated Procurement under Section 53.1 (Two Failed Biddings), 
the BAC shall require the submission of a Certificate of PhilGEPS Registration in 
accordance with Section 8.5.2 of the IRR of R.A. 9184.

H. Observers. For Negotiated Procurement under Section 53.1 (Two-Failed Biddings), 
observers shall be invited in accordance with Section 13 of the IRR of R.A. 9184. For 
other alternative methods of procurement, observers may be invited by the Procuring 
Entity as it may deem necessary.

I. Reference to Brand Names12.  Specifications for the procurement of Goods shall 
be based on relevant characteristics, functionality and/or performance requirements.  
Reference to brand names shall not be allowed except for items or parts that are 
compatible with the existing fleet or equipment of the same make and brand and will 
maintain the performance, functionality and useful life of the equipment. This rule shall 
also apply to the goods component of infrastructure projects and consulting services.

J. Delegation of Authority. The conduct of Shopping and Negotiated Procurement 
under Emergency Cases, Small Value Procurement and Lease of Real Property and 
Venue may be delegated to the End-user unit or any other appropriate bureau, 
committee, or support unit duly authorized by the BAC through a Resolution approved 
by the HOPE.

For Shopping under Section 52.1(a) and Negotiated Procurement under Emergency 
Cases, due to the urgent nature of the attendant circumstances, the BAC and the HOPE 
through a Resolution and Office Order, respectively, may delegate to specific officials,

11 Section 54.6, IRR of R.A. 9184. 
12 Section 18, R.A. 9184 and its IRR.

Page 118 of 149

personnel, committee or office in the Procuring Entity the conduct of Shopping and 
award of contract to efficiently and expeditiously deal with the emergency sought to 
be addressed.

For record and monitoring purposes, all awards shall be immediately reported with all 
supporting documents to the HOPE, through the BAC, to ensure compliance with all 
the conditions and requirements provided for under R.A. 9184, its IRR and related 
guidelines.

K. Mandatory Review. The BAC shall conduct a mandatory review and evaluation of 
the terms, conditions, specifications, cost estimates in the RFQ or RFP, if none or less 
than the required number of quotations or proposals are received, despite the 
extension of deadline for the third time.

Based on its findings, the BAC may revise the terms and conditions and specifications, 
and if necessary, adjust the ABC, subject to the required approvals, and repeat the 
procurement process.

L. Notice of Award; Contact Approval; Notice to Proceed.

1) Except in Shopping, and Negotiated Procurement through Emergency 
Cases, Agency-to-Agency and Small Value Procurement, the following 
procedures shall apply in the issuance of the Notice of Award (NOA), 
Contract/Purchase Order (PO) and Notice to Proceed (NTP) for the 
Alternative Methods of Procurement identified in this Guidelines, thus:

a. The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract. 
Within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days from 
receipt, the HOPE shall approve or disapprove the BAC’s 
recommendation. In case of approval, the HOPE shall immediately 
issue the NOA to the Supplier, Contractor or Consultant.  In the 
event the HOPE shall disapprove the recommendation, such 
disapproval shall be based only on valid, reasonable, and justifiable 
grounds to be expressed in writing, addressed to the BAC.

b. The Supplier, Contractor or Consultant shall immediately enter into 
contract with the Procuring Entity upon receipt of the NOA. Upon 
transmission of the signed contract/PO, the HOPE or his duly 
authorized representative shall immediately sign the contract/PO 
provided that all the relevant documentary requirements are 
submitted.

c. The HOPE or his duly authorized representative shall issue the NTP, 
if necessary, and a copy of the approved contract to the Supplier, 
Contractor or Consultant within three (3) calendar days from the 
date of approval of the contract by the appropriate government 
approving authority.

2) Posting of Notice of Award, Contract and Notice to Proceed13. 
Unless the contract involves and affects national security as determined by 
the HOPE in accordance with Section IV(D) of this Guidelines, the BAC,

13 Section 54.3, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 119 of 149

through its Secretariat, shall post the NOA, Contract/PO, including the NTP 
if necessary, for information purposes, in the PhilGEPS website, the website 
of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any conspicuous 
place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity 
within ten (10) days from their issuance, except for contracts with ABC of 
Fifty Thousand Pesos ( 50,000.00) and below.

M. Bid, Performance and Warranty Securities14.

Bid security may be dispensed with. However, performance and/or warranty securities 
are required for the following alternative methods of procurement, in accordance with 
Sections 39 and 62 of the IRR as summarized below:

Alternative Method 
of Procurement 
Performance 
Security  
(PS) 
Warranty Security  
(WS) 
Direct Contracting 
x 
 
Repeat Order 
x 
 
Two-Failed Biddings 
 
 
In no case shall WS be 
required in the 
procurement of 
Consulting Services.  
Emergency Cases  
Procuring Entity may 
require PS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
However, for 
Infrastructure 
Projects, PS is 
required. 
Procuring Entity may 
require WS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
In no case shall WS be 
required in the 
procurement of 
Consulting Services.  
Take-over of Contracts 
 
 
Adjacent/Contiguous 
 
For Infrastructure 
Projects, WS is required. 
Small Value 
Procurement 
Procuring Entity may 
require PS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
However, for 
Infrastructure 
Projects, PS is 
required. 
Procuring Entity may 
require WS depending 
on the nature of the 
procurement project. 
In no case shall WS be 
required in the 
procurement of 
Consulting Services.

N. Blacklisting. Suspension or blacklisting of suppliers, contractors, or consultants 
shall be made in accordance with the Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting of 
Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors, and Consultants.  A suspended or 
blacklisted supplier, contractor or consultant shall not be allowed to participate in all 
procurement opportunities of the government for the duration of the suspension or 
blacklisting, regardless of the modality of procurement employed by the Procuring 
Entity.

14 Sections 54.4 and 54.5, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 120 of 149

V. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES

A. DIRECT CONTRACTING

1. Definition. Direct Contracting or single source procurement is a method of 
procurement of goods that does not require elaborate Bidding Documents.  The 
supplier is simply asked to submit a price quotation or a pro-forma invoice together 
with the conditions of sale. The offer may be accepted immediately or after some 
negotiations.  Direct Contracting may be resorted to under any of the following 
conditions:

a) Procurement of goods of proprietary nature which can be obtained only from 
the proprietary source, i.e., when patents, trade secrets, and copyrights 
prohibit others from manufacturing the same item;

b) When the procurement of critical components from a specific supplier is a 
condition precedent to hold a contractor to guarantee its project performance,

c) Those sold by an exclusive dealer or manufacturer which does not have sub-
dealers selling at lower prices and for which no suitable substitute can be 
obtained at more advantageous terms to the government.

To justify the need to procure through the Direct Contracting method, the End-User 
should conduct a survey of the industry and determine the supply source. In all cases 
where Direct Contracting is contemplated, the survey must be conducted prior to the 
commencement of the procurement process. Moreover, the End-User must justify the 
necessity for an item that may only be procured through Direct Contracting, and it 
must be able to prove that there is no suitable substitute in the market that can be 
obtained at more advantageous terms.

2. Procedure

a) The BAC shall prepare the RFQ or pro-forma invoice together with the terms 
and conditions of sale, and shall send the same to the identified direct supplier.

b) Simplified negotiations on the terms and conditions of the contract may be 
conducted by the BAC to ensure that the supplier is technically, legally and 
financially capable to deliver the goods at the most advantageous price and 
contract for the Government.

c) The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of the 
supplier. Award of contract shall be made in accordance with Section IV(L) of 
this Guidelines.

B. REPEAT ORDER

15 Section 50, R.A. 9184 and its IRR. 
16 Section 51, R.A. 9184 and its IRR.

Page 121 of 149

1. Definition. Repeat Order is a method of procurement of goods from the previous 
winning bidder, whenever there is a need to replenish goods subject to the following 
conditions:

a) The goods were procured under a contract previously awarded through 
Competitive Bidding;

b) Unit prices must be the same as or lower than those in the original contract, 
provided that such prices are still the most advantageous to the government after 
price verification;

c) The repeat order will not result in splitting of contracts, requisitions, or 
purchase orders, as provided for in Article IV(B) of this Guidelines;

d) Except in cases duly approved by the GPPB, repeat orders shall be availed of 
only within six (6) months from the date of the NTP arising from the original 
contract, provided that there has been a partial delivery, inspection and acceptance 
of the goods within the same period;

e) Repeat orders shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the quantity of 
each item in the original contract. In order not to exceed the 25% threshold, the 
goods under the original contract must be:

i. 
Quantifiable; 
ii. 
Divisible; and 
iii. 
Consisting of at least four (4) units per item.

2. Procedure

a) Upon determination of the need to replenish the goods earlier procured through 
competitive bidding, the End-User unit shall prepare the necessary Purchase 
Request for the procurement of additional goods, after a careful study and 
confirmation of the prevailing market price of the goods to be re-ordered and 
comparing this with the price of the goods in the original contract, accompanied 
by the appropriate justification why the re-ordering is being pursued.

b) When all the conditions are present, the BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the 
award of contract through Repeat Order. Award of contract shall be made in 
accordance with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.

C. SHOPPING17

1. Definition. Shopping is a method of procurement of goods whereby the Procuring 
Entity simply requests for the submission of price quotations for readily available off-
the-shelf goods or ordinary/regular equipment to be procured directly from suppliers 
of known qualifications.  This method of procurement shall be employed in any of the 
following cases:

a) When there is an unforeseen contingency requiring immediate purchase, the 
amount shall not exceed the following:

17 Section 52, R.A. 9184 and its IRR.

Page 122 of 149

i. 
For NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional Government, Two 
Hundred Thousand Pesos ( 200,000)

ii. 
For LGUs, in accordance with the following schedule:

DOF 
Classification 
of LGUs 
Maximum Amount  (in Philippine Peso) 
Province 
City 
Municipality 
1st Class 
2nd Class 
3rd Class 
4th Class 
5th Class 
6th Class

In the case of barangays, Fifty Thousand Pesos ( 50,000).

b) Procurement of ordinary or regular office supplies and equipment not available 
in the DBM-PS, in the amount not to exceed the following:

i. 
For NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional Government, One 
Million Pesos ( 1,000,000)

ii. 
For LGUs, in accordance with the following schedule:

DOF 
Classification 
of LGUs 
Maximum Amount  (in Philippine Peso) 
Province 
City 
Municipality 
1st Class 
2nd Class 
3rd Class 
4th Class 
5th Class 
6th Class

In the case of barangays, Fifty Thousand Pesos ( 50,000).

The phrase “ordinary or regular office supplies” shall be understood to include those 
supplies, commodities, or materials which are necessary in the transaction of its official 
businesses, and consumed in the day-to-day office operations. However, office 
supplies shall not include services such as repair and maintenance of equipment and 
furniture, as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related or analogous 
services.

2. Procedure

a) Shopping under Section 52.1(a)

i. 
The End-User unit or the duly authorized official or personnel shall submit 
a purchase request to the BAC indicating the urgency to address an 
identified need of the Procuring Entity and the unforeseen contingency that 
caused its necessity.

Page 123 of 149

ii. 
The BAC shall immediately prepare the RFQ, indicating the specifications, 
quantity, ABC, and other terms and conditions of the contract.

iii. 
The RFQ may be sent directly to the supplier of known technical, legal and 
financial qualifications. Due to the attendant circumstances and the urgency 
of the procurement, the supplier shall immediately respond to the RFQ and 
signify its technical, legal and financial capability to supply and deliver the 
goods to be procured. Posting of the RFQ may be dispensed with.

iv. 
The BAC shall immediately validate the technical, legal and financial 
capability of the supplier to supply and deliver the goods by requiring the 
submission of relevant documents or through other verifiable means to 
prove the capability of the Supplier.

v. 
Upon confirmation and ascertainment of such capability, the BAC shall 
recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of the supplier with 
the Single or Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation. In case of 
approval, the HOPE shall immediately enter into a contract with the said 
supplier.

b) Shopping under Section 52.1(b)

i. 
The End-User unit or the duly authorized official or personnel shall submit 
a purchase request to the BAC relative to the goods to be procured through 
Shopping.

ii. 
The BAC shall prepare the RFQ, indicating the specifications, quantity, ABC, 
and other terms and conditions of the contract.

iii. 
Except for those with ABCs equal to Fifty Thousand Pesos (  50,000.00) 
and below, RFQs shall be posted for a period of at least three (3) calendar 
days in the PhilGEPS website, website of the Procuring Entity, if available, 
and at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of 
the Procuring Entity.

iv. 
The BAC shall send the RFQs to at least three (3) suppliers of known 
qualifications, and at least three (3) price quotations must be obtained. 
This, notwithstanding, those who responded through any of the required 
postings shall be allowed to participate.

v. 
The deadline for submission may be extended thrice, if none or less than 
the required number of quotations are received.  For ABCs more than Fifty 
Thousand Pesos ( 50,000.00), extensions of deadline shall likewise be 
posted for a period of three (3) calendar days in the PhilGEPS, the website 
of the Procuring Entity, if any, and at any conspicuous place in the Procuring 
Entity’s premises. In case no supplier responded after the third extension, 
the BAC shall conduct a mandatory review in accordance with Section IV(K) 
of this Guidelines.

vi. 
Upon receipt of at least three (3) quotations within the prescribed deadline, 
the BAC shall prepare an Abstract of Quotations setting forth the names of

Page 124 of 149

those who responded to the RFQ, their corresponding price quotations, and 
the lowest calculated quotation submitted.

vii. 
The BAC shall validate the technical, legal and financial capability of the 
supplier to supply and deliver the goods.

viii. 
Upon confirmation and ascertainment of such capability, the BAC shall 
recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of the supplier with 
the Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation. In case of approval, the 
HOPE shall immediately enter into a contract with the said supplier.

D. NEGOTIATED PROCUREMENT18. Negotiated Procurement is a method of 
procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services, whereby the 
Procuring Entity directly negotiates a contract with a technically, legally and financially 
capable supplier, contractor or consultant in any of the following cases:

1. TWO FAILED BIDDINGS19

a) Definition. Where there has been failure of competitive bidding or Limited 
Source Bidding for the second time as provided for in Section 35 of RA 9184 and 
its IRR, when:

i. 
No bids are received;

ii. 
All prospective bidders are declared ineligible;

iii. 
All bids fail to comply with all the bid requirements or fail post-qualification, 
or, in the case of consulting services, there is no successful negotiation; or

iv. 
The bidder with the Lowest/Single Calculated Responsive Bid or 
Highest/Single Rated Responsive Bid refuses, without justifiable cause, to 
accept the award of contract, and no award is made in accordance with 
Section 40 of RA 9184 and its IRR.

b) Procedures

i. 
After conduct of the mandatory review of the terms, conditions, 
specifications, and cost estimates, as prescribed in Section 35 of the 
IRR, the BAC, based on its findings, as assisted by its Secretariat, TWG 
and End-User unit may revise and agree on the technical, legal and 
financial eligibility requirements and technical specifications or terms of 
reference, and if necessary, adjust the ABC, subject to the required 
approvals. However, the ABC cannot be increased by more than twenty 
percent (20%) of the ABC for the last failed bidding.

ii. 
The BAC shall invite at least three (3) suppliers, contractors or 
consultants, including those disqualified in previous biddings for the 
project, for negotiations to ensure effective competition. This, 
notwithstanding, those who responded through any of the required 
postings shall be allowed to participate. Even if only one (1) bidder

18 Section 53, R.A. 9184 and its IRR. 
19 Section 53.1, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 125 of 149

should respond to such invitation or posting, the BAC shall proceed with 
the negotiation subject to the rules prescribed hereunder.

iii. 
Any requirements, guidelines, documents, clarifications, or other 
information relative to the negotiations that are communicated by the 
BAC to a supplier, contractor, or consultant shall be communicated on 
an equal basis to all other suppliers, contractors, or consultants 
engaging in negotiations with the BAC relative to the procurement. The 
prospective bidders shall be given equal time and opportunity to 
negotiate and discuss the technical and financial requirements of the 
project to be able to submit a responsive quotation or proposal.

iv. 
Following completion of the negotiations, the BAC shall request all 
suppliers, contractors, or consultants in the proceedings to submit, on 
a specified date, a best offer based on the final technical and financial 
requirements. Pursuant to Section IV(G) of this Guidelines, the 
Procuring Entity shall require the submission of a Certificate of PhilGEPS 
Registration in accordance with Section 8.5.2 of the IRR of RA 9184.

v. 
The BAC shall recommend award of contract to the HOPE in favor of 
the supplier, contractor or consultant determined to have the Single or 
Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation (for goods and 
infrastructure projects) or Single or Highest Rated and Responsive 
Proposal (for consulting services). Award of contract shall be made in 
accordance with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.

2. EMERGENCY CASES20.

Instances when Negotiated Procurement under Emergency Cases may be resorted to:

i. 
In case of imminent danger to life or property during a state of calamity, 
or

ii. 
When time is of the essence arising from natural or man-made calamities 
or

iii. 
Other causes where immediate action is necessary:

a) to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or 
b) to restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other 
public utilities.

In all instances of Negotiated Procurement under this Section, the HOPE shall 
confirm in writing the existence and veracity of the ground or grounds relied 
upon before approving the ensuing contract.

Considering that the underlying reason to support a Negotiated Procurement 
through the Emergency modality relates to “time element” as when there is – 
a) imminent danger to life or property; or, b) when time is of the essence; or, 
c) immediate action is necessary, the Procuring Entity, through the HOPE, BAC,

20 Section 53.2, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 126 of 149

its Secretariat and End-User unit, should consider appropriate timing or the 
proximity of time between the actual procurement activity to be conducted and 
the emergency sought to be addressed, such that when the reason or cause 
for the emergency has already been abated, adoption of competitive bidding 
as the primary mode of procurement shall be considered.

When the ground is based on imminent danger to life during a state of calamity, 
there must be a declaration by a competent authority of a state of calamity 
pursuant to existing laws, rules and regulations before any procurement activity 
may be undertaken.21

b) Procedure

i. 
The End-User unit or the duly authorized official or personnel shall submit 
a request to the BAC or the HOPE, as the case may be, accompanied by 
appropriate supporting documents identifying the emergency sought to be 
addressed, and the necessary goods, civil works or consulting services 
(e.g., Technical Specifications, Scope of Work or Terms of Reference) that 
have to be procured to address the emergency.

ii. 
Upon preparation of the appropriate procurement documents, the BAC may 
directly negotiate with a supplier, contractor or consultant with technical, 
legal and financial capability to deliver the goods, execute the works and 
perform the services to address the emergency. Upon confirmation and 
ascertainment of such capability to address the emergency, the HOPE, 
upon recommendation of the BAC, shall immediately award the contract to 
the Supplier, Contractor or Consultant.

3. TAKE-OVER OF CONTRACTS

Instances when the takeover of contracts may be resorted to:

i. The contract, previously awarded through Competitive Bidding, has 
been rescinded or terminated for causes provided for in the contract 
and existing laws; and

ii. Where immediate action is necessary:

a) to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, or

b) to restore vital public services, infrastructure facilities and other 
public utilities.

b) Procedure

i. 
The BAC shall post-qualify and negotiate with the second lowest 
calculated/highest rated bidder for the project under consideration at the 
said bidder’s own original bid price, applicable to the remaining works to 
be done. Authority to negotiate contracts for projects under the foregoing

21 Section 16, R.A. 10121. 
22 Section 53.3, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 127 of 149

exceptional cases shall be subject to prior approval by the HOPE concerned, 
within their respective limits of approving authority.

ii. 
If negotiation fails, then the BAC shall post-qualify and negotiate with the 
next lowest calculated/highest rated bidder at the said bidder’s own original 
bid price.

iii. 
If the negotiation fails another time, the process is repeated until all the 
bidders from the previous bidding have been considered.

iv. 
If the negotiation fails and there is no bidder left from the previous bidding 
or if the original awardee is a Single Calculated Responsive Bidder/Single 
Rated Responsive Bidder, the BAC may either invite at least three (3) 
suppliers/contractors/consultants to submit their bids, or resort to any 
other appropriate alternative method of procurement.

v. 
In case of successful post-qualification and negotiation, the BAC shall 
recommend to the HOPE the award of contract with the said supplier, 
contractor or consultant. Award of contract shall be made in accordance 
with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.

4. ADJACENT OR CONTIGUOUS23

a) Definition. Where the subject contract is adjacent or contiguous to an on-
going Infrastructure Project or Consulting Service where the consultants have 
unique experience and expertise to deliver the required service, subject to the 
following conditions:

i. 
Original contract is the result of a Competitive Bidding;

ii. 
Subject contract to be negotiated has similar or related scopes of work;

iii. 
It is within the contracting capacity of the contractor/consultant considering 
the legal, technical (e.g., PCAB license, SLCC) and financial (e.g., NFCC for 
the contiguous project) requirements for eligibility;

iv. 
In determining the SLCC, NFCC and PCAB license, the sum of the value of 
the remaining works for the existing contract and the ABC of the contiguous 
or adjacent work shall be considered;

v. 
The contractor/consultant uses the same prices or lower unit prices as in 
the original contract less mobilization cost;

vi. 
The ABC of the contiguous or adjacent work involved does not exceed the 
contract amount of the ongoing project;

vii. 
The contractor/consultant has no negative slippage/delay in the original 
contract during the time of negotiation; and

viii. 
Negotiations for the procurement are commenced before the expiry of the 
original contract.

23 Section 53.4, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 128 of 149

In infrastructure projects, the phrase “adjacent or contiguous” refers to projects 
that are in actual physical contact with each other or in the immediate vicinity such 
that the required equipment and other resources can easily be mobilized; while in 
consulting services, it pertains to the linkage or relationship of the subject matters, 
outputs or deliverables required.

If there is a necessity to introduce new items which are related to the scope of 
work of the original contract, the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the unit prices 
of the new items are equal to or lower than the prevailing market prices.

b) Procedure

i. 
The BAC shall negotiate with the contractor or consultant for the ongoing 
infrastructure project or consulting services (e.g., scope of work or terms 
of reference, unit price and other terms and conditions of the contract).

ii. 
In case of successful negotiation, the BAC shall recommend to the HOPE 
the award of contract in favor of the contractor or consultant. Award of 
contract shall be made in accordance with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.

5. AGENCY-TO-AGENCY

a) Definition. Procurement from another agency of the government (i.e., 
Servicing Agency) that has the mandate to deliver goods or services or to 
undertake infrastructure projects or consultancy services as required by the 
Procuring Entity.

Agency-to-Agency Agreements shall be governed by the Guidelines, unless 
otherwise provided by a special law, such as in the case of Procurement of Printing 
Services from Recognized Government Printers and Procurement of Common-use 
Supplies and Equipment from the DBM-PS.

All procurement to be undertaken by the Servicing Agency, including those 
required for the project, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of R.A.

All projects undertaken through Agency-to-Agency Agreements shall be subject to 
pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules and regulations.

b) Conditions. It is the general policy of government to purchase its requirements 
from the private sector. However, it acknowledges that, in some exceptional cases, 
procurement from another agency of the government is more efficient and 
economical for the government, subject to the following conditions:

i. 
The Procuring Entity shall justify that entering into an Agency-to-Agency 
Agreement with the Servicing Agency is more efficient and economical to 
the government;

24 Section 53.5, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 129 of 149

ii. 
Servicing Agency has the mandate to deliver the goods and services 
required to be procured or to undertake the infrastructure project or 
consultancy required by the Procuring Agency;

iii. 
Servicing Agency has the absorptive capacity to undertake the project;

iv. 
Servicing Agency owns or has access to the necessary tools and equipment 
required for the project;

v. 
Sub-contracting is not allowed. However, the servicing agency may 
implement the infrastructure project in-house, by job-order, or through the 
pakyaw contracting system; and

vi. 
For procurement of infrastructure projects, the Servicing Agency must have 
a track record of having completed, or supervised a project, by 
administration or by contract, similar to and with a cost of at least fifty 
percent (50%) of the project at hand.

c) Procedure

i. 
The End-User unit shall justify to the BAC that the resort to Agency-to-
Agency is more efficient and economical to the government.

ii. 
It shall likewise secure a certificate from the relevant officer of the Servicing 
Agency that the latter complies with all the foregoing conditions.

iii. 
Based on the assessment and recommendation of the End-User unit, the 
BAC shall issue a Resolution recommending the use of Agency-to-Agency 
Agreement to the HOPE.

iv. 
In case of approval, the HOPE shall enter into a Memorandum of Agreement 
(MOA) with the Servicing Agency.

6. SCIENTIFIC, SCHOLARLY OR ARTISTIC WORK, EXCLUSIVE TECHNOLOGY 
AND MEDIA SERVICES25.

a) Definition. Where Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services can 
be contracted to a particular supplier, contractor, or consultant as determined by 
the HOPE, for any of the following reasons:

i. The requirement is for:

a) Work of art; commissioned work or services of an artist for specific 
artistic skills (e.g., singer, performer, poet, writer, painter, sculptor, 
etc.)

b) Scientific, academic, scholarly work or research, or legal services;

c) Highly-specialized life-saving medical equipment, as certified by the 
Department of Health;

25 Section 53.6, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 130 of 149

d) Scientific, technical, economic, business, trade or legal journal, 
magazine, paper, subscription, or other exclusive statistical 
publications and references; or

e) Media documentation, advertisement, or announcement through 
television, radio, newspaper, internet, and other communication 
media.

Due to the nature of the information to be disseminated, alongside 
principles of transparency, efficiency and economy, award to more 
than one (1) supplier may be made by the Procuring Entity.

ii. The construction or installation of an infrastructure facility where the 
material, equipment, or technology under a proprietary right can only 
be obtained from the same contractor.

To justify the need to procure through this negotiated modality, the End-User shall 
conduct a market study and determine the probable sources. This study should 
confirm that the supplier, contractor or consultant could undertake the project at 
more advantageous terms. In all cases, the market study must be conducted prior 
to the commencement of the procurement process.

b) Procedure

i. 
The BAC shall undertake the negotiation with a technically, legally and 
financially capable supplier, contractor or consultant based on the 
Technical Specifications, Scope of Work or Terms of Reference prepared 
by the End-User.

ii. 
Upon successful negotiation, the BAC shall recommend the award of 
contract to the HOPE in accordance with Section (IV)(L) of this 
Guidelines.

7. HIGHLY TECHNICAL CONSULTANTS26

a) Definition. Procurement of consultancy contract involving an individual 
consultant, subject to the following conditions:

i. 
The individual consultant will be hired to do work that is either:

a) Highly technical or proprietary; or

b) Primarily confidential or policy determining, where trust and confidence 
are the primary consideration.

ii. 
The term of the individual consultant shall, at the most, be on a six (6) 
month basis, renewable at the option of the appointing HOPE, but in no 
case shall exceed the term of the latter.

b) Procedure

26 Section 53.7, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 131 of 149

i. 
The End-User Unit shall justify to the BAC the engagement of the individual

ii. 
The BAC shall undertake the negotiation with the individual consultant 
based on the Terms of Reference prepared by the End-User. Considering 
the nature of the consultancy work, the negotiations need not be elaborate, 
it is enough that the BAC has validated that the individual is legally, 
technically and financially capable to undertake and fulfill the consultancy 
work based on the Terms of Reference.

iii. 
The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract to the 
individual consultant. Award of contract shall be made in accordance with 
Section (IV)(L) of this Guidelines.

8. SMALL VALUE PROCUREMENT (SVP)27

a) Definition. Procurement of (a) goods not covered by Shopping under Section 
52 of the IRR of RA 9184, (b) infrastructure projects, and (c) consulting services, 
where the amount involved does not exceed the following threshold:

i. 
For NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional Government, 
One Million Pesos (  1,000,000)

ii. 
For LGUs, in accordance with the following schedule:

DOF 
Classification 
of LGUs 
Maximum Amount  (in Philippine Peso) 
Province 
City 
Municipality 
1st Class 
2nd Class 
3rd Class 
4th Class 
5th Class 
6th Class

In the case of barangays, Fifty Thousand Pesos (  50,000).

b) Procedure

i. 
The End-User shall submit a request for SVP to the BAC, which indicates 
the technical specifications, scope of work, terms of reference, ABC and 
other terms and conditions.

ii. 
The BAC shall prepare and send the RFQs/RFPs to at least three (3) 
suppliers, contractors or consultants of known qualifications. This, 
notwithstanding, those who responded through any of the required 
postings shall be allowed to participate.  Receipt of at least one (1) 
quotation is sufficient to proceed with the evaluation thereof.

iii. 
Except for those with ABCs equal to Fifty Thousand Pesos (  50,000.00) 
and below, RFQs shall be posted for a period of three (3) calendar days in

27 Section 53.9, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 132 of 149

the PhilGEPS website, website of the Procuring Entity, if available, and at 
any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the 
Procuring Entity.

iv. 
Pre-bid conference may be conducted at the discretion of the BAC, in order 
to clarify and/or explain any of the requirements, terms, conditions, and 
specifications stipulated in the RFQ/RFP.

v. 
After the deadline for submission of quotations/proposals, an Abstract of 
Quotations/Ratings shall be prepared setting forth the names of those who 
responded to the RFQ/RFP, their corresponding price quotations/ratings.

vi. 
The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of 
the supplier or contractor with the Single or Lowest Calculated and 
Responsive Quotation (for goods or infrastructure projects), or consultant 
with the Single or Highest Rated and Responsive Proposal (for consulting 
services). In case of approval, the HOPE shall immediately enter into 
contract with the said supplier, contractor or consultant.

9. LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY AND VENUE28.

a) Definition. Procurement covering lease of real property and venue for official 
use, where:

i. 
Real Property refers to land and buildings (office spaces or units) and 
constructions of all kinds adhered to the soil.

ii.  
Venue refers to training centers, convention halls, hotels, and similar 
establishments catering to trainings, seminars, conferences, conventions, 
symposia and similar gatherings requiring the official participation of 
government officials and employees. This may include meals and 
accommodation depending on the requirements of the Procuring Entity.

iii. 
Lessee refers to any government agency temporarily occupying a real 
property on the basis of a contract executed with the private individual, 
partnership, cooperative, association, or corporation having absolute 
ownership over such real property.

iv.  
Lessor refers to any government agency or private individual, 
partnership, cooperative, association, or corporation having absolute 
ownership over the real property or venue to be leased.

b) Policy Considerations

i. 
Publicly-owned vis-a-vis privately-owned real property and venue

It is preferred that government agencies lease publicly-owned real property or 
venue from other government agencies.

28 Section 53.10, IRR of R.A. 9184.

Page 133 of 149

If there is an available publicly-owned real property or venue that complies 
with the requirements of the Procuring Entity, it may enter into a contract of 
lease with the government-agency owner.

In the event that the Procuring Entity would resort to privately-owned real 
property or venue, the End-User unit shall justify that the same is more efficient 
and economical to the government.

ii. 
Location

The location of the real property or venue to be leased should have been 
meticulously selected by the Procuring Entity after taking into consideration, 
among others, the need for prudence and economy in government service and 
the suitability of the area in relation to the mandate of the office, and its 
accessibility to its clients.  In the lease of venue, other factors such as the 
nature of the event or the level of security in the proposed location may also 
be taken into account.

iii. 
ABC and rental rates

The ABC shall be set using the mid point of the range obtained from the results 
of the market analysis on the prevailing lease rates for real property or venue 
within the vicinity of the selected location complying with the criteria and 
technical specifications of the End-User Unit.  In no case shall the rental rates, 
including additional expenses, such as association dues in the case of lease of 
real property, exceed the ABC.

As a general rule, rental rates are considered reasonable when they represent 
or approximate the value of what the Lessee gets in terms of accommodation, 
facility, amenities, and convenience from the leased real property or venue, 
and the Lessor gets an equitable return of capital or investment.

Rental rates should also be within the prevailing market rates for lease of real 
property or venue with the same or similar condition or classification and 
located within the vicinity.  Rental rate refers to the amount paid by the Lessee 
for the use and/or occupancy of the privately-owned real property to the 
Lessor, where payment is usually made on a monthly basis.

iv. 
Technical Specifications

Technical Specification shall be prepared taking into consideration the rating 
factors under Appendix B of this Guidelines.

c) Procedures for Lease of Privately-Owned Real Property and Venue

i. Real Property

a) The BAC shall invite at least three (3) prospective Lessors to submit 
sealed price quotations.

On a specified date, submitted price quotations shall be opened to 
determine the Lowest Calculated Quotation. Receipt of at least one (1) 
quotation is sufficient to proceed with the evaluation thereof.

Page 134 of 149

b) The real property being offered by the Lessor with the Single or Lowest 
Calculated Quotation shall be rated in accordance with the technical 
specifications and the reasonableness of its price quotation shall be 
determined in accordance with the methodology prescribed in Appendix 
B.

c) Upon determination of the responsiveness and reasonableness of the 
quotation, the BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract 
in favor of the Lessor with the Single or Lowest Calculated and 
Responsive Quotation. Award of contract shall be made in accordance 
with Section IV(L) of this Guidelines.

ii. Venue

a)  The BAC shall send the RFQ to at least three (3) venues within the 
vicinity of the selected location. Receipt of at least one (1) quotation is 
sufficient to proceed with the evaluation thereof.

b)  The venue being offered by the Lessor with the Lowest Calculated 
Quotation shall then be rated in accordance with the technical 
specifications prepared pursuant to Appendix B of this Guidelines.  
Compliance rating with technical specifications may be conducted 
through ocular inspection, interviews, or other forms of due diligence.

c) Upon determination of the responsiveness of the quotation, the BAC 
shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract in favor of the 
Lessor with the Single or Lowest Calculated and Responsive Quotation. 
Award of contract shall be made in accordance with Section IV(L) of 
this Guidelines.

VI. REPEALING CLAUSE

This Consolidated Guidelines for Alternative Methods of Procurement (Consolidated 
Guidelines) repeals the following Guidelines: Guidelines for Shopping and Small Value 
Procurement29, Guidelines for Agency-to-Agency Agreements30, and Guidelines for 
Lease of Privately-Owned Real Estate and Venue31.

Any other guidelines, administrative order, office order, rule or regulation and/or parts 
thereof contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of the Consolidated Guidelines 
are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

VII. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

This Consolidated Guidelines for Alternative Methods of Procurement shall take effect 
sixty (60) calendar days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper 
of general nationwide circulation and upon filing with the University of the Philippines 
Law Center of three (3) copies of this Annex “H”.

29 GPPB Resolution 09-2009, dated 23 November 2009. 
30 GPPB Resolution 018-2007, dated 31 May 2007. 
31 GPPB Resolution 08-2009, dated 3 November 2009.

Page 135 of 149

ANNEX “H”

APPENDIX A

DOCUMENTARY REQUIREMENTS FOR  
ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT

I. 
This Appendix prescribes for the documents that the BAC shall require from suppliers, 
contractors and consultants for Alternative Methods of Procurement, except for Repeat 
Order, Shopping under Section 52.1(a), and Negotiated Procurement under Sections 
53.1 (Two-Failed Biddings), and 53.5 (Agency-to-Agency) of the IRR of RA 9184.

II. 
The BAC shall indicate in the RFQ or RFP at what stage of the procurement process 
these requirements must be submitted, i.e., submission of offer/s, evaluation of offer/s, 
before issuance of Notice of Award or prior to payment.

Alternative Modality 
Mayor’s/
Business 
Permit 
Professional 
License 
/Curriculum 
Vitae 
(Consulting 
Services) 
PhilGEPS 
Reg. 
Number 
PCAB 
License 
(Infra.) 
NFCC 
(Infra.) 
Income/
Business 
Tax 
Return 
Omnibus 
Sworn 
Statement 
I. Direct Contracting 
[Section 50] 


 
For ABCs 
above 
P500K

II. Shopping [Sec 
52.1(b)] 




III. Negotiated 
Procurement

A. Emergency Cases 
(Section 53.2)] 


 
 
For 
ABCs 
above 
P500K  
 
For ABCs 
above 
P500K 


B. Take-Over of 
Contracts (Section 
53.3.2; for new 
bidders) 
 
 
 
 


C. Adjacent/ 
Contiguous (Section

 


D. Scientific, Scholarly 
or Artistic Work, 
Exclusive Technology 
and Media Services 
(Section 53.6) 
 




 
For ABCs 
above 
P500K

C. Highly Technical 
Consultant (Section



D. Small Value 
Procurement (Section 
 
 
 


 
 
E. Lease of Real 
Property Or Venue 
(Section 53.10) 




 
Except for 
gov’t 
agencies 
as lessors

*For individuals engaged under Sec. 53.6, 53.7 and 53.9 of the IRR of RA 9184, only the BIR Certificate of Registration 
shall be submitted in lieu of DTI Registration and Mayor’s Permit.

III. 
Procuring Entities already maintaining an updated file of any of the bidder’s above-
mentioned requirements, whether through the PhilGEPS Certificate of Registration and 
Membership or its own records, may no longer require its re-submission.

Page 136 of 149

ANNEX “H”

APPENDIX B

LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY AND VENUE: 
RATING FACTORS AND  
DETERMINATION OF REASONABLENESS OF RENTAL RATES

A. TABLE OF RATING FACTORS FOR LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY

RATING FACTORS 
WEIGHT 
(%) 
RATING

I. 
Location and Site Condition

1. Accessibility 
(25)

2. Topography and Drainage 
(20)

3. Sidewalk and waiting shed 
(15)

4. Parking space 
(15)

5. Economic potential 
(10)

6. Land 
classification, 
utilization, 
and 
assessment 
(10)

7. Other added amenities 
(5)

II. 
Neighborhood Data

1. Prevailing rental rate 
(20)

2. Sanitation and health condition 
(20)

3. Adverse influence 
(15)

4. Property utilization 
(15)

5. Police and fire station 
(15)

6. Cafeterias 
(10)

7. Banking/postal/telecom 
(5)

III. 
Real Property

1. Structural condition 
(30)

2. Functionality

a. Module (6)

b. Room arrangement 
(6)

c. Circulation 
(6)

d. Light and ventilation 
(6)

e. Space requirements 
(6)

3. Facilities

a. Water supply and toilet 
(6)

(6)

c. Elevators 
(6)

d. Fire escapes
(6)

e. Fire fighting equipment 
(6)

4. Other requirements

a. Maintenance

Page 137 of 149

b. Attractiveness 
(5)

IV. 
Free Services and Facilities

1. Janitorial and security 
(20)

2. Air conditioning 
(20)

3. Repair and maintenance 
(20)

4. Water and light consumption 
(20)

5. Secured parking space 
(20)

I. 
Location and Site Condition 
× (.20)  =

II. 
Neighborhood Data 
× (.20)  =

III. 
Real property 
× (.50)  =

IV. 
Free Services and Facilities 
× (.10)  =

FACTOR VALUE

Note:  Weight of each rating factor may be changed as long as total weight per classification 
is equivalent to 100.  Figures in parenthesis are samples.  Procuring Entity must determine 
passing rate before inviting bids from Lessors.  A bid is determined to be responsive if it is 
equal to or higher than the passing rate.

B. DETERMINATION OF REASONABLENESS OF RENTAL RATES

The reasonableness of rental rates may be determined using any of the following methods.

1.1. 
Computation based on Observed Depreciation

This method uses the following formula and a depreciation rate determined 
after meticulous ocular inspection of the actual condition of the real property:

Reproduction Cost  = Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 – Depreciation 
Rate) 
Formula Rate  
= Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate 
Rental Rate  
= Formula Rate × Factor Value 
Monthly Rental  
= Rentable Area × Rental Rate

1.1.1. Ang mga sumusunod na bigat ay maaaring gamitin sa pagtukoy ng naobserbahang rate ng pagbaba ng halaga:

Status 
Depreciation (%) 
Good 
Fair 
Poor 
Very poor

1.1.2. Reproduction Cost refers to the estimated total cost of replacing the real 
property with the same utility.

1.1.3. Capitalization Rate refers to the interest rate on the cost or value of the 
property.

Page 138 of 149

1.1.4. Rentable Area refers to the total area of the real property in square 
meters being occupied or to be occupied by the Lessee less the common 
area like lobby, stairway, elevator hall, common comfort room, machine 
room for air conditioner, and other areas of common use by the public 
or upper floor occupants.

1.1.5. Factor Value refers to the rating factor where locations and site 
conditions, neighborhood data and real property structural condition, 
functionality, facilities and other requirements, including free services 
and facilities offered by the Lessor are considered.  The rating factors 
and its corresponding weights are provided in Table A of this Appendix.

1.2. 
Computation based on Straight Line Depreciation

This method uses the following formula:

Age 
of 
Real 
Property 
= 
Current Year – Year of Construction 
Depreciation Rate 
= 
Please See Table of Structural Depreciation 
Reproduction Cost  
= 
Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 – 
Depreciation Rate) 
Formula Rate  
= 
Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate 
Rental Rate  
= 
Formula Rate × Factor Value 
Monthly Rental  
= 
Rentable Area × Rental Rate

1.2.1. Depreciation rate shall be determined using the following Table of 
Structural Depreciation provided by the DPWH:

AGE 
ESTIMATED LIFE OF REAL PROPERTY

WOODEN 
FRAME  
(40 years) 
SEMI-
CONCRETE 
(60 years) 
REINFORCED 
CONCRETE 
(75 years) 
STRUCTURAL 
REINFORCED 
(100 years)

Percentage (%) of estimated life 
2.5 
1.5 
4.5 
3.8 
2.8 
8.9 
6.9 
5.6 
4.2 
11.7 
7.4 
5.5 
14.5 
11.1 
9.1 
6.7 
17.2 
13.1 
10.7 
8.1 
19.8 
15.1 
12.3 
9.3 
22.4 
13.9 
10.5 
15.5 
11.8 
27.5 
20.7 
17.9 
29.9 
22.5 
18.5 
14.2 
32.2 
24.5 
15.3 
34.5 
26.6 
21.4 
16.4 
36.8 
27.7 
22.8 
17.5 
29.3 
24.3 
18.6 
49.1 
30.8 
24.8

Page 139 of 149

57.7 
43.8 
36.8 
42.4 
33.6 
55.6 
47.5 
60.6 
52.2 
42.1

56.5

68.9 
60.5 
49.6

72.3 
64.1 
53.1

67.3 
56.3

70.3 
59.3

64.5

69.3

71.4

73.3

1.2.2. Estimated Unit Construction Cost refers to the estimated prevailing cost 
of construction per square meter of the real property being appraised.  
The respective Estimated Unit Construction Cost of types of real 
property for each region may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Maintenance of the DPWH.

1.2.3. Reproduction Cost, Capitalization Rate, Rentable Area and Factor Value 
shall have the same meaning as those referred Items 1.1.2 to 1.1.5.

1.3. 
Comparative Market Price Analysis

This method is based on the conduct of comparative market analysis on the 
prevailing lease rates for real properties within the vicinity of the selected 
location complying with the criteria and technical specifications of the Procuring 
Entity. In the lease of vacant lot or other land spaces, the Procuring Entity shall 
likewise consider the zonal valuation issued by the city or municipality having 
jurisdiction over the property.

2. 
If the price quotation of the prospective Lessor does not exceed the computed monthly 
rental or is within the prevailing market rates, the rental rate offered may be regarded 
as reasonable, and its quotation may then be considered for award.

3. 
Sample Computations for Observed Depreciation and Straight Line Depreciation:

A 5-storey office building made of reinforced concrete structure with mechanical 
equipment, i.e., elevator, air conditioning system, etc.

Date of Construction 
1987 
Estimated Unit Construction 
Cost 
P25,000/sq.m 
Depreciation 
20% (Good condition) 
Capitalization Rate 
20% (Variable based on bank rate) 
Factor Value 
90% (Based on rating)

Page 140 of 149

COMPUTATION BASED ON OBSERVED DEPRECIATION

Reproduction 
Cost  
= Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 – Depreciation Rate)

= P25,000/sq.m. (1 – 0.20)

= P20,000/sq.m.

Formula Rate  
= Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate

PHP 334 per square meter per month.

Rental Rate  
= Formula Rate × Factor Value

P334 (0.90)

300.60 per square meter per month, approximately 300 per square meter.

Rentable Area 
= 200.00 sq.m.

Monthly Rental  
= Rentable Area × Rental Rate

= 200 per square meter multiplied by P300 per square meter per month.

= PHP 60,000.00/month.

COMPUTATION BASED ON STRAIGHT LINE DEPRECIATION

Age 
of 
Real 
Property 
= Current Year – Year of Construction

= 20 years

Depreciation 
Rate 
= See Appendix B for the Table of Structural Depreciation

Reproduction 
Cost  
= Estimated Unit Construction Cost × (1 – Depreciation Rate)

= P25,000/sq.m. (1 – 0.248)

= P18,800/sq.m.

Formula Rate  
= Reproduction Cost × Monthly Capitalization Rate

= P18,800 (0.20/12) = 18,800 (0.0167)

PHP 313.96 per square meter per month.

Rental Rate  
= Formula Rate × Factor Value

= P313.96 (0.90)

= PHP 282.56 per square meter per month, approximately PHP 285.00 per square meter.

Rentable Area 
= 200.00 sq.m.

Monthly Rental  
= Rentable Area × Rental Rate

= 200 sq.m. × P285.00/sq.m.

= PHP 57,000.00/month.

Page 141 of 149

C. TABLE OF RATING FACTORS FOR LEASE OF VENUE

RATING FACTORS 
WEIGHT (%) 
RATING 
I. 
Availability

II 
Location and Site Condition

1. Accessibility 
(50)

2. Parking space 
(50)

III. 
Neighborhood Data

1. Sanitation and health condition 
(25)

2. Police and fire station 
(25)

3. Restaurant 
(25)

4. Banking and Postal 
(25)

IV.
Venue

a. Structural condition 
(20)

b. Functionality

a. Conference Rooms 
(10)

b. Room arrangement (e.g., single, 
double, etc.) 
(5)

c. Light, 
ventilation, 
and 
air 
conditioning 
(5)

d. Space requirements 
(5)

c. Facilities

a. Water supply and toilet 
(4)

(5)

c. Elevators 
(4)

d. Fire escapes
(4)

e. Fire fighting equipment 
(4)

f. 
Internet and Telecommunications 
(4)

g. Audio visual equipment 
(5)

d. Other requirements

Maintenance
(5)

b. Attractiveness 
(5)

c. Security 
(5)

e. Catering Services

f.  Client’s satisfactory rating 
(5)

I. 
Availability 
X (.5) =

II. 
Location and Site Condition 
X (.1) =

III. Neighborhood Data 
X (.05) =

IV. 
Venue 
X (.35) =

FACTOR VALUE

Note:  Weight of each rating factor may be changed as long as total weight per classification is 
equivalent to 100.  Figures in parenthesis are samples.  Procuring Entity must determine passing

Page 142 of 149

rate before inviting bids from Lessors.  A bid is determined to be responsive if it is equal to or 
higher than the passing rate.

Page 143 of 149

ANNEX “I”                                                                      
GUIDELINES ON TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS

I. 
PURPOSE, SCOPE, AND APPLICATION

These guidelines aim to promote fairness in the termination of procurement contracts 
and to prescribe contract conditions and measures to enable government to protect 
its interests. For this purpose, policies and procedures relating to the whole or partial 
termination of government procurement contracts of goods, infrastructure projects, 
and consulting services are herein established.

II.
DEFINITION OF TERMS

1. 
Coercive Practice means harming or threatening to harm, directly or indirectly, 
persons or their property to influence their participation in a procurement 
process, or affect the execution of a contract.

2. 
Collusive Practice means a scheme or arrangement including practice among 
bidders (prior to or after bid submission) designed to establish bid prices at 
artificial non-competitive levels to prevent free and open competition.

3. 
Corrupt Practice means the offering, giving, receiving or soliciting of anything 
of value to influence the action of a public official in the selection process or in 
contract execution. It also means entering, on behalf of the Government, into 
any contract or transaction manifestly and grossly disadvantageous to the same, 
whether or not the public officer profits or will profit thereby; and similar acts as 
provided in Republic Act 3019.

4. 
Fraudulent Practice means a misrepresentation of facts in order to influence 
a selection process or the execution of a contract to the detriment of the 
Procuring Entity.

5. 
Head of the Procuring Entity refers to: (i) the head of the agency or his duly 
authorized official, for national government agencies; (ii) the governing board or 
its duly authorized official, for government-owned and/or controlled 
corporations; or (iii) the local chief executive, for local government units. 
Provided, that in a department, office or agency where the procurement is 
decentralized, the Head of each decentralized unit shall be considered as the 
Head of the Procuring Entity subject to the limitations and authority delegated 
by the head of the department, office or agency.

6. 
Implementing Unit refers to the unit or office having direct supervision or 
administration over the implementation of the contract such as the Project 
Management Office or the End-User Unit.

7. 
Termination in Part means the termination of a part but not all, of the work 
that has not been completed and accepted under a contract.

8. 
Termination in Whole means the termination of all of the work that has not 
been completed and accepted under a contract.

Page 144 of 149

9. 
Show Cause refers to a notice which the Procuring Entity is required to issue 
prior to terminating a contract. The purpose of a show cause notice is to enable 
the contractor to present its position why the contract should not be terminated.

10. Verified Report refers to the report submitted by the Implementing Unit to the 
Head of the Procuring Entity setting forth its findings as to the existence of 
grounds or causes for termination and explicitly stating its recommendation for 
the issuance of a Notice to Terminate.

IV.
GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS

A. Termination for Default

1. In contracts for Goods:

The Procuring Entity shall terminate a contract for default when any of the 
following conditions attend its implementation:

a) Outside of force majeure, the Supplier fails to deliver or perform any or all of 
the Goods within the period(s) specified in the contract, or within any extension 
thereof granted by the Procuring Entity pursuant to a request made by the 
Supplier prior to the delay, and such failure amounts to at least ten percent 
(10%) of the contract price;

b) As a result of force majeure, the Supplier is unable to deliver or perform any 
or all of the Goods, amounting to at least ten percent (10%) of the contract 
price, for a period of not less than sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of the 
notice from the Procuring Entity stating that the circumstance of force majeure 
is deemed to have ceased; or

c) The Supplier fails to perform any other obligation under the Contract.

2. In contracts for Infrastructure Projects:

The Procuring Entity shall terminate a contract for default when any of the 
following conditions attend its implementation:

a) Due to the Contractor’s fault and while the project is on-going, it has incurred 
negative slippage of fifteen percent (15%) or more in accordance with 
Presidential Decree 1870;

b) Due to the Contractor’s fault and after the contract time has expired, it has  
incurred a negative slippage of ten percent (10%) or more in the completion 
of the work; or

c) The Contractor:

i. 
abandons the contract works, refuses or fails to comply with a valid 
instruction of the Procuring Entity or fails to proceed expeditiously and 
without delay despite a written notice by the Procuring Entity;

Page 145 of 149

ii. does not actually have on the project site the minimum essential equipment 
listed on the Bid necessary to prosecute the Works in accordance with the 
approved work plan and equipment deployment schedule as required for 
the project;

iii. does not execute the Works in accordance with the contract or persistently 
or flagrantly neglects to carry out its obligations under the contract;

iv. neglects or refuses to remove materials or to perform a new work that has 
been rejected as defective or unsuitable; or

v. sub-lets any part of the contract works without approval by the Procuring 
Entity.

3. In contracts for Consulting Services:

The Procuring Entity shall terminate a contract for default when any of the 
following conditions attend its implementation:

a) Outside of force majeure, the Consultant fails to deliver or perform the Outputs 
and Deliverables within the period(s) specified in the contract, or within any 
extension thereof granted by the Procuring Entity pursuant to a request made 
by the Consultant prior to the delay;

b) As a result of force majeure, the Consultant is unable to deliver or perform a 
material portion of the Outputs and Deliverables for a period of not less than 
sixty (60) calendar days after the Consultant’s receipt of the notice from the 
Procuring Entity stating that the circumstance of force majeure is deemed to 
have ceased; or

c) The Consultant fails to perform any other obligation under the contract.

B. Termination for Convenience

The Procuring Entity may terminate the Contract, in whole or in part, at any time for 
its convenience.  The Head of the Procuring Entity may terminate a contract for the 
convenience of the Government if he has determined the existence of conditions that 
make Project Implementation economically, financially or technically impractical 
and/or unnecessary, such as, but not limited to, fortuitous event(s) or changes in law 
and national government policies.

C. Termination for Insolvency

The Procuring Entity shall terminate the contract if the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant 
is declared bankrupt or insolvent as determined with finality by a court of competent 
jurisdiction.  In this event, termination will be without compensation to the 
Supplier/Contractor/Consultant, provided that such termination will not prejudice or 
affect any right of action or remedy which has accrued or will accrue thereafter to the 
Procuring Entity and/or the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant.

D. Termination for Unlawful Acts

Page 146 of 149

The Procuring Entity may terminate the contract in case it is determined prima facie 
that the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant has engaged, before or during the 
implementation of the contract, in unlawful deeds and behaviors relative to contract 
acquisition and implementation. Unlawful acts include, but are not limited to, the 
following:

a) Corrupt, fraudulent, collusive and coercive practices;

b) Drawing up or using forged documents;

c) Using adulterated materials, means or methods, or engaging in production 
contrary to rules of science or the trade; and

d) Any other act analogous to the foregoing.

E. Termination by Contractor/Consultant

1. In contracts for Infrastructure Projects:

The Contractor may terminate its contract with the Procuring Entity if the works 
are completely stopped for a continuous period of at least sixty (60) calendar days 
through no fault of its own, due to any of the following reasons:

a) Failure of the Procuring Entity to deliver, within a reasonable time, supplies, 
materials, right-of-way, or other items it is obligated to furnish under the terms 
of the contract; or

b) The prosecution of the work is disrupted by the adverse peace and order 
situation, as certified by the Armed Forces of the Philippines Provincial 
Commander and approved by the Secretary of National Defense.

2. In contracts for Consulting Services:

The Consultant may terminate its agreement with the Procuring Entity if the latter 
is in material breach of its obligations pursuant to the contract and has not 
remedied the same within sixty (60) calendar days following its receipt of the 
Consultant’s notice specifying such breach.

V. 
PROCEDURES FOR TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS

1. Verification. Upon receipt of a written report of acts or causes which may 
constitute ground(s) for termination as aforementioned, or upon its own initiative, the 
Implementing Unit shall, within a period of seven (7) calendar days, verify the 
existence of such ground(s) and cause the execution of a Verified Report, with all 
relevant evidence attached.

2. Notice to Terminate.  Upon recommendation by the Implementing Unit, the 
Head of the Procuring Entity shall terminate contracts only by a written notice to the 
Supplier/Contractor conveying the termination of the contract. The notice shall state:

Page 147 of 149

a) that the contract is being terminated for any of the ground(s) afore-mentioned, 
and a statement of the acts that constitute the ground(s) constituting the 
same;

b) the extent of termination, whether in whole or in part;

c) an instruction to the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant to show cause as to why 
the contract should not be terminated; and

d) special instructions of the Procuring Entity, if any.

The Notice to Terminate shall be accompanied by a copy of the Verified Report.

3. Show Cause. Within a period of seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the Notice 
of Termination, the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant shall submit to the Head of the 
Procuring Entity a verified position paper stating why the contract should not be 
terminated.

If the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant fails to show cause after the lapse of the 
seven (7) day period, either by inaction or by default, the Head of the Procuring Entity 
shall issue an order terminating the contract.

4. Rescission of Notice of Termination. The Procuring Entity may, at anytime 
before receipt of the Supplier’s/Contractor’s/Consultant’s verified position paper to 
withdraw the Notice to Terminate if it is determined that certain items or works subject 
of the notice had been completed, delivered, or performed before the 
Supplier’s/Contractor’s/Consultant’s receipt of the notice.

5. Decision.  Within a non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days from receipt 
of the verified position paper, the Head of the Procuring Entity shall decide whether or 
not to terminate the contract.  It shall serve a written notice to the 
Supplier/Contractor/Consultant of its decision and, unless otherwise provided, the 
Contract is deemed terminated from receipt of the Supplier/Contractor/Consultant of 
the notice of decision.  The termination shall only be based on the ground(s) stated in 
the Notice to Terminate.

6. Contract Termination Review Committee (CTRC).  The Head of the 
Procuring Entity may create a committee to assist him in the discharge of his function 
under these Guidelines.  All decisions recommended by the CTRC shall be subject to 
the approval of the Head of the Procuring Entity.

7. Take-over of Contracts.  If a Procuring Entity terminates the contract due to 
default, insolvency, or for cause, it may enter into a Negotiated Procurement pursuant 
to Section 53(c) of R.A. 9184 and 53.3 of its IRR.

8. Procuring Entity’s Options in Termination for Convenience in Contracts 
for Goods.  The goods that have been performed or are ready for delivery within 
thirty (30) calendar days after the Supplier’s receipt of Notice to Terminate shall be 
accepted by the Procuring Entity at the contract terms and prices.  For goods not yet 
performed or ready for delivery, the Procuring Entity may elect:

Page 148 of 149

a) to have any portion delivered or performed and paid at the contract terms and 
prices; and/or

b) to cancel the remainder and pay to the Supplier an agreed amount for partially 
completed or performed goods and for materials and parts previously procured 
by the Supplier .

If the Supplier suffers loss in its initial performance of the terminated contract, such 
as purchase of raw materials for goods specially manufactured for the Procuring Entity 
which cannot be sold in open market, it shall be allowed to recover partially from the 
contract, on a quantum meruit basis.  Before recovery may be made, the fact of loss 
must be established under oath by the Supplier to the satisfaction of the Procuring 
Entity before recovery may be made.

9. Notice by Contractor/Consultant. The Contractor/Consultant must serve a 
written notice to the Procuring Entity of its intention to terminate the contract at least 
thirty (30) calendar days before its intended termination.  The Contract is deemed 
terminated if it is not resumed in thirty (30) calendar days after the receipt of such 
notice by the Procuring Entity.

V.
AMENDMENTS

1. In the implementation of these Guidelines, the Government Procurement Policy 
Board (GPPB) may introduce modifications hereto through the amendment of its 
specific provisions as the need arises.

2. Any amendment to these Guidelines shall be applicable to government projects 
advertised for bid after the effectivity of the said amendment.

Page 149 of 149