Page 1 of 23

IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS 
OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10927, 
“AN ACT DESIGNATING CASINOS AS COVERED PERSONS UNDER 
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9160, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE ANTI-MONEY 
LAUNDERING ACT OF 2001, AS AMENDED”

Act No. 10927, otherwise known as “An Act Designating Casinos as Covered Persons under 
Republic Act No. 9160, otherwise Known as The Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2001, as 
amended”, the Anti-Money Laundering Council (AMLC), Philippine Amusement and Gaming 
Corporation (PAGCOR), Cagayan Economic Zone Authority (CEZA), and Aurora Pacific 
Economic Zone and Freeport Authority (APECO) hereby jointly adopt and promulgate the 
following Rules and Regulations:

RULE I 
TITLE, DECLARATION OF POLICY, AND SCOPE

Section 1. Title. – These Rules shall be referred to as the Casino Implementing Rules and 
Regulations (CIRR) of Republic Act No. 10927.

Section 2. Declaration of Policy. – It is the policy of the State to ensure that the 
Philippines shall not be used as a money laundering and terrorist financing  site for the 
proceeds of any predicate offense.

Consistent with its foreign policy, the Philippines shall extend cooperation in 
transnational investigations and prosecutions of persons involved in money laundering and 
terrorist financing activities wherever committed.

Section 3. Scope. – This CIRR  shall apply to all casinos, including internet- and ship-
based casinos, operating within the territorial jurisdiction of the Philippines and authorized 
by the Appropriate Government Agency (AGA) to engage in gaming operations.

The implementing rules applicable to other covered persons shall not apply to casinos 
unless it is expressly so provided under this CIRR.

Section 4. Basic Principles and Policies to Combat Money Laundering/Terrorist 
Financing. – Casinos shall be regulated to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing, 
as well as from undermining the Philippine financial system. Casinos shall therefore apply the 
following principles throughout their businesses:

a. 
Conform with high ethical standards and observe good corporate 
governance consistent with the guidelines issued by the AGA in order 
to protect the integrity of their operations and that of the gaming 
industry;

Page 2 of 23

b. 
Know sufficiently their customer to prevent suspicious individuals or 
entities from transacting with, or establishing or maintaining 
relationship with casinos;

c. 
Adopt and effectively implement an appropriate anti-money laundering 
(AML) and countering the financing of terrorism (CFT) risk management 
system that identifies, assesses, monitors, and controls risks associated 
with money laundering and terrorist financing;

d.  
Ensure that officers and employees are aware of their respective 
responsibilities under this CIRR and carry them out in accordance with 
its Money Laundering Prevention Program;  and

e.  
Cooperate with the  AMLC and the AGA  for the effective 
implementation of the AMLA and this CIRR, and other applicable 
issuances.

RULE II 
DESIGNATION OF CASINOS AS COVERED PERSONS

Section 5. Designation of Casinos as Covered Persons. – Casinos, including internet and 
ship-based casinos, with respect to their casino cash transactions related to their gaming 
operations, and such other entities as may be hereafter determined by AGA, are hereby 
designated as covered persons under the AMLA.

RULE III
DEFINITION OF TERMS

Section 6. Definition of Terms - For purposes of this Act, the following terms are hereby 
defined as follows:

(A) 
“Account” – refers to membership account, customer’s credit account, check 
cashing account, deposit account or any other account opened with a casino by 
or on behalf of a customer.

(B) 
“Ancillary Area” – refers to any of the following areas within the casino premises:

1) 
Major aisles, the maximum area of which shall not exceed such limit 
within any part of the casino premises as the appropriate government 
agency may, from time to time, specify; 
2) 
Back-of-house facilities; 
3) 
Any reception or information counter; 
4) 
Any area designated for the serving or consumption of food and 
beverages;

Page 3 of 23

5) 
Any retail outlet; 
6) 
Any area designated for performance; 
7) 
Any area designated for aesthetic or decorative display; 
8) 
Staircases, staircase landings, escalators, lifts and life lobbies; 
9) 
Toilet; and 
10) Such other areas not intended to be used for the conduct or playing of 
games or as a gaming pit as the appropriate government agency, when 
defining the boundaries of the casino premises or on the application of 
the casino, may allow.

(C) 
“Anti-Money Laundering Act” (AMLA) – refers to Republic Act (RA) No. 9160, as 
amended by RA Nos. 9194, 10167, 10365 and 10927.

(D) 
“Anti-Money Laundering Council” (AMLC) – refers to the financial intelligence unit 
of the Republic of the Philippines which is the government agency tasked to 
implement the AMLA, as amended.

(E) 
“Appropriate Government Agency” (AGA) – refers to APECO, CEZA, PAGCOR or 
any other government agency, as may be determined by law.

(F) 
"Beneficial Owner” – refers to any natural person who:

1)  
ultimately owns or controls the customer and/or on whose behalf a 
transaction or activity is being conducted; or

2)  
has ultimate effective control over a legal person or arrangement.

(G) 
“Cash” – refers to currency notes and coins considered as legal tender in the 
country of issue.

(H) 
“Casino” – refers to a business authorized or operated by the appropriate 
government agency to engage in gaming operations, including ship-based and 
internet-based casinos.

(I) 
“Casino Cash Transaction” – refers to transactions involving the receipt or payout 
of cash by and of a casino, paid or received by or on behalf of a customer, or such 
other cash transactions that may be determined by AMLC and the AGA.

(J) 
“Casino Marketing Arrangement” – refers to arrangements whereby a person 
organises, promotes or facilitates the playing of any game in a casino, including 
the use of a gaming room, by one or more customers for which the first mentioned 
person receives from the casino or from the person for the time being in charge 
of the casino —

1) 
a commission based on the turnover of play in the casino attributable to 
the customer/s or otherwise derived from the play of the customer/s; 
2) 
a share of the casino’s gross gaming revenue from the customer/s; or 
3) 
such other form of payment or rebate, monetary or otherwise, as may 
be prescribed.

Page 4 of 23

(K) 
“Casino Transaction” – refers to the purchase or redemption of casino chips or 
tokens, or other gaming instruments, or purchase or redemption thereof by any 
other forms of payment, transfer, or delivery by, through, or to a casino, by 
whatever means effected.

(L) 
“Covered Persons” – refers to casinos, including internet and ship-based casinos, 
with respect to their casino cash transactions related to their gaming operations.

(M)  “Covered Transaction” – refers to a single casino cash transaction involving an 
amount in excess of Five Million Pesos (P5,000,000.00) or its equivalent in any 
other currency.

(N) 
“Customer/Client” – refers to any person who engages or attempts to engage in 
casino transactions or any person  who places wager, or intends to place wager, 
in the casino’s gaming operations through a customer account of any casino 
marketing arrangement provider.

(O) 
“Designated Non-Financial Business and Profession” (DNFBP) – includes casinos 
covered under RA No. 10927 and this CIRR in addition to those DNFBPs already 
covered under the AMLA.

(P) 
 “Gaming Area” – refers to any area within the casino premises other than an 
ancillary area;

(Q) 
“Gaming Operations” – refers to games of chance and variations thereof offered 
by casinos, and approved by the AGA under their enabling laws and other 
applicable issuances. It shall exclude:

1) 
Traditional Bingo operations authorized by the AGA;

2) 
Lotteries and sweepstakes of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office 
(PCSO); and

3) 
Such other games of chance and variations as may be declared exempt 
by the AGA based on the result of their money laundering and terrorist 
financing risk assessment in consulation with AMLC.

(R) 
“Identification Document” – refers to any of the following documents:

1) 
For Filipino citizens: those issued by any of the following 
official authorities:

a. 
Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines, 
including 
its 
political 
subdivisions, 
agencies, 
and 
instrumentalities;

Page 5 of 23

b. 
Government-Owned 
or 
-Controlled 
Corporations (GOCCs); and

c. 
Covered persons registered with and 
supervised or regulated by the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), the Securities and 
Exchange 
Commission 
(SEC), 
or 
the 
Insurance Commission (IC).

2) 
For foreign nationals: valid passport or Alien Certificate of 
Registration.

(S) 
“Internet-based Casinos” – refers to casino operations where persons participate 
by the use of remote communication facilities such as, but not limited to, internet, 
telephone, television, radio or any other kind of electronic or other technology to 
facilitate communication.

(T) 
“Monetary Instrument” – refers to:

1) 
Coins or currency of legal tender in the Philippines, or in any other 
country;

2) 
Negotiable checks such as casino checks, personal  checks, and bank 
drafts;

3) 
Casino Value instruments such as casino chips, casino reward cards, 
Ticket/Voucher in or Ticket/Voucher out, markers, cashier’s orders, chip 
purchase orders/vouchers, chip checks, gift certificates, and casino 
drafts; and

4) 
Other similar instruments where title thereto passes to another by 
endorsement, assignment or delivery.

(U) 
“Money Laundering” (ML) – refers to money laundering under Section 4 of the 
AMLA.

(V) 
“Person” – refers to any natural or juridical person.

(W) “Politically Exposed Person” (PEP) – refers to an individual who is or has been 
entrusted with prominent public position in (a) the Philippines with substantial 
authority over policy, operations or the use or allocation of government-owned 
resources; (b) a foreign State; or (c) an international organization.

The term PEP shall include immediate family members, and close relationships 
and associates that are reputedly known to have:

1) 
 Joint beneficial ownership of a legal entity or legal arrangement with the 
main/principal PEP; or

Page 6 of 23

2) 
 Sole beneficial ownership of a legal entity or legal arrangement that is 
known to exist for the benefit of the main/principal PEP.

“Immediate Family Member” – refers to spouse or partner; children or their 
spouses or partners; and parents or parents-in-law.

(X) 
“Predicate Offense” – refers to the unlawful activities under Section 3(i), of the 
AMLA.

(Y) 
“Proceeds of a Predicate Offense” – refers to an amount derived or realized from 
a predicate offense. It shall include:

1) 
All material results, profits, effects and any amount realized from any 
predicate offense;

2) 
All monetary, financial or economic means, devices, documents, papers 
or things used in, or having any relation to, any predicate offense; and

3) 
All moneys, expenditures, payments, disbursements, costs, outlays, 
charges, accounts, refunds and other similar items for the financing, 
operations, and maintenance of any predicate offense.

(Z) 
“Ship-based Casinos” – refers to casinos operating on board a vessel, ship, boat or 
any other water-based craft wholly or partly intended for gambling.

(AA) “Suspicious Transaction” – refers to transactions with covered persons, regardless 
of the amounts involved, where any of the following exist:

1) 
there is no underlying legal or trade obligation, purpose or economic 
justification;

2) 
the client is not properly identified;

3) 
the amount involved is not commensurate with the business or financial 
capacity of the client;

4) 
taking into account all known circumstances, it may be perceived that the 
client's transaction is structured in order to avoid being the subject of 
reporting requirements under the AMLA;

5) 
any circumstance relating to the transaction which is observed to deviate 
from the profile of the client and/or the client's past transactions with 
the covered person;

6) 
the transaction is in any way related to an unlawful activity or any money 
laundering activity or offense that is about to be committed, is being or 
has been committed; or

Page 7 of 23

7) 
any transaction that is similar, analogous or identical to any of the 
foregoing.

(BB) “Terrorist Financing” (TF) – refers to those acts defined and punished under 
Sections 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of RA No. 10168.

(CC) “Working Day” – refers to all calendar days excluding weekends, official national 
holidays, officially-declared national holidays, and officially-declared local 
holidays where the AMLC Secretariat office is located.

RULE IV 
FUNCTIONS OF THE AMLC AND APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

Section 7. Functions of the AMLC.- The functions of the AMLC are:

a) 
to require and receive covered or suspicious transaction reports from 
casinos;

b) 
to issue orders addressed to the AGA or a casino to determine the true 
identity of the owner of any account subject of a covered or suspicious 
transaction report, or request for assistance from a foreign State, or 
believed by the AMLC, on the basis of substantial evidence, to be, in 
whole or in part, wherever located, representing, involving, or related 
to, directly or indirectly, in any manner or by any means, the proceeds 
of any unlawful activity;

c)  
to institute civil forfeiture proceedings and all other remedial 
proceedings through the Office of the Solicitor General;

d) 
to file complaints with the Department of Justice or the Office of the 
Ombudsman for the prosecution of money laundering offenses and 
other violations under the AMLA;

e) 
to investigate suspicious transactions and covered transactions deemed 
suspicious after investigation by the AMLC, money laundering activities 
and other violations of the AMLA;

f) 
to file with the Court of Appeals, ex parte, through the Office of the 
Solicitor General:

1. 
a petition for the freezing of any monetary instrument or 
property that is in any way related to an unlawful activity; or

2. 
an application for authority to inquire into or examine any 
particular deposit or investment, including related accounts, 
with any banking institution or non-bank financial institution;

Page 8 of 23

g) To formulate and implement such measures as may be necessary and justified under the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA) to counteract money laundering.

h) 
to receive and take action in respect of any request from foreign states 
for assistance in their own anti-money laundering operations as 
provided in the AMLA;

i) 
to develop educational programs, including awareness campaign on the 
pernicious effects, the methods and techniques used, and the viable 
means of preventing money laundering and the effective ways of 
prosecuting and punishing offenders;

j) 
to enlist the assistance of any branch, department, bureau, office, 
agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-
owned and -controlled corporations, in undertaking any and all AML 
operations, which may include the use of its personnel, facilities and 
resources for the more resolute prevention, detection and investigation 
of money laundering offenses and prosecution of offenders; and

k) 
to impose administrative sanctions for the violation of laws, rules, 
regulations, orders, and resolutions issued pursuant thereto.

Section 8. Functions of the Appropriate Government Agency. – The functions of the 
AGA are:

a) 
To supervise, assess and monitor, compliance of casinos with obligations 
under the AMLA, this CIRR, and other applicable issuances;

b) 
To accredit third party auditors to carry out AML audit on the 
comprehensiveness and effectiveness of the casinos’ measures to 
prevent criminal behavior in general and to combat money laundering  
and terrorist financing in particular;

c) 
Except for covered and suspicious transaction reports, to require casinos 
to submit necessary information and documentation on AML compliance 
and those relevant to any violation of the AMLA, this CIRR, and other 
applicable issuances;

d) 
To implement the necessary measures for restoring the appropriate legal 
conditions in the event of violations of the AMLA, this CIRR, and other 
applicable issuances;

e) 
To order precautionary measures for the duration of any investigation or 
legal proceedings of violations of the AMLA, this CIRR, and other 
applicable issuances, such as the suspension of the casinos’ license; and

f) 
To provide the AMLC with the results of its inspection in connection with 
item a) above.

Page 9 of 23

Section 9. Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Guidelines 
and Circulars of Appropriate Government Agency. – The AGA shall issue their respective 
AML/CFT guidelines and circulars for the guidance and compliance of casinos under their 
respective jurisdictions, to assist the AMLC in effectively implementing the provisions of the 
AMLA, this CIRR, and other AMLC issuances.

RULE V
RISK MANAGEMENT

Section 10. Risk Management Policies. – All casinos shall develop sound risk 
management policies and practices to identify, monitor, mitigate, and control risks associated

The four (4) areas of sound risk management practices are:

a.  
adequate and active board and senior management oversight; 
b.  
acceptable policies and procedures embodied in an ML and TF 
prevention compliance program, which takes into account customer, 
country, product and delivery channel risks; 
c. 
appropriate monitoring; and  
d. 
comprehensive internal controls and audit.

Section 11. Institutional Risk Assessment. – Casinos shall perform institutional risk 
assessment taking into account the four risks mentioned in Section 10.b. The assessment shall 
include both quantitative and qualitiative factors. Institutional risk assessment shall be 
conducted at least once every two (2) years or as may be determined by AGA.

Section 12. Active Board and Senior Management Oversight.  – The casino’s Board of 
Directors, or the partners or the sole proprietor, as the case may be, is ultimately responsible 
for ensuring compliance with the AMLA, its rules and regulations, and directives and guidance 
from the AMLC and AGA.

Section 13. Designation of a Compliance Officer and/or Office. – Casinos shall designate 
a compliance officer of senior management status with the authority and mandate to ensure 
day-to-day compliance with its AML/CFT obligations. The compliance officer shall have a 
direct line of communication to the casino’s Board of Directors, or the partners or the sole 
proprietor, as the case may be, to report on matters pertaining to its AML/CFT obligations, 
including the casino’s failure to manage ML/TF risks and new AML/CFT obligations issued in 
the form of circulars and correspondence from AMLC and AGA that require updates to the 
casino’s compliance measures. The compliance officer shall also ensure that compliance 
measures reflect readily available information concerning new trends in ML and TF and 
detection techniques.

If a casino’s activities are complex or if it maintains multiple business locations, it shall 
make and document a decision as to whether or not it will be necessary to create a 
compliance office or to appoint a compliance officer for each of the casino’s locations. This 
decision shall take into consideration the similarity of risks posed to the casino’s various

Page 10 of 23

operations, including but not limited to, distinctions in customers/clients, transactions, 
services offered, as well as the location between business locations.

The casino shall also designate a separate officer to be responsible and accountable for 
all record-keeping requirements under this CIRR. These officers will also be responsible for 
making these records readily available to the AMLC upon request.

Section 14. Internal Controls and Internal Audit Program. – Casinos shall establish 
internal controls to ensure day-to-day compliance with its AML/CFT obligations under the 
AMLA, this CIRR, and other applicable issuances, taking into consideration the size and 
complexity of the casino operations.

Qualified personnel who are independent of the office being audited shall conduct 
internal audits for casinos. The auditors shall have the support and a direct line of 
communication to the casino’s Board of Directors, or the partners or the sole proprietor, as 
the case may be.  The casino’s internal audit program shall include periodic and independent 
evaluation of the casino’s risk management, as well as the sufficiency and degree of 
adherence to the casino’s compliance measures. Internal audit examination scope shall cover 
the accuracy of customer identification information, covered and suspicious transaction 
reports, and all other records and internal controls pertaining to compliance with AML/CFT 
obligations. Internal audits shall be conducted at least once every two (2) years or at such 
frequency as necessary, consistent with the risk assessment of the casinos.

The results of the internal audit shall be timely and directly communicated to both the 
casino’s Board of Directors, or the partners or the sole proprietor, as the case may be, and 
the compliance officer. There shall also be a written procedure by which deficiencies in a 
compliance program are promptly remedied once identified by an internal audit. Moreover, 
audit results relative to AML/CFT compliance shall promptly be made available to the AMLC 
and AGA upon request.

The internal audit function shall be periodically assessed by an independent third party 
auditor accredited by the AGA.

Section 15. Implementation of a Money Laundering Prevention Program (MLPP). – The 
casino’s Board of Directors, or the partners or the sole proprietor, as the case may be, shall 
approve, and the compliance officer shall implement, a comprehensive, risk-based MLPP 
geared towards the promotion of high ethical and professional standards and the prevention 
of ML and TF. The MLPP shall be in writing, consistent with the AMLA, and its provisions shall 
reflect the casino’s corporate structure and risk profile. It shall be readily available in user-
friendly form, whether in hard or soft copy. Moreover, it shall be well disseminated to all 
officers and staff who are obligated, given their position, to implement compliance measures. 
The casino shall design procedures that ensure an audit trail evidencing the dissemination of 
the MLPP to relevant officers and staff.

Where a casino operates at multiple locations in the Philippines, it shall adopt an 
institution-wide MLPP to be implemented in a consolidated manner. Lastly, the MLPP shall be 
updated at least once every two years or whenever necessary to reflect changes in AML/CFT 
obligations, ML and TF trends, detection techniques and typologies.

Page 11 of 23

At minimum, the MLPP’s provisions shall include:

a. 
Detailed procedures of the covered person’s compliance and 
implementation of the following major requirements of the 
AMLA, and this CIRR:

1. 
Customer identification process, including acceptance 
policies and an on-going monitoring process;

2. 
Record-keeping and retention;

3. 
Covered transaction reporting; and

4. 
Suspicious transaction reporting, including the adoption of 
a system, electronic or manual, of flagging, monitoring and 
reporting of transactions that qualify as suspicious 
transactions, regardless of amount or that will raise a “red 
flag” for purposes of future reporting of such transactions 
to the AMLC when their aggregated amounts breached 
the threshold for a covered transaction report. Suspicious 
transaction reporting shall include a reporting chain under 
which a suspicious transaction will be processed and the 
designation of a Board-Level or approved Committee who 
will ultimately decide whether or not the covered 
institution should file a report to the AMLC.

b. 
An effective and continuous AML/CFT training program for all 
directors, and responsible officers and employees, to enable 
them to fully comply with their obligations and responsibilities 
under the AMLA, this CIRR and other applicable issuances, their 
own internal policies and procedures, and such other obligations 
as may be required by the AMLC and AGA;

c. 
An adequate risk-based screening and recruitment process to 
ensure that only qualified and competent personnel with no 
criminal record or integrity-related issues are employed or 
contracted by casinos;

d. 
An internal audit system and an independent audit program that 
will ensure the completeness and accuracy of information 
obtained from customers.  The casino shall specify in writing the 
examination scope of independent audits, which shall include 
ensuring checking the accuracy and completeness of 
identification documents, covered transaction report (CTR) and 
suspicious transaction report (STR) submitted to the AMLC, and 
records retained in compliance with this framework, as well as 
assuring adequacy and effectiveness of the casino’s training 
programs;

Page 12 of 23

e. 
A mechanism that ensures all deficiencies noted during the audit 
and/or 
regular 
or 
special 
inspection/examination 
are 
immediately corrected and acted upon;

f. 
Cooperation with the AMLC and AGA;

g. 
Designation of an AML compliance officer, who shall, at least, be 
of a senior management level, as the lead implementer of the 
casino’s compliance program; and

h. 
The identification, assessment, and mitigation of ML/TF risks 
that may arise from new business practices, services, 
technologies, and products.

Section 15.a. Customer Acceptance Policies & Ongoing Monitoring. – Casinos shall 
have clear, written and graduated acceptance policies and procedures that will seek to 
prevent suspicious individuals or entities from transacting with, establishing or 
maintaining business relationship with them. Casinos shall develop guidelines to assist 
personnel to assess whether a customer’s profile warrants refusal of service to protect 
the security and integrity of the business.

Casinos shall also provide for a mechanism by which customers’ transactions and 
identification information will be continuously monitored and updated. They shall 
create a system that will enable them to understand the normal and reasonable account 
activity of their customers given the customer’s activities, risk profile, and source of 
funds.

Section 15.b. Monitoring and Reporting System. – All casinos shall adopt an ML/TF 
monitoring system, including a name screening mechanism, whether electronic or 
manual, that is appropriate for their risk-profile and business complexity in accordance 
with this framework. The system shall be capable of generating timely, accurate and 
complete reports, including CTRs and STRs, and to regularly apprise the casino’s Board 
of Directors, or the partners or the sole proprietor, as the case may be on AML and CFT 
compliance.

Section 15.c. Employee Training Program. – Casinos shall create employee 
training programs that detail ML and TF prevention roles and hiring standards that 
promote high ethical standards in order to protect the safety and integrity of the 
casino’s business.

Training programs shall be ongoing programs that alert directors, officers, and 
employees on their collective and distinct roles in preventing ML and TF. The casino 
shall also provide for refresher trainings to review updates to compliance measures as 
they arise from new legislation, AMLC and AGA issuances,  internal audit findings, and 
discoveries in ML/TF trends and detection techniques. In particular, the AML/CFT 
trainings shall explain the customer identification process, record keeping 
requirements, covered and suspicious transaction reporting, and the internal 
processes/chain of command for reporting and cooperation with the AMLC and AGA.

Page 13 of 23

Attendance by casino personnel at all training programs and seminars, whether 
internally or externally organized shall be recorded. Copies of training materials shall be 
kept and submitted to the compliance officer, which shall be made available to the 
AMLC and AGA upon their request.

Section 15.d. Submission of a Sworn Certification of Adoption of a duly approved 
MLPP duly approved by its Board within Ninety (90) days from the Effectivity of this CIRR.

Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this CIRR, all casinos shall prepare 
and have available for inspection an updated MLPP embodying the principles and 
provisions stated in this CIRR. The compliance officer shall submit to the AMLC and AGA 
a sworn certification that a new MLPP has been prepared, duly noted and approved by 
the casino’s Board of Directors.

RULE VI 
CUSTOMER IDENTIFICATION PROCESS AND CUSTOMER DUE DILIGENCE

A. 
Customer Identification. –

Section 16. Customer Identification. – Casinos shall establish and record the true 
identity of their customers based on identification documents, as defined under Section 6.R 
of this CIRR, upon opening of an account or redemption of casino chips or tokens or gaming 
instruments in an amount to be determined by the AMLC and AGA in the casino gaming area. 
They shall maintain a system of verifying the true identity of their customers based on reliable, 
independent sources, documents, data, or information. In case of corporate customers, 
including a trustee, agent, nominee, or intermediary arrangements, casinos are required to 
maintain a system of verifying their legal existence and organizational structure, as well as 
the authority and identification of all persons purporting to act on their behalf.

Once the customer’s identification details have been recorded in the casino 
management system of the casino for which the customer is issued a membership card, 
loyalty card or other document which allows the casino to identify such customer, such 
membership card, loyalty card or other document shall be considered a valid identification 
document of the customer in the casino for purposes of the identification requirement under 
this CIRR.

Section 17. Customer Identification System. – Casinos shall establish appropriate 
systems and methods, and adequate internal controls, compliant with the AMLA, this CIRR, 
AMLC issuances, the guidelines issued by the AGA for verifying and recording the true and full 
identity of their customers.

B. 
Customer Due Diligence. –

Section 18. Customer Due Diligence (CDD). –  Casinos shall know their customers and, 
to the extent possible, the intermediary and the person or entity on whose behalf the 
transaction is being conducted;provided, that the bettor/player shall be considered the 
beneficial owner if he has full and physical control over the bet placed on the table in the

Page 14 of 23

Gaming Area of the casino. Casinos shall apply the same criteria for assessing risk profiles to 
both parties and apply the appropriate standard of due diligence to each party.

Casinos shall create a system that will first establish and then record the full identity of 
their customers and risk assessment results. In addition to using all information available to 
them, casinos shall require customers to furnish the required Identification Documents.

In conducting CDD, a risk-based approach shall be undertaken depending on the type 
of customer, business relationship, or nature of the product, casino transaction or activity.

Section 19. Minimum Customer Information and Identification Documents when 
Conducting Customer Due Diligence. – The following are the minimum customer information 
and identification documents required in the conduct of CDD:

a. 
Name of customer; 
b. 
Date and place of birth; 
c. 
Present address; 
d. 
Permanent address; 
e. 
Contact number or information, if any; 
f. 
Nationality; 
g. 
Proof of Identification and Identification Number; 
h. 
Nature 
of 
work, 
name 
of 
employer 
or 
nature 
of 
self-
employment/business; and 
i. 
Source of funds.

Customers who open an account in a casino shall be required to submit a copy of an 
identification document.

Provided that the absence of any of the foregoing information shall not be considered 
a violation of this provision so long as the identity of the customer is sufficiently known by 
the presence of the other identifying information and the covered person is able to risk 
profile the customer.

Where the customer or authorized representative is a foreign national, casinos shall 
require said foreign national to present valid passport or Alien Certificate of Registration.

Section 20. Face-to-Face Contact. – Casinos shall conduct face-to-face contact at the 
account opening, or as reasonably practicable so as not to interrupt the normal conduct of 
business, taking into account the nature of the product, type of business and the risks 
involved; provided that ML and TF risks are effectively managed. Provided further, that no 
withdrawal or transfer of funds from the account of the customer shall be processed without 
conducting a face-to-face contact.

The use of Information and Communication Technology in the conduct of face-to-face 
contact may be allowed, provided that the covered person is in possession of and has verified 
the identification documents submitted by the prospective customer prior to the interview 
and that the entire procedure is documented.

Page 15 of 23

Section 21. Risk-Based CDD Standards. – Consistent with all AML/CFT compliance 
measures, a casino’s CDD procedures shall be risk-based, requiring enhanced diligence for 
customers posing a high-risk of ML/TF and permitting reduced due diligence for customers 
posing a low-risk of ML/TF. Casinos shall therefore document clear policies and procedures, 
including guidelines and criteria for determining which customers pose low, normal, or high 
risk of ML and TF. A casino’s internal risk classifications shall reflect the idiosyncratic risks to 
its operations, requiring an intimate knowledge of the risks inherent to their operations and 
the acquisition of relevant expertise to make such risk assessments.

The customer’s risk classification shall, on risk-based approach, be informed by the 
customer’s source of funds, occupation, residence or origin, status as politically exposed 
persons, adverse media exposure, appearance on government, international and industry 
watch lists; the types of services, products, and transactions sought by the customer; and the 
presence of linked accounts. Casinos shall document the risk classification and level of CDD 
applied to each customer.

A. 
Customer Risk Assessment. – Casinos shall develop clear, written and 
graduated customer acceptance policies and procedures, including a set 
of criteria for customers that are likely to pose low, normal, or high risk to 
their operations. The criteria may include:

1)  
the nature of the service or product to be availed of by the 
customers;

2)  
the purpose of the account or casino transaction;

3)  
the amount of funds to be deposited by a customer or the size of 
casino transactions undertaken or to be undertaken, including 
transactions in an amount to be determined by the AMLC and 
AGA;

4)  
the regularity or duration of the casino transaction;

5)  
the fact that a customer came from a high-risk jurisdiction;

6)  
the existence of suspicious transaction indicators; and

7)  
such other factors the casino may deem reasonable or necessary 
to consider in assessing the risk of a customer to ML and TF.

Casinos or AMLC and AGA shall set the standards in applying reduced, 
normal, and enhanced customer due diligence, including a set of conditions 
for the denial of account opening or services.

B. 
Ongoing Monitoring of Customers, Accounts and Casino Transactions. – 
Casinos shall, on the basis of materiality and risk, update all customer 
information and identification documents of existing customers required 
to be obtained under the AMLA, this CIRR, and other applicable issuances 
of the AMLC and the AGA.

Page 16 of 23

Casinos shall install an electronic AML monitoring system that will enable 
them to understand the normal and reasonable account or gaming activity 
of customers to ensure that the customers’ accounts and casino 
transactions are consistent with the casinos’ knowledge of its customers, 
and the latter’s gaming activities, risk profile, and source of funds.

C. 
Third Party Reliance. - Casinos may rely on a third party to perform 
customer identificationand face-to-face contact. The third party shall be:

a. 
A covered person as herein defined and as defined in the 
Section 3 (A) of the AMLA; or

b. 
A financial institution or DNFBP operating outside the 
Philippines that is covered by equivalent customer 
identification and face-to-face requirements.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the ultimate responsibility for identifying 
the customer remains with the casino relying on the third party.

Provided that, in cases of high-risk customers, the covered person relying 
on the third person shall also conduct enhanced due diligence procedure.

D. 
Outsourcing the Conduct of Customer Identification and Due Diligence. – 
Casinos may outsource the conduct of customer identification and due 
diligence, including face-to-face contact, to a counterparty, intermediary 
or agent. The outsource, counterparty or intermediary shall be regarded 
as agent of the covered person that is, the processes and documentation 
are those of the covered person itself. The ultimate responsibility for 
identifying the customer and keeping the identification documents 
remains with the casino.

The casino outsourcing the conduct of customer identification, including 
face-to-face contact, shall ensure that the employees or representatives 
of the counterparty, intermediary or agent undergo equivalent training 
program as that of the covered person’s own employees undertaking 
similar activity.

E. 
Prohibited Accounts. – Anonymous accounts and accounts under fictitious 
names shall be prohibited, and casinos shall maintain customers’ account 
only in the true and full name of the account owner or holder.

Section 22. Identification and Verification of a Beneficial Owner, Trustee, Nominee, or 
Agent. – Where an account is opened or a casino transaction is conducted by any person in 
behalf of another, the casinos shall establish and record the true and full identity and 
existence of both the account holder or transactor and the beneficial owner or person on 
whose behalf the casino transaction is being conducted. Provided, that the bettor/player 
shall be considered the beneficial owner if he has full and physical control over the bet placed 
on the table in the Gaming Area of the casino.

Page 17 of 23

The casinos shall determine the true nature of the parties’ capacities and duties by 
obtaining a copy of the written document evidencing their relationship and apply the same 
standards for assessing the risk profile and determining the standard of due diligence to be 
applied to both.  In case it entertains doubts as to whether the account holder or transactor 
is being used as a dummy in circumvention of existing laws, it shall apply enhanced due 
diligence or file a suspicious transaction report, if warranted.

Section 23. Prohibited Transactions. – Casinos shall be prohibited from engaging in the 
following transactions or activities:

1) 
Any transaction involving the conversion of cash from one form to another 
without being used in gaming, and results therefrom, made through:

a. 
The receipt of cash for transmittal of all or part thereof through 
wire or telegraphic transfer for or on behalf of a customer;

b. 
Payments in cash of funds received through wire or telegraphic 
transfer;

c. 
The cashing of checks or other negotiable instruments;

2) 
Receiving cash, the purpose or ownership of which cannot be ascertained 
within a period of at least seven (7) days from the date of receipt; and

3) 
Using of casino chips in the premises other than the issuing casino, including 
betting and exchanging into cash or other forms of casino chips.

Section 24. Politically Exposed Persons. – In addition to establishing the full identities of 
PEPs, casinos shall also establish and record the identities of the immediate family members 
and entities if publicly known to be related to the PEP. Casinos shall carefully consider a PEP’s 
position and the position’s attendant risks with respect to money laundering and terrorist 
financing in determining what standard of due diligence shall apply to them.

RULE VII
RECORD-KEEPING

Section 25. Record-Keeping. – All CDD records and casino transactions of customers 
shall be maintained and safely stored for at least five (5) years, except for records of video 
footage, where casinos may enforce a risk-based approach, provided that suspicious activities 
and STR-related footage are kept for 5 years or as otherwise allowed by the AMLC.  If a case 
has been filed in court, records, including video footage, must be retained and safely kept 
beyond the five (5)-year period, until it is officially confirmed by the AMLC Secretariat that 
the case has been resolved, decided or terminated with finality.

Section 26. Record Safekeeping. – A casino shall designate an officer to be responsible 
and accountable for all record-keeping requirements explained in this CIRR. The officer will

Page 18 of 23

also be responsible for making these records readily available to the AMLC and AGA upon 
request.

Casinos shall maintain records in an organized and confidential manner, which allows 
the AMLC, AGA, the courts, and any auditor acceptable to AGA to establish an audit trail for 
money laundering and terrorist financing activities, if any,and to assess its compliance 
program.

Section 27. Form of Records. – Records shall be retained as originals or copies in such 
forms as are admissible in court pursuant to existing laws, such as RA No. 8792 or the E-
Commerce Act and its implementing rules and regulations, and the applicable rules 
promulgated by the Supreme Court.

RULE VIII
TRANSACTION REPORTING

Section 28. Reporting of Covered and Suspicious Transactions. – Casinos shall report to 
the AMLC all covered transactions and suspicious transactions within five (5) working days, 
unless the AMLC prescribes a different period not exceeding fifteen (15) working days, from 
the occurrence thereof.

For suspicious transactions, “occurrence” refers to the date of determination of the 
suspicious nature of the transaction, which determination shall be made not exceeding ten 
(10) calendar days from the date of transaction. However, if the transaction is in any way 
related to, or the person transacting is involved in or connected to, a predicate offense or 
money laundering offense, the 10-day period for determination shall be reckoned from the 
date the covered person knew or should have known the suspicious transaction indicator.

Casinos shall take note and record instances where a transaction is initially flagged as 
potentially suspicious, even if they do not ultimately report the transaction through an STR, 
to facilitate ongoing monitoring of a given customer’s transactions.

Should a casino transaction be determined to be both a covered transaction and a 
suspicious transaction, it shall be reported as a suspicious transaction.

Section 29. Substance and Form of Reports. – Covered persons shall ensure the accuracy 
and completeness of CTRs and STRs, which shall be filed in the forms prescribed by the AMLC 
and shall be submitted in a secured manner to the AMLC in electronic form.

Casinos shall ensure the accuracy and completeness of CTRs and STRs in accordance 
with the reporting procedures prescribed by the AMLC. In order to provide accurate 
information, the casino shall regularly update customer identification information at least 
once every five (5) years on the basis of risk and materiality.

Section 30. Confidentiality of Reporting. – When reporting covered or suspicious 
transactions, casinos, and their officers and employees, are prohibited from communicating, 
directly or indirectly, in any manner or by any means, to any person or entity, or the media,

Page 19 of 23

the fact that a covered or suspicious transaction has been or is about to be reported, the 
contents of the report, or any other information in relation thereto. Any information about 
such reporting shall not be published or aired, in any manner or form, by the mass media, or 
through electronic mail, or other similar devices.

In case of violation thereof, the concerned officer, and employee, of the casino and 
media shall be held criminally liable under Section 14(d) of the AMLA, as amended.

Section 31. Safe Harbor Provision. – No administrative, criminal or civil proceedings shall 
lie against any person for having made a covered transaction or suspicious transaction report 
in the regular performance of his duties and in good faith, whether or not such reporting 
results in any criminal prosecution under the AMLA or any other Philippine law.

Section 32. Enrollment with the AMLC’s Reporting System. – All casinos shall register 
with the AMLC’s electronic reporting system within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of 
this CIRR.

RULE IX 
INQUIRY, FREEZING AND FORFEITURE OF MONETARY INSTRUMENT OR PROPERTY

Section 33. Authority to Examine Customer’s Accounts. – The AMLC or AGA  may 
examine any particular account, as herein defined, including related accounts, with any 
covered person as herein defined, that is deemed related to a predicate offense or money 
laundering offense as defined under Republic Act No. 9160, as amended, or financing of 
terrorism as defined under RA No. 10168.

For purposes of this section, ‘related accounts’ shall refer to accounts, the funds and 
sources of which originated from and/or are materially linked to the accounts subject of a 
freeze order(s) issued by a competent authority or subject of an inquiry under the preceding 
paragraph.

Section 34. Freezing and Forfeiture of Monetary Instruments or Properties. – The 
freezing and forfeiture of monetary instruments or properties shall be governed by RA No. 
9160, as amended, and its Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations. Upon expiration of 
a freeze order, casinos  shall secure  written confirmation from the AMLC whether or not a 
case has been filed.

For purposes of this CIRR, the freeze order or asset preservation order issued shall be 
limited only to the amount of cash or monetary instrument or value of property that the court 
finds there is probable cause to be considered as proceeds of a predicate offense, and the 
freeze order or asset preservation order shall not apply to amounts in the same accounts in 
excess of the amount or value of the proceeds of the predicate offense.

Section 35. Rules of Procedure. – Proceedings for the issuance of freeze order shall be 
governed by the Rule of Procedure in Cases of Civil Forfeiture, Asset Preservation, and 
Freezing of Monetary Instrument, Property, or Proceeds Representing, Involving, or Relating

Page 20 of 23

to an Unlawful Activity or Money Laundering Offense under Republic Act No. 9160, as 
Amended (A.M. No. 05-11-04-SC).

RULE X 
COMPLIANCE CHECKING AND INVESTIGATION BY THE AMLC

Section 36. Authority to Check Compliance and Conduct Investigation. – Pursuant to 
Section 7(5)(7), of the AMLA, the AMLC shall have the authority to conduct compliance 
checking and investigation:

A. 
Compliance Checking. –

1) 
Authority of the AMLC in Compliance Checking. – The AMLC shall 
have the power to conduct on-site compliance checking, with at 
least 24 hours prior notice, to validate the compliance of covered 
persons, as herein defined, on the requirements of the AMLA and 
this CIRR.

2) 
Checking of Covered Person’s MLPP. – Covered persons shall make 
available its MLPP upon request by the AMLC.

B. 
Investigation. –

1)  
Authority to Investigate. – The AMLC, shall investigate suspicious 
transactions and covered transactions deemed suspicious, ML and TF 
activities, and other violations of the AMLA, its implementing rules and 
regulations, this CIRR and other AMLC issuances.

In the exercise of its investigative function, the AMLC, through its 
Secretariat, may perform the following in accordance with  law:

a. 
Direct casinos to produce information, documents and 
objects, including video footages, clippings, recordings, 
and electronic data, necessary to determine the true 
identity of persons subject of investigation;

b. 
Require responsible officers and employees of casinos and 
pertinent government agencies to give statements 
pertinent to the casino transaction, person or violation 
being investigated; and

c. 
Request information, documents and objects from 
domestic government agencies; foreign states, including 
its financial intelligence units, law enforcement agencies, 
and financial regulators; or the United Nations and other 
international organizations or entities.

Page 21 of 23

2) 
Duty of Casinos to Cooperate with the AMLC.  – Casinos shall in 
accordance with law, immediately give the authorized personnel of 
the AMLC, full access to all information, documents or objects 
pertaining to the account, casino transaction and/or person subject 
of the investigation.

Certified true copies of the documents pertaining to account, casino 
transaction and/or person subject of the investigation shall be 
submitted within five (5) working days from receipt of the request or 
order from the AMLC.

RULE XI 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 37.  
Penal and Administrative Sanctions. – Non-compliance with the 
provisions of this CIRR shall be subject to such penalties and sanctions as the AMLC and AGA 
may impose under the AMLA, and AGA’s Charters, respectively, as well as the AMLC and AGA’s 
implementing rules and regulations and issuances made pursuant to Section 9 hereof.

The Rules on the Imposition of Administrative Sanctions under RA No. 9160, as 
amended shall apply to covered persons contemplated under this CIRR.

Section 38. 
Separability Clause. – If any provision of this CIRR is declared 
unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity and effectivity of other provisions 
hereof.

Section 39. 
Repealing Clause. – All AML/CFT rules and issuances, relating to 
casinos, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this CIRR, are hereby repealed, 
amended or modified accordingly.

Section 40. 
Effectivity. – This CIRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its 
publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved:

ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING COUNCIL 
(AMLC Resolution No. 92, dated 11 October 2017)

Acting Chairperson
(Officer-in-Charge, Central Bank of the Philippines)

Page 22 of 23

Member 
(Chairperson, Securities and Exchange Commission) 
Member 
(Commissioner, Insurance Commission)

PHILIPPINE AMUSEMENT AND GAMING CORPORATION 
(Board Meeting, dated 12 October 2017)

Chairman and Chief Executive Officer

President and Chief Operating Officer

Director

Director

Director

CAGAYAN ECONOMIC ZONE AUTHORITY 
(Resolution No. 10-002-17, dated 10 October 2017)

Acting Chairman

Vice Chairman

Director

Director

Director

Director

Director

Director

Director

Director

Page 23 of 23

AURORA PACIFIC ECONOMIC ZONE AND FREEPORT AUTHORITY 
(Board Resolution No. 2017-8, dated 18 October 2017)

President and Chief Executive Officer