The Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of
Republic Act (RA) 11148,
otherwise known as the
“Kalusugan at Nutrisyon ng Mag-Nanay Act”
Contents
RULE 1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE
RULE 2: DECLARATION OF POLICY
RULE 3: OBJECTIVES
RULE 4: SCALING UP HEALTH AND NUTRITION FOR THE FIRST ONE
THOUSAND (1,000) DAYS OF LIFE
4
RULE 5: COVERAGE
5
RULE 6: DEFINITION OF TERMS
6
RULE 7. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
9
RULE 8. PROGRAM COMPONENTS
11
RULE 9. NUTRITION IN THE AFTERMATH OF NATURAL DISASTERS
AND CALAMITIES
:
17
RULE 10: CAPACITY BUILDING FOR BARANGAY HEALTH AND
NUTRITION VOLUNTEERS AND OTHER PERSONNEL
18
RULE 11: THE NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL (NNC) GOVERNING
~
BOARD
18
RULE 12: POWERS, FUNCTIONS, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF
THE NNC
20
RULE 13: ROLE OF NNC MEMBER AGENCIES, OTHER NGAS AND
LGUS
21
RULE 14: PARTICIPATION OF CSOs AND THE ACADEME
30
RULE 15: MONITORING, REVIEW AND ASSESSMENT OF THE
PROGRAM
31
RULE 16: REPORTORIAL REQUIREMENTS
32
RULE 17: PROGRAM INSTITUTIONALIZATION, COMPLIANCE, AND
INCENTIVES
32
RULE 18: PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES
32
RULE 19: APPROPRIATIONS
33.
RULE 20: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
33

RULE 1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This shall be known as the implementing rules and regulations (IRR) of Republic Act
(RA) No.11148, otherwise known asthe “Kalusugan at Nutrisyon ng Mag-Nanay Act.”
SECTION 2. PURPOSE.
Theserules are hereby promulgatedto prescribe the manner, procedure, and guidelines
-
for the implementationofthe “Kalusuganat Nutrisyon ng Mag-Nanay Act,”to facilitate
compliance therewith, and to achieve the objectives thereof.
RULE 2: DECLARATION OF POLICY
SECTION1.It is declared as policy of the State that:
a.
The right to health is a fundamental principle guaranteed by the State. As
emphasized under Section 15, Article II of the 1987 Constitution, "[t]he State
shall protect and promote the right to health of the people andinstill health
consciousness
among them.”
Moreover,
pursuant to various
international
humanrights instruments, and agreements that the State adheres to, the State
guarantees the right to adequate food, care, and nutrition to pregnant and
lactating women, including adolescent females, womenof reproductive age, and
especially children from zero to two (0-2) yearsold.
b.
The State commits to the Philippine Development Plan (PDP), the Philippine
Plan of Action on Nutrition (PPAN), the Infant and Young Child Feeding
(IYCF) Strategic Plan, the Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD)
Strategic Plan—with reference to pertinent international commitments such as
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the Astana Declaration on Primary
Health Care, World Health Assembly (WHA) Resolution 69.9, World Health
Organization
(WHO) Global Nutrition Targets 2025 (GNT 2025), Framework
for Action on Nutrition of the Second International Conference on Nutrition
(ICN2), the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC),
and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability
(UNCRPD)—1o contributeto the improvementofthe quality of human resource
in the country and the reduction of maternal and child morbidity and mortality,
and stunting.
c.
The State adopts universal health care (UHC)principles such as strengthening
primary health care, health service delivery packages, health care provider
networks, population-based and individual-based health services, use of health
technology
assessment,
and
harmonized
financial
plans
to
support
the
implementation of the First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy.
d.
The State declares its determination to eliminate hunger and reduceall forms of
malnutrition. The State further maintains that ensuring healthy lives, promoting
Page 2 of 34
tte

well-being, ending hunger and foodinsecurity, and achieving good nutrition for
all at all ages are essential to the attainment of sustainable development.
e.
The State prioritizes nutrition for adolescent females, pregnant and lactating
women, infants, and young children, to be implementedin an integrated manner
by all branches of government,
using a
whole-of-government
approach in
collaboration with civil society organizations (CSOs) and the private sector,
with avoidanceofconflicts ofinterest.
f.
The State scales up nutrition intervention programsin the first one thousand
(1,000) days ofa child's life, and allocates resourcesin a sustainable mannerto
improve the nutritional status and to address the malnutrition of infants and
young children from zero to two (0-2) years old—thecritical period in which
they are at risk for irreversible damage to cognitive and physical development,
adolescent females, pregnant and lactating women; as well as to ensure growth
and
development
of
infants
and
young
children,
and
to
prevent
the
intergenerational effects of stunting.
RULE 3: OBJECTIVES
SECTION 1. The Implementation of the Act specifically aimsto:
a.
Provide comprehensive, sustainable, multisectoral strategies and approaches to
address health and nutrition problems of newborns,infants and young children,
pregnant and lactating women, and adolescent females, as well as multi-
factorial issues that negatively affect the development of newborns, infants and
young children, integrating the short-, medium-, and long-term plans of the
government
to
end
hunger,
improve
health
and
nutrition,
and
reduce
malnutrition;
,
b.
Provide a policy environment conduciveto nutrition improvement;
c.
Provide
evidence-based
nutrition-specific
interventions
and actions
which
integrate responsive caregiving and early stimulation in a safe and protective
environment over thefirst one thousand (1,000) days of life as recommended
by the United
Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health
Organization
(WHO), as well as nutrition-sensitive
mechanisms,
strategies,
programs, and approaches in implementing programs andprojects to improve
nutritional status, and to eradicate malnutrition and hunger;
d.
Strengthen and define the roles of the Department of Health (DOH), the
National Nutrition Council (NNC), and other government agencies tasked to
implementnutrition programsfor the first one thousand (1,000) daysoflife;
e.
Institutionalize and scale up nutrition in the first one thousand (1,000) days of
life
in
the
national
plan on
nutrition—particularly
PPAN,
the
ECCD
intervention packages developed by the NNC, the PDP, the National Plan of
Page 3 of 34
t1

Action for Children
(NPAC), the regional
development plans, and Local
DevelopmentInvestment Plans (LDIP), as well as those for health and nutrition;
f.
Ensure the meaningful,
active and sustained
participation,
partnership and
cooperation of NNC-memberagencies, other National Government Agencies
(NGAs), local government units (LGUs), CSOs, and the private sector in an
integrated and holistic manner for the promotion of the health and nutritional
well-being of the population,
prioritizing in areas with high incidence and
magnitude: of poverty,
Geographically
Isolated and
Disadvantaged
Areas
(GIDA), and in hazard and conflict zones;
g.
Strengthen enforcement of Executive Order No. 51, series of 1986 (EO 51,s.
1986), otherwise known as the "National Code of Marketing of Breastmilk
Substitutes, Breastmilk Supplements and Other Related Products" or the "Milk
Code," and RA No. 10028, otherwise known as the "Expanded Breastfeeding
Promotion Act of 2009," to protect, promote, and support optimal infant and
young child feeding and maternity protection, and in consultation with the
stakeholders
in
the
public
and
private
sectors,
consider
the
new
recommendations
from the WHA Resolution 69.9 to end the inappropriate
promotion of food for infants and young children;
h.
Strengthen
the
implementation
of other
nutrition-related
laws,
programs,
policies, and guidelines including multisectoral integration, inclusivity, gender
equality, and promotion of the UNCRC; and
i.
Strengthen family community support systems with the active engagement of
parents and caregivers, with support from LGUs, the NGAs, CSOs, and other
stakeholders.
RULE 4: SCALING UP HEALTH AND NUTRITION FOR
THE FIRST ONE THOUSAND (1,000) DAYS OF LIFE
SECTION
1. The DOH, the NNC, and the Department of Agriculture
(DA)—in
coordination with key NGAs, LGUs, CSOs,and other stakeholders—shall develop and
implement a comprehensive and sustainable strategy forthe first one thousand(1,000)
days of life to address the health, nutrition, and developmental problems affecting
infants, young children, adolescent females, and pregnantand lactating women.It shall
operationalize the latest PPAN,integrating the short, medium, and long-term plans of
the governmentin responseto the globalcall to eradicate hunger, improve nutrition,
and prevent and manage malnutrition,as one (1) of the seventeen (17) SDGs.
SECTION 2.
The comprehensive and sustainable strategy shall be developed and
approved by the NNC Governing Board within sixty (60) days from theeffectivity of
this IRR. This strategy shall be considered as inputs to the updating of the PDP andall
related sectoral and thematic plans. The strategy shall be updated within the framework
of the formulation and updating of the national developmentplan.
Page 4 of 34
1°We

SECTION 3.
All key agencies
shall integrate
relevant programs, projects, and
activities in their respective plans and budget proposals aligned with the current PPAN.
Programs,projects, and activities in agency plans and budget proposals shall be tagged
as such in the relevant documents.
SECTION 4.
To ensure the effective translation of the First One Thousand (1,000)
Days Strategy into programs, projects, and activities, the DOH, including the NNC,
shall spearhead the formulation of agency policies, national policy guidelines, and
Manual of Operations
(MOP) for the
implementation of the Strategy within one
hundred and eighty (180) daysafter the approvalofthis IRR. The MOPshall be updated
regularly or aligned with the updating of the PPAN—oras maybe needed.
RULE 5: COVERAGE
SECTION1. This IRR shall govern the implementation of this Act including the
development of comprehensive and sustainable strategies on the first one thousand
(1,000)
days of life by the DOH, NNC, DA, NGAs,
LGUs (provinces,
cities,
municipalities, and barangays), CSOs, and other stakeholders.
SECTION 2. The
implementation
shall cover those who are nutritionally-at-risk,
especially pregnant and lactating
women particularly adolescent mothers, women of
reproductive age, adolescent females, and all Filipino children who are newly born up
to age twenty-four (24) months.
SECTION3. Priority shall be given to those who reside in disaster-prone areas and
GIDAs, suchas those that are isolated due to distance, inaccessibility to transportation,
and weather conditions.
These
areas may also have
unserved and
underserved
communities,
communities in or recovering from situation of crisis or armed conflict
and recognized as such by a government body, with persons belonging to the vulnerable
sector, and record high incidences of poverty.
SECTION4. The NNCshall prioritize and advocate for LGUs, which meetany ofthe
followingcriteria:
a.
With the highest prevalence or high magnitude of undernutrition and nutrient-
deficiency
among
pregnant and lactating women,
adolescent females, and
children aged zero to two (0-2) years;
b.
Availability of facilities or capability to implement the program; and
c.
Prioritizes such program in their locality and willingness to provide counterpart
resources for its implementation.
These LGUs,as well as poorest provinces identified by the Human Development and
Poverty Reduction Cluster (HDPRC),shall be identified as PPAN focusareas.
Page 5 of 34
tne

RULE 6: DEFINITION OF TERMS
SECTION1. For purposes of implementing this Act, the following terms are defined
as follows:
a.
Breastmilk Substitute (BMS) refers to any type of milk, in either liquid or
powdered form,including soy milk, follow-up formula, and growing-up milks,
that are specifically marketed for feeding infants and young children up to the
age ofthree (3) years;
Chronic Energy Deficiency (CED),
or acute
undernutrition,
refers to a
condition where there is negative energy balance due to inadequate food and
nutrient intake, problemsin absorption, relatively rare or excessive nutrientloss
mostly due to infections and malignancies;
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) refer to non-State group of actors whose
aimsare neither to generate profits nor to seek governing power, such as non-
government
organizations
(NGOs),
professional
associations,
foundations,
independentresearch institutes, community-based organizations (CBOs), faith-
based
organizations,
people's
organizations,
social
movements,
network
coalitions, and/or labor unions, which are organized based
onethical, cultural,
scientific, religious or philanthropic considerations, and workers associations;
Early Stimulation refers to the process where infants and young children
receive external stimuli to interact with others and their environment to promote
early child development.
It provides different opportunities for the child to
explore, develop skills and abilities in a natural way, and understand whatis
happening around them.
Examples of early stimulation are language, motor,
and sensory stimulation with the aim of optimizing their cognitive, physical,
emotional, and social abilities to avoid undesiredstates in development;
First One Thousand (1,000) Days of Life refers to the period of a child'slife,
spanning the nine (9) months in the womb, starting from conception
tothefirst
twenty-four (24) months of life—whichis consideredto be the critical window
of opportunity to promote health and developmentand prevent malnutrition and
its life-long consequences;
Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDA)referto areasthat
are isolated due to distance or geographical isolation, weather conditions, and
lack of modes of transportation.
This also refers to unserved and underserved
communities,
and other areas identified to have access or service delivery
problems,
high
incidence
of
poverty,
presence
of
vulnerable
sector,
communities in or recovering from situation of crisis or armed conflict, and
those recognized as such by a government body;
Kangaroo Care (or Kangaroo Mother Care)refers to a universally available
and biologically sound method
ofcare for all newborns, but in particular for
small babies,
with key components:
a)
skin-to-skin
contact; b) exclusive
Page 6 of 34
Lang

breastfeeding;
c)
support to the
mother/parent-infant
dyad; and d) early
discharge and follow-up.
Said method of care is used in practice by both
mothers andfathers;
.
Local Government Unit (LGU) refersto territorial and political subdivisions
called provinces, cities,
municipalities, and barangays
established by or in
accordance with the Constitution, as specifically under the Local Government
Code (LGC);
i. Low Birth Weightrefers to weightat birth of an infant, whether born full term
or preterm, of less than two thousand five hundred grams(2,500 g) or five and
a half pounds(5.5 Ibs), or five pounds and eight ounces(5 lbs, 8 02);
Malnutrition refers to deficiencies, excesses, or imbalances in a person's intake
of protein and/or
nutrients
covering
both
undemutrition
which
includes
suboptimal
breastfeeding,
stunting,
wasting
or thinness,
underweight
and
micronutrient
deficiencies, or insufficiencies, as well as overnutrition, which
includes overweight and obesity;
. Maternity Protection refers to the fundamental right of women at work which
aims to preserve the health of mothers and their newborns, and to provide
measure of economic security for the women concerned
andtheir families.It
herein refers to the rights of pregnant and lactating mothersat work as stipulated
in existing labor, civil service, and other related laws and regulations;
Moderate Acute Malnutrition (MAM)
refers to children aged zero to fifty-
nine (0-59) months with low weight-for-length/height, defined as between two
(2) andthree (3) Standard Deviations (SD) below the median (<-2 up to -3 SD)
of the WHO growth standards or a Mid-Upper Arm Circumference (MUAC)
measurementof less than one hundred twenty-five millimeters (<125mm) and
greater than or equal to one hundred fifteen millimeters (2115mm);
. Nutrition-Sensitive
Interventions and Programs refer to interventions or
programs that address the underlying determinants of maternal, fetal, infant, and
child nutrition and development, such as those pertaining to food security, social
protection,
adequate
caregiving
resources at the maternal
household
and
community levels; and access to health services and a safe and hygienic
environment, and incorporate specific nutrition goals and actions.
Nutrition-
sensitive
programs can serve as
delivery
platforms
for
nutrition-specific
interventions, potentially increasing their scale, coverage, and effectiveness;
.
Nutrition-Specific
Interventions and Programs refer to interventions or
programs that address the immediate determinants of maternal, fetal, infant and
child nutrition and development, adequate food and nutrient intake, feeding,
caregiving and parenting practices, and low burdenofinfectious diseases;
Page 7 of 34
tl ae

o.
Nutritionally-at-Risk Pregnant Women refer to pregnant women, including
adolescent mothers, with a low pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI),or those
who
donot gain sufficient weight during pregnancy, with any of the following
predisposing
factors:
narrowly-spaced
pregnancies
and births,
situated in
families
with low income,
with large number of dependents
where food
purchase is an economic problem, has previously given birth to a preterm or low
birth weight infant, or other unfavorable prognostic factors, such as obesity or
anemia,
with diseases which influence nutritional
status such as diabetes,
tuberculosis, drug addiction, alcoholism, and mental disorder. In the absence of
a verifiable BMI, MUAC measurementwill be used;
p.
Overweight and Obesity refer to the abnormal or excessive fat accumulation
that may impair health.
It is measured by BMI, a simple index of weight-for-
height, which is commonly used to classify overweight and obesity among
adults.
BMI is calculated by dividing a person's weight in kilograms by the
square of his/her height in meters (kg/m”). According to the WHO, adults with
a BMI greater than or equal to twenty-five (25) are overweight and a BMI
greater than or equal to thirty (30) is obese. For children, it is defined as the
percentage of children aged zeroto fifty-nine (0-59) months whose weightfor
length/height is above two (2) SD (overweight) or above three (3) SD (obese)
from the median of the WHO Child Growth Standards; and BMI-for-age for
adolescent is: >1 SD is overweight, >2 SD is obese, >3 SD severely obese;
q.
Responsive Caregiving refers to the method where the caregiver pays prompt
and close attention with affection to what the child is signaling and provides a
response that is appropriate to the child's
immediate
behavior, needs and
developmentalstate;
r.
Routine Child Immunization refers to provision of vaccines against vaccine
preventable diseases (VPDs) among newborns, infants, and children under the
age of five years.
This includes
vaccines
against: (a) Tuberculosis;
(b)
Diphtheria, Pertussis and Tetanus (DPT); (c) Poliomyelitis; (d) Measles; (e)
Mumps; (f) Rubella or German measles; (g) Hepatitis B; (h) Pneumonia, ear
infection, meningitis and other invasive diseases due to Hemophilus influenzae
Type B (HiB) and Streptococcus pneumoniae; and (i) other types as may be
|
determined by the Secretary of Health;
s.
Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) refers to children aged zeroto fifty-nine
(0-59) months with very low weight for length/height, definedas less than three
(3) SD below the median (<-3SD) of the WHO Growth Standards, characterized
by visible severe wasting, the presence of bipedal pitting edema, or a MUAC
measurementof less than one hundredfifteen millimeters (<1 15mm);
t.
Stunting refers to chronic undernutrition during the most critical periods of
growth and developmentin early life. It is defined as the percentageof children
aged zero to fifty-nine (0-59) months whose height for age is below minus two
Page 8 of 34
ne

(2) SD (for moderate stunting) and minus three (3) SD (for severe stunting) from
the median of the WHO Growth Standards; and
u.
Vulnerable Groupsrefer to those who, by their situation, make their family
members at risk to developing health, nutrition, and developmental issues and
problems; for example:
subsistence farmers and fisherfolk,
agriculture and
fishery workers, indigenous peoples, victims of disasters and calamities, the
urban poor especially those in resettlement areas, workers in the informal
economy, and persons with disabilities.
RULE 7. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
SECTON1. The DOH,in coordination with NNC, DA, LGUs, and key NGAs, shall
be responsible for the implementation of this Act.
SECTION2. It shall be implemented at the barangay level through the health centers,
rural health units, and/or barangay health stations, under the direct supervision of the
city and/or municipal government. The implementation of the First One Thousand
(1,000) Days Strategy shall be supported by a local resolution or policy from their
respective
Sangguniang
Bayan,
Sangguniang
Panlungsod,
and
Sangguniang
Barangay.
SECTION3. The barangay health workers (BHWs) and barangay nutrition scholars
(BNSs), together with child development workers (CDWs), shall be mobilized and
provided with resources and benefits to carry out their tasks including allowances
granted by their LGUs. Their PhilHealth memberships shall be in accordance with the
minimum requirements set by PhilHealth.
Benefits for BHWsand BNSs include those provided under the RA No. 7883—known
as “The Barangay Health Workers' Benefits and Incentives Act of 1995”—which
includes hazard
allowance,
subsistence
allowance,
training,
education and career
enrichment programs
(TECEPS), civil service eligibility, free legal services, and
preferential access to loan, and Presidential
Decree No. 1569 (Strengthening the
Barangay Nutrition Program by Providing for a Barangay Nutrition Scholar in Every
Barangay),
which includes civil service eligibility, training stipend, kit, and travel
allowance.
SECTION
4. LGUs are
encouraged to integrate
maternal,
neonatal,
child, and
adolescent health and nutrition programsin the local nutrition action plans (LNAPs),
and investment plans for health. For this purpose, the local nutrition action officers
(NAOs) designated or appointed by their local chief executives (LCEs) shall facilitate
processes for the formulation, approval, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation ofthe
LNAPs andits integration in the Comprehensive Development Plans (CDPs), LDIPs,
and
Annual
Investment
Plans
(AIPs).
They
shall
coordinate
closely
with
offices/departments of their
respective
LGUs to
ensure
the
harmonization
and
integration ofefforts for nutrition improvement.
Page 9 of 34
tt Ge

SECTION5. The NNC and other NGAs concerned shall provide appropriate technical
assistance
to
respective
LGU
counterparts in the
development,
formulation,
and
implementation of this Act and this IRR.
SECTION 6. CROSS-CUTTING PROGRAM COMPONENTS. The DOH, NNC,
and DA,in coordination with key NGAs, LGUs, CSOs, and other stakeholders, shall
work together to
review,
integrate,
and
strengthen
the
following
cross-cutting
components to improvethe effective coverage, delivery, and scale up of the First One
Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy Components, in accordance with the WHO, UNICEF
and World Bank’s
Nurturing Care Framework for Early Child Development, for
infants, children, pregnant and lactating women, and adolescent females:
a.
Policy, standards, and guideline development. Formulate policies, standards,
guidelines, clinical practice guidelines, and manuals of operation which will be
reviewedand revised as may be needed to ensure alignment with this Act, the
PPAN,and UHCprinciples, which set the policy direction for the First One
Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy. Additional policies, standards, and guidelines
"will be formulated as may be needed.
b.
National andlocal health and nutrition investment planning andfinancing.
Thelocal investment plans and LNAPs by LGUsshall be integrated and aligned
with PPAN.
c.
Service delivery. Interventions under the First One Thousand (1,000) Days
Strategy shall be included in service packages based on the principles of UHC.
New interventions, as well as those existing requiring periodic review for the
Strategy, shall undergo health technology assessment (HTA) based on UHC
principles.
.
d.
Sectoral collaboration and partnerships. The NNC,the regional nutrition
committee, and local nutrition committees shall provide the basic mechanism
for sectoral collaboration and partnership for the implementation of the First
One Thousand (1,000) DaysStrategy.
e.
Health and nutrition human resources capacity development. The DOH,
together with NNC,in collaboration with key agencies, shall develop strategies
and implementation plans for the capacity building of health human resources
for the implementation of the First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy.
f.
Logistics and supply chain management. Tools for forecasting, procurement,
storage, distribution, and delivery of supplies needed in the implementation of
the First One Thousand
(1,000) Days
Strategy
shall be enhanced and/or
developed to ensure the timely availability of supplies for delivery of services
underthe Strategy.
g.
Health and nutrition promotion and education, social mobilization, and
community organization, including advocacy. DOH,together with NNC and
in collaboration with key agencies, shall develop a comprehensive health and
Page 10 of 34
Mph

nutrition promotion,
communication,
and advocacy plan for the First One
Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy for adaptation and localization by LGUs.
h.
Monitoring
and
evaluation.
The
DOH,
together
with
NNC
and
in
collaboration with key agencies, shall develop a monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) plan. The M&Eplan shall identify core outcome, output, process, and
input
indicators—and
mechanisms
for
generating,
processing,
analyzing,
reporting,
disseminating, and using these indicators for policy and program
development and adjustment.
The
accomplishments
shall be linked to the
performance standards ofagencies involved.
_
i.
Research and development. The DOH and NNC,-in collaboration with key
agencies, shall develop a research agenda to be integrated into the National
Unified Health Research Agenda (NUHRA), and the PPAN Research Agenda
shall be aligned with the needs of UHC andthe First One Thousand (1,000)
Days Strategy. The contents of this agenda shall be funded by all agencies
concerned.
j.
Knowledge management and information. Policies, guidelines, researches,
reports, data, and other relevant and related materials shall be made available to
stakeholders for designing, reviewing, and expanding the implementation in
accordance with RA No. 10173, otherwise knownas “The Data Privacy Act.”
RULE 8. PROGRAM COMPONENTS
SECTION 1. The program shall include services and interventions provided at the
different life stages based on the Nurturing Care Framework.
LGUs, NGAs, CSOs
concemed, and other stakeholders shall work together to ensure the delivery of these
services and interventions.
SECTION 2. General
services and interventions to be rendered in the first one
thousand
(1,000) days period of a child, pregnant and lactating women including
adolescent females and adolescent mothers, and women of reproductive age, giving
high priority to high risk groups and those belonging to the vulnerable population are
the following:
a.
Appropriate assessment
and counselling on maternal nutrition,
appropriate
infant and young child feeding practices, mental health, avoidanceof risk-taking
behaviors, smoking cessation, and adoption of healthy lifestyle practices, and
family health;
,
b.
For maternal and newborn care, the provision of mother and baby-friendly
practices during labor and delivery and childbirth and immediate newborn care
in line with, and in compliance with, Mother and Baby-Friendly Health Facility
Initiative, RA No. 10028 (amending RA No. 7600, otherwise known as “The
Rooming-in and Breastfeeding Act of 1992”), EO 51, s. 1986, and other related
administrative issuances of the DOH;
Page 11 of 34
[Io

.
Provision of support to fathers and caregivers to ensure their commitment to
support the motherand the child on proper health and nutrition care, and provide
necessary counselling and positive parenting support interventions;
.
Protection,
promotion,
and
support
of
optimal
breastfeeding
and
complementary
feeding based on national infant and young child feeding
guidelines.
Products that function as
breast-milk
substitutes shall not be
promoted. For complementary feeding, emphasis shall be placed on the use of
suitable,
nutrient-rich,
home-prepared,
and locally available foods that are
preparedandfed safely;
.
Dietary supplementation and/or feeding programsin the implementation of the
First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy shall be implemented for priority
targeted age groups such aschildren aged six to twenty-three (6-23) months and
nutritionally-at-risk
pregnant and lactating women,as provided for in Rule 8,
Section 3.a.(4) and Rule 8, Section 3.f.(1);
Provision of age-appropriate micronutrient supplements such asiron with folic
acid, calcium carbonate, iodine, Vitamin A, and other micronutrients based on
DOHguidelines;
.
Promotion of the
consumption
of iodized
salt and foods
fortified
with
micronutrients based on DOH guidelines;
.
Provision of age-appropriate maternal and routine child immunizations based
on the latest DOH guidelines, including tetanus and diphtheria toxoid vaccine,
and other vaccines as appropriate;
Provision oforal health services including oral health assessment;
Provision of anti-helminthic tablets in line with DOH guidelines;
.
Counselling
and
support
to
parents
and
caregivers
on
parent/caregiver-
infant/child interaction for responsive care, early stimulation, and promotion of
early
literacy
for
early
childhood
development
and
early
detection,
identification,
referral,
and
provision
of
appropriate
intervention
for
developmental delays and disabilities;
Provision of comprehensive bio-psychosocial interventions during the first one
thousand (1,000) days of life through multisectoral collaboration among and
between stakeholders;
. Protection against child abuse, violence against women and children, injuries,
and accidents
including the provision of first aid, counselling, and proper
referrals;
.
Provision of early referral to higher level facilities to manageillness, injuries,
disabilities, and/or other complications including acute malnutrition;
Page 12 of 34tl

o.
Provision of potable source of water and appropriate sanitation facilities and
services, and counselling and support on proper handwashing, personal hygiene,
and environmental sanitation;
p.
Support for home kitchen gardens wherever feasible; provision of locally
available grown crops, vegetables, and fruits in addition to other agricultural
products to be used in complementary feeding and dietary supplementation;
q.
Counselling on, and utilization of, modern methods of family planning and
access to reproductive
health care services, as defined in RA No. 10354,
otherwise knownas “The Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act
of 2012;”
r.
Social welfare support to improve access to health and nutrition services, such
as—butnot limited to—dietary supplementation, provision of complementary
food and/or other healthy food products and commodities for nutritionally-at-
risk pregnant
women,
postpartum
and/or
lactating women, and newborns
belonging to poorest of the poor families, and assessment and referral for
development delays and other disabilities for early prevention, treatment, and
rehabilitation for infants six (6) months and above whobelongto poorest ofthe
poor families;
s.
Assurance of women and child-friendly spaces during calamities, disasters, or
other emergencies, where mothers and their infants will be able to access and
be provided early childhood care and development services, such as health,
nutrition, early learning and stimulation, responsive care, and protection;
t.
Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) coverage and utilization
of benefit packages, and linkagesto facility and community-based health and
nutrition workers, and volunteers; and
u.
Others as may be determined basedoninternational and national guidelines and
evidence generated locally.
SECTION3.In addition to the general services under Section 2, the following specific
health, nutrition, and related services and interventions are to be rendered during the
first one thousand (1,000) days period of a child, pregnant and lactating women
including adolescent females and adolescent mothers, and women of reproductive age
giving high priority to high risk groups, and those belonging
to the vulnerable
population:
a. Prenatal Period (First Two Hundred
Seventy
[270] Days). Prenatal care
servicesat the facility and community level shall include, but not limited to the
following:
(1) Pregnancy tracking and enrollmentto antenatal care services (ANC);
(2) Regular
follow-up to complete the recommended
minimum number of
quality ANCcare visits with properreferral for high-risk pregnancies;
Page 13 of 34a

i/
including
adolescent mothers, and provision of dietary
supplementation
using RUSForother nutrient-dense food, as appropriate;
(5) Organization
of
community-based
mother
support
groups
and
peer
counsellors for breastfeeding in cooperation with other health and nutrition
workers;
(6) Maternity
protection and lactation breaks for women in the workplaces
including micro, small, and medium enterprises(MSMEs);
(7) Availability of lactation stations in workplaces, both in government andin
the private sector, informal economy workplaces, and in public places and
public means oftransportation as stipulated in RA No. 10028, and its IRR;
(8) Organization of breastfeeding support groups in workplaces, in cooperation
with occupational health workers and human resource managers trained in
lactation managementfor the workplace; and
(9) Others as may be determined based oninternational and national guidelines
and evidence generatedlocally.
. Birth and Newborn Period (Twenty-Eight [28] Days). Health and nutrition
servicesat the facility and community level shall include, but not limited to, the
following:
(1) Provision of early and continuous skin-to-skin contactto all full-term babies
and continuous kangaroo care for small babies born preterm and low birth
weight, in compliance with the newborn protocol ofthe DOHin allfacilities
providing birthing services;
(2) Provision of routine newborn care services such as eye prophylaxis, Vitamin
K supplementation, and immunizations;
(3) Administration of newborn screening and newborn hearing screening;
(4) Availability of human milk pasteurizer for strategic level two (2) and level
three (3) facilities with neonatal intensive care units (NICU) to ensure
breastmilk supply for small babies born preterm andJow birth weight within
its facility, the service delivery network it serves, and for use of infants and
young children during emergencies and disasters, in accordance with DOH
guidelines;
(5) Facilitate the prompt birth and death registration, including fetal deaths,
|
including
restoration and reconstruction of birth and death registration
|
documents destroyed during disasters;
(6) Maintenance of non-separation of the mother and her newborn from birth
for
early
breastfeeding
initiation
and
rooming-in for
exclusive
breastfeeding; and
(7) Others as may be determined based on international and national guidelines
and evidence generatedlocally.
.
First Six (6) Months of Infancy (One Hundred Eighty [180] Days). Health
and nutrition services at the facility and community level shall include, but not
limited to, the following:
Page 15 of 34
[e*

(3) Empowering women
onthe preparation of birth plans, including plans for
obstetric and newborn
emergencies and complications,
and appropriate
plans for breastfeeding and rooming-in, including counselling;
(4) Early
identification
and
management
of
nutritionally-at-risk
pregnant
women
and
pregnant
adolescent
females
and
provision of dietary
supplementation using ready-to-use
supplementary food (RUSF) or other
nutrient-dense food as appropriate;
(5) Assessment
of risk
for
parasitism
and
provision
of
anti-helminthic
medicines;
(6) Maternity protection during pregnancy; and
(7) Others as may be determined based on international and national guidelines
and evidence generatedlocally.
. Women About to Give Birth and Immediate Postpartum Period. Health and
nutrition services at the facility and community level shall include, but not
limitedto, the following:
(1) Adherenceto the couple's birth, breastfeeding, and rooming-in plans;
(2) Monitoring of the progress of labor and well-being of both the mother and
the fetus, and provision of interventions to any health issue that mayarise;
(3) Identification
of high-risk
newborns
that
will be
delivered,
i.e,
the
premature, small for gestational age (SGA), and/or low-birth weight infants;
and the provision of preventive interventions to reduce complications of
prematurity or low birth weight;
(4) Nutrition
counselling and provision of nutritious food and meals at the
facility, most especially for women who gave birth to babies who are
preterm, SGA,orlow birth weight, until discharged;
(5) Provision of lactation
management
services
to
support
breastfeeding
initiation and exclusive breastfeeding for six (6) months, mostespecially for
caesarean deliveries, and thereafter until discharged;
(6) Maintenance of non-separation of the mother and her newborn and rooming-
in for early breastfeeding initiation; and
(7) Others as may be determined based on international and national guidelines
and evidence generated locally.
Postpartum and Lactating Women. Health and nutrition services at the
facility and community level shall include, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Ensure follow-up visits to health facilities where they gave birth;
(2) Home visits for women in
difficult-to-reach
communities
especially if
located ina GIDA;
(3) Lactation support and counselling from birth up to two (2) years and beyond,
including those women who will return to work and for women in the
informal economies, and those with breastfeeding difficulties;
(4) Identification
and
management of malnutrition
or chronically
energy
deficient (CED) and nutritionally-at-risk postpartum
and lactating women,
Page 14 of 34fo

(1) Ensure provision of kangaroo care in communities for small babies born
preterm and low birth weight, who—after their first month of life—still have
not met their ideal weight in compliance with DOH guidelines;
(2) Growth and development monitoring and promotion forall infants less than
six (6) months old, especially those who had low birth weight, are stunted,
or had severe acute malnutrition or moderate acute malnutrition;
(3) Identification and management of moderate or severe acute malnutrition
among infants less than six (6) months old and provision of lactation
management services and managementof medical conditions contributing
to malnutrition; and
(4) Others as may be determined based
oninternational and national guidelines
and evidence generatedlocally.
f.
Infants Six (6) Months up to Two (2) Years of Age (Five Hundred and Fifty
[550] Days). Health and nutrition services at the community level shall include,
but not limited to, the following:
(1) Timely
introduction
of safe,
appropriate,
and
nutrient-dense
quality
complementary
food with continued and sustained breastfeeding for all
infants from six (6) monthsup to two (2) years of age, with emphasis on the
use of suitable, nutrient-rich,
home-prepared, and locally available foods
that are prepared andfed safely;
(2) Dietary
supplementation of age-appropriate
and
nutrient-dense
quality
complementary food;
(3) Growth and development monitoring and promotion in health facilities and
at home;
(4) Management of common childhood illnesses based on WHO and DOH
guidelines;
(5) Identification and management of moderate and severe acute malnutrition
using national guidelines and proper referral to higher level facilities, as
appropriate, for treatment and management, especially those with serious
medical complications; and
(6) Others as may be determined based on international and national guidelines
and evidence generatedlocally.
SECTION 4. HEALTH AND NUTRITION SERVICES FOR ADOLESCENT
FEMALES. Adolescent females are those who are ten (10) to eighteen (18) years old,
including pregnant adolescents. This age group also includes those who are nineteen
(19) years old, as qualified under RA No. 10354 andits IRR. Their health and nutrition
are important in the outcome of malnutrition in the population. Hence, their health and
nutrition are given optimal significance in the implementation of the program.
SECTION5.In addition to the general services under Section 2, the following specific
health, nutrition, and other related services and interventions for adolescent females
shall include, butare not limited to the following to ensure the prevention of the cyclical
nature of malnutrition:
Page 16 of 34
pt Opt

a.
Assessmentof health and nutrition status and identification of nutritionally-at-
risk adolescent females, especially in circumstances where dietary intakes are
suboptimal,
micronutrient
deficiencies
and
anemia
are high,
and
when
pregnancy imposes inordinate demands on the adolescents' own growth and
development, as well as provision of ready-to-use supplementary food (RUSF),
ready-to-use
therapeutic
food
(RUTF),
or
other
nutrient-dense
food
for
nutritionally-at-risk but non-overweight or non-obese adolescent females as
appropriate;
b.
Referral to appropriate health facilities to manage menstruation irregularities or
abnormalities that contribute to anemia and bloodloss, and manage complicated
illnesses, including moderate or severe acute malnutrition;
c.
Promotion of
adolescent-friendly
health
facilities,
regardless of disability,
development, and pregnancy status to improve their health-seeking behavior
and preventillnesses and diseases;
d.
Counselling on breastfeeding and infant care;
Provision of adolescent, sexual, and reproductive health services; and
f.
Others as may be determined based on international guidelines and evidence
generated locally.
o
RULE
9.
NUTRITION
IN
THE
AFTERMATH
OF
NATURAL DISASTERS AND CALAMITIES
SECTION
1. Areas that are affected by disasters and emergency situations, both
natural and human-induced mustbe prioritized in the delivery of health and nutrition
services, and psychosocial services interventions.
SECTION2. Priority shall be given to all covered population of the law specifically
the vulnerable groups.
SECTION3. All services included in the Program Components of this law and IRR
shall be immediately provided during emergencies as applicable based on DOH and
other related agency guidelines.
SECTION4. Women,infant and child-friendly spaces shall be prepared and ready to
accommodate women and their children, provide their daily necessities such as food,
clothing, clean water, and shelter; with readily available breastfeeding support and
counselling for those with children up to two (2) years or beyond, as well as provision
and guidance on the appropriate complementary food for children over six (6) months
old.
SECTION
5. Donations of milk formula,
breastmilk
substitutes, and/or products
covered by the Milk Code without the approval of the Inter-Agency Committee (IAC)
created under EO 51, s. 1986, shall be prohibited in order to protect the health and
nutrition of pregnant and lactating women, infants, and young children before, during
and after a disaster.
In emergency situations, donations or assistance that are in the
form of non-breastmilk substitute (non-BMS) and non-BMS related products from the
Page 17 of34
wh

private sector, with no conflicts of interest or those not involved with manufacture,
marketing, and sales of products covered by the scope of the Milk Code, shall be
allowed
immediately
in the
aftermath of natural
disasters and calamities.
Strict
compliance with the Milk Code andits current IRR shall be observed, and options for
mothers with breastfeeding problems will be provided, such as, but.not limited to, the
mobilization of breastfeeding support groupsorstrategic establishment of local human
milk banks. Violations under this rule shall be separately penalized under the Milk
Code.
SECTION 6. The DOH andother key agencies, in coordination with the National
Disaster Risk Reduction
and
Management
Council (NDRRMC),
shall
formulate
appropriate guidelines and mechanismsin times of disasters and calamities. In doing
so, humanitarian, inclusive, gender and culture-sensitive standards for the protection of
children, pregnant and lactating women in accordance with RA No. 10821, otherwise
known as the
"Children's
Emergency
Relief and
Protection Act," its IRR, and
Comprehensive Emergency Program for Children (CEPC) shall be considered.
RULE
10:
CAPACITY
BUILDING
FOR
BARANGAY
HEALTH AND NUTRITION VOLUNTEERS AND OTHER
PERSONNEL
SECTION
1. The DOH and the NNC,in coordination with LGUs, shall provide
practical, effective,
gender-,
disability- and culturally-sensitive
training courses to
BHWs,
BNSs, CDWs, and other personnel concerned to upgrade their skills and
competence in the implementation of the services and interventions for the health and
nutrition of women and children. Specifically—
a.
The DOH and the
NNCshall supervise, monitor, and evaluate the training
courses including re-orientation courses in line with the implementation of the
program.
b.
The DOH and the NNCshall be responsible for disseminating information and
providing training to LGUs.
c.
LGUs, with the technical assistance from the DOH, the NNC, and CSOs,shall
be responsible in training BHWs, BNSs, CDWs,and other barangay volunteers
on the promotion of the program.
d.
The DOHand the NNCshall update existing community level training tools to
facilitate the integration of the First One Thousand (1,000) Days strategies and
services.
RULE
11:
THE
NATIONAL
NUTRITION COUNCIL
(NNC) GOVERNING BOARD
SECTION1: THE GOVERNING BOARD.
a.
The NNC Council refers to the NNC Governing Board and the NNC Secretariat.
Page 18 of 34fie

b.
The NNC,through the Governing Board, and other concerned NGAsshall
provide appropriate technical assistance to respective LGU counterparts in the
development, formulation, and implementation of the Act and this IRR.
SECTION 2. COMPOSITION.The NNC Governing Board shall be composedofthe
following:
a.
Secretary of the DOHasthe ex officio Chairperson;
b.
Secretary of the DA asthe ex officio Vice Chairperson;
_
¢.
Secretary of the Departmentofthe Interior and Local Government (DILG)as
the ex officio Vice Chairperson;
d.
Secretary of the Department of Education (DepEd);
e.
Secretary of the Departmentof Social Welfare and Development (DSWD);
f.
Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry (DT);
g.
Secretary of the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE);
h.
Secretary of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST);
i.
Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM);
Secretary of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA); and
k.
Three (3) representatives from the private sector to be recommended by the
NNC Governing Board and to be approved and appointed by the President who
shall come from any of the following, based on the criteria set by applicable
tules:
(1) health and nutrition professional organizations;
(2) womensector;
(3) farmerand fisherfolk;
(4) urban poor;
(5) organizations or associations of community health workers or BNSs;
(6) CSOs; and
(7) academic
and researchinstitutions.
Said representatives shall serve for a term of two (2) years.
SECTION3. The heads of departments may be represented by their duly designated
representatives whoshall be of a rank not lower than an Assistant Secretary.
SECTION4. Persons from the private sector with conflicts of interest, especially as
described in EO 51, s. 1986, are prohibited from being members of the Council.
SECTION5. The composition of the NNC's Secretariat and Technical Committee as
defined in Executive
Order No. 234, series of 1987, "Reorganizing the National
Nutrition Council" shall be maintained.
Page 19 of 34
| ne

RULE
12:
POWERS,
FUNCTIONS,
ROLES
AND
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE NNC
SECTION1. The NNC,the highest policy making and coordinating body
on nutrition,
shall have the following functions and powers:
a.
Formulate national nutrition policies, plans, strategies, and approaches for
nutrition
improvement,
including
strategies on women,
infant and young
children, and adolescentnutrition;
b.
Oversee and serve as a focal point in the integration of nutrition policies and
programs of all
member
agencies and
instrumentalities
charged
with the
implementation of existing laws, policies, rules, and regulations concerning
nutrition;
c.
Coordinate, monitor and evaluate nutrition programs
and projects of the public
and private sectors and LGUsto ensure their integration with national policies;
d.
Receive
grants,
donations,
and
contributions
in any form
from
foreign
governments,
private
institutions,
and other funding entities for
nutrition
programsand projects: provided, that no conditions shall be made contrary to
the policies or the provisions
ofthis Act and its IRR, and with special reference
to EO 51, s. 1986 and WHA Resolution 69.9;
e.
Coordinate the joint planning and budgeting of member agencies to ensure
fundsfor relevant nutrition programs andprojects; to secure the release of funds
in
accordance
with the approved
programs
and projects; and to monitor
implementation and track public expenditure on these programs; and
f.
Call upon any government agency and instrumentality for such assistance as
maybe required to implement the provisions of this Act and its IRR.
SECTION 2. ROLE OF MEMBERS. Memberagencies shall be responsible for
ensuring the
implementation of programs and projects, development of promotive,
preventive,
and curative nutrition programs, and integration of health and nutrition
concerns into their respective policies and plans. It shall provide additional resources
in any form, including technical assistance, sourced from its budget in support of local
nutrition programs.
.
SECTION 3. TECHNICAL
COMMITTEE. The NNC Technical
Committee is
composed ofheads of major department bureaus and agencies involved in nutrition and
appropriate NGOs. It provides technical assistance to the Board and NNC Secretariat,
and facilitates inter- and intra-agency coordination, supervision, and monitoring and
implementation
ofnutrition policies and programs.
SECTION 4. THE SECRETARIAT.
a.
The NNCSecretariat serves as the executive arm of the NNC Governing Board.
The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Director who shall be assisted
Page 20 of 34
ftA

by two Deputy Executive Directors, all of whom shall be appointed by the
President.
b.
It has three (3) technical divisions (nutrition policy and planning, nutrition
surveillance,
and nutrition
information and education) and two (2) support
divisions
(administrative
and finance).
It has regional offices headed by
nutrition program coordinators (NPCs).
c.
The functions are:
(1) Advise the Board on nutrition policy and program matters;
(2) Recommend a comprehensive food and nutrition policy;
(3) Coordinate with
government
offices and NGOs for nutrition
program
managementand resource programming;
(4) Initiate the formulation and develop measure to improve implementation of
the PPAN;
(5) Monitor and analyze nutrition and related socio-economic data for periodic
statement on the country's nutrition situation;
(6) Monitor and evaluate the PPAN;
(7) Develop
and
implement
a
comprehensive
advocacy,
information,
and
education strategy for the PPAN; and
(8) Provide technical, financial, and logistics support to LGUsand agencies for
the development and implementation of nutrition programs andprojects.
SECTION 5. MEETINGS. The NNCshall conduct meetings regularly through annual
and quarterly meetings,
and as
necessary
through
special
meetings.
The NNC
Secretariat shall coordinate with the members forthe call of special meetings.
RULE 13: ROLE OF NNC MEMBER AGENCIES, OTHER
NGAS AND LGUS
SECTION
1.
The
DOH,
NNC
member
agencies
and
their
regional
offices,
Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM), and LGUs, shall
be responsible for ensuring the implementation of programsand projects, development
of promotive, preventive, and curative nutrition programs, andintegration of health and
nutrition concerns into their respective policies and plans.
Specifically, the DOH, NNC member agencies and their regional offices, BARMM,
and LGUs,with support from CSOsand other stakeholders, shall:
a.
prioritize programs and projects in the First One Thousand (1,000) Days
Strategy in long-term plans, programs, and annual budgets.
Through joint
issuances, the member agencies shall cooperate in the promotion, integration,
and implementation of the programs. Also, the member agencies shall actively
participate in the collaborative activities of the NNC and its member agencies;
b.
review and develop/update relevant policies, guidelines, strategies, tools, and
training packages to support integration of First One Thousand (1,000) Days
Page 21 of 34
fT Ck

Strategy Components acrossall levels and sectors of government in order to
facilitate the implementation of the law and these rules;
c.
prepare a long-term First One Thousand (1,000) Days financing strategy to
build
on
available
funding
streams
that
already
support
the
different
components of the Program and provide additional resources in any form,
including
technical assistance, sourced from the budget in support of local
nutrition
programs.
NGAs
and
LGUs
shall
strengthen
public
financial
managementto increase allocation and efficiency of spending;
d.
regularly review and update competency profiles of all service providers to
strengthen workforce capacities on health, nutrition, child development, child
protection, responsive caregiving, early stimulation, and social protection;
e.
work closely with the academe, professional societies, and organizations from
different
sectors, the
Commission
on Higher Education (CHED), and the
Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) to update both pre-service and in-
service curricula;
f.
prioritize systems strengthening including the harmonization and updating of
information or surveillance systems, logistics and supply chain management
systems, and referral systemsor service delivery networks; and
g.
provide
leadership in identifying the monitoring,
evaluation, and research
priorities, make resources available for implementation of research, and foster
collaboration
among
program
implementers,
researchers,
and scientists to
develop national and local evidence-based platforms for research and learning
of the first one thousand (1,000) days oflife.
SECTION2. The following are the specific roles of key NGAsin the implementation
of the law and these rules:
a.
The Department of Health (DOH) shall be the lead technical agency for the
First One Thousand (1,000) Days strategies and services. It will be responsible
for providing technical assistance atall levels for plans, policies, and program
development
as
may
be
needed
for
health,
nutrition,
early
childhood
development,
and adolescent health, and development concerns within the
scope of this Act and this IRR.It will also provide augmentation support to
identified priority LGUs, including—butnot limited to—funding and supplies
relevant to the program. As Chair of the NNC Governing Board,it shall lead in
providing oversight for the first one thousand (1,000) days program. In this
regard, the NNC Secretariat shall be the overall coordinator of the first one
thousand (1,000) days program. It shall facilitate annual convergence planning
and budgeting at the national level.
It shall ensure the dynamic flow and
exchange of information on policy and program
implementation.
It shall
prepare quarterly status reports for submission to demand agencies;
Page 22 of 34
fh pc

.
The Department of Agriculture (DA) as Vice-Chair of the NNC Governing
Board, shall be the co-lead agency, providing technical assistance to the DOH
and to other agencies on matters related to food security and food systems.It
shall
provide
technical
assistance
and
augmentation
support to LGUs in
strengthening food systems towards becomingresilient and nutrition-sensitive.
It shall build capacities of local agriculture officers in supporting the effective
and integrated delivery of the program;
The Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), as Vice-
Chair of the NNC Governing Board, shall provide technical support to LGUsin
the implementation and monitoring of the law through issuances encouraging
all LGUsto fully support the implementation of this Act and its IRR, through
enactment of local policies and ordinances,
facilitating the attendance and
participation of LGUsto the trainings and seminars to be conducted by NNC
Member Agencies, ensure that the implementation of this Act is integrated in
the local development plans and investment plans of LGUs, and monitoring
LGU compliance using the standard and innovative monitoring tools. It shall
support the engagement of Leagues of Local Governments and First One
Thousand (1,000) Days Champions and form communities ofpractice to enable
peer learning and exchange for LGUs to share good practices and address
implementation problems;
.
The Department of Agrarian Reform
(DAR)
shall lead in the review,
implementation,
and
monitoring of the
Comprehensive
Agrarian
Reform
Program (CARP)to support the design and coordinated delivery of nutrition-
sensitive support services and prioritizing vulnerable groups with land tenure
security issues. In coordination with the DOH and other concerned government
agencies, it shall also provide technical support in building capacities and
awarenessof beneficiaries and service providersto prioritize interventions for
the first one thousand (1,000) days oflife;
.
The Department of Budget Management
(DBM) shall support member
agencies in determining appropriate allocations for the program, ensure timely
release of funds needed for the program, and provide technical assistance on
financial management and monitoring and evaluation of the program;
The Department of Education (DepEd) shall review and develop modules on
key core health and nutrition messagesfor the first one thousand (1,000) days
for integration into the curriculum, as well as support to parent and community
education activities in schools, and implement nutrition-specific and nutrition-
sensitive initiatives for the adolescent female andat-risk population in schools
and the alternative learning system/alternative delivery mode structures of the
agency. To ensure the integration and to foster the enhancementofthe First One
Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy, DepEd shall collaborate with the academe in
reviewing
and updating
relevant pre- and in-service curricula to integrate
nurturing care;
Page 23 of 34i
jw

.
The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE)shalllead in the review,
updating,
implementation
and monitoring of labor and employment-related
policies and programs in accordanceto these rules; and, in coordination with
the DOH and other NGAs
concerned,
shall issue related guidelines and
communicate the maternity protection provisions of these rules to employers
and workers in the private sector;
.
The Department of Science and Technology (DOST) shall provide central
direction, leadership, and coordination of scientific and technological efforts
and ensure that the results
therefrom are geared and utilized in areas of
maximum economic and social benefits for the target population of the First
One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy. It shall also review and update existing
surveys and tools to support generation and analysis of key indicators on the
first one thousand (1,000) daysoflife in line with global and national standards;
The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), shall be
responsible for strengthening social welfare and child protection services and
programs, and provide technical assistance to NGAs and LGUsin integration
and improved delivery of parenting, early childhood care and development, and
responsive care services. It shall build capacities of Municipal Social Welfare
and Development Officers, CDWs, and municipal links along organizing and
managing the Family Development Sessions (FDS) developed andall parenting
programs (for example: Parent’s Effectiveness Services (PES), Empowerment
and
Reaffirmation of Paternal
Abilities
(ERPAT),
etc.), and
Supervised
Neighborhood Play (SNP), among others;
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTD) shall be responsible in the
review, updating, implementation, and monitoring of policies, standards, and
programs to improve consumer awareness
ontheir rights and responsibilities,
and ensuring
consumer
welfare and protection
relevant to the First One
Thousand(1,000) Days Strategy;
.
The Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) Council shall provide
technical and funding support on matters related to early childhood care and
development, including early stimulation and early learning. It shall establish
National Child
Development
Centers (NCDCs) in identified priority areas,
subject to ECCD Governing Board-approved guidelines and provide technical
support that may comein the form, butnot limited to the following: (a) capacity
building for ECCDservice providers, and (b) provision of ECCD packagesto
child developmentcenters in the priority areas;
The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), as its primary mandate, shall
ensure the safety, efficacy or quality of health products as defined by RA No.
97111, otherwise knownas “The Food and Drug Administration Act of 2009,”
and uphold and enforce laws and standards on food regulation, safety and
fortification, and its other mandates provided for by relevant laws that directly
Page 24 of 34
pl pe

or indirectly affects the implementation of this Act. It shall also investigate,
verify reports of EO 51, s.
1986
violations, and when appropriate,
apply
administrative
sanctions against the violators and/or file criminal complaints
against persons and entities found to have violated, singly or repeatedly, the
provisions of the Codeorits current IRR.It shall also ensure that the labels of
food products covered by the scope of the Philippine Milk Code shall conform
to the rules and regulations of the FDA and the Milk Code's current IRR;
. The Philippine Health Insurance
Corporation (PhilHealth) shall cover
mothers and children under the National Health Insurance Program.
It shall
incorporate in its benefit packages the health services for maternal and child
health and nutrition.
It shall enable mothers and children to have access to
health services covered by its benefit packages according to its existing rules
and regulations;
.
The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA)shall provide
policy and monitoring
support,
technical
assistance, and
augmentation of
resources to build evidence and policy-related researches in support of the
Program;
.
The Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) shall provide technical support in
harmonizing
data and
information and in reviewing and updating existing
surveys and tools to support generation and analysis of key indicators on the
first one thousand (1,000) daysoflife in line with global and national standards;
.
The Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA)shall
review and update the National Technical Education and Skills Development
Plan andall relevant standards, tests, and systems to reflect needed reformsin
integrating skills development programs relevant to or that can support the
effective
implementation of these rules, to contribute directly to improved
economic status of trained graduates,
as well as ensure food and nutrition
security, increased accessto other basic social services, and better quality oflife
for their families. To ensure the integration and to foster the enhancementofthe
First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy, TESDAshall collaborate with the
academe in reviewing and updating relevant pre- and in-service curricula to
integrate nurturing care;
.
The Civil Service Commission (CSC) shall provide technical support in
reviewing and updating policies and standards for the economical, efficient, and
effective
personnel
administration
in
government,
in
formulating,
administering,
and
evaluating
programs
relative
to the
development
and
retention of qualified and competent workforce, and in inspecting personnel
actions
and
programs of
departments,
agencies,
bureaus,
offices,
local
government
including
government-owned
or
controlled
corporations
in
accordanceto these rules; it shall, in coordination with DOH and other NGAs
Page 25 of 34
| ae

concerned, communicate the maternity protection provisions of the law and
these rules to the public sector workers;
r.
The Commission on Higher Education (CHED)shall lead in reviewing and
updating curricula relevant pre- and in-service curricula in coordination with
NGAs, professional societies, the academe, and stakeholders;
s.
The National Anti-Poverty Commission
(NAPC) shall coordinate and ensure
the active and meaningful participation of the basic sectors and recommend
policies and other measures to guarantee the responsive implementation of the
law. In coordination with DOH and other concerned government agencies,it
shall also work on strategies to strengthen provision of maternity protection for
workers in the informal economy,including workers in the informal sector, as
well as workers in MSMEs;
t.
The National Youth Commission (NYC) shall provide leadership technical
and funding support as the policy-making coordinating body on matters related
to youth and adolescent programming. It shall engage and encourage youth
leaders through the
Sangguniang Kabataan and their build capacities and
awarenessto prioritize interventions within the first one thousand (1,000) days
of life; and
u.
The
Professional
Regulation
Commission
(PRC)
shall
administer,
implement, and enforce the regulatory policies of the national government with
respect
to the
regulation
and
licensing of the
various
professions
and
occupations underits jurisdiction, including the enhancement and maintenance
of professional and occupational standards and ethics, and the enforcement of
the rules and regulations
relative to the First One Thousand (1,000) Days
Strategy.
SECTION 3. LGUsare encouraged to integrate maternal, neonatal, child health and
nutrition programsin local development plans and related plans such as LNAPs and
investment plans for health.
The following are the specific roles of LGUs in the
implementation of the law and theserules:
a.
Provincial, City, and Municipal Levels shall
(1) Exercise general supervision and control in the implementation
ofthe First
One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy at their respective local levels in
coordination with the DOH, NNC,and other NGAs,and promote—as well
as enforce—local legislative measures relevantto the Strategy that will aim
to strengthen and enhanceits implementation in the communities;
(2) Integrate
the
First
One
Thousand
(1,000)
Days
comprehensive
and
sustainable
strategy into their
respective
Provincial
Development
and
Physical Framework Plan (PDPFP), CDPs, LDIPs, and AIPs with clear and
appropriate
guidance and extensive support from NGAs, their regional
offices, and Provinces;
Page 26 of 34
“og
[re

(3) Ensure the effective and efficient delivery of services in the continuum of
care;
(4) Provide mentoring and supervision for trained staff and service providers so
that they can provide quality care, facilitate timely referrals for specialized
care as needed, and collect and report quality data;
(5) Provide counterpart as necessary that will tap into potential funding sources
in addition to other local fundsto be utilized to support the implementation
of this program,
organize and support parent
cooperatives to establish
community-based
programs,
and
provide
counterpart
funds
for the
continuing professional developmentof their service providers;
- (6) Provide the facilities and platforms for the implementation of the First One
Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy, maximizing opportunities for integrated
activities; and
(7) Ensure
functionality
and
effectiveness
of
their
respective
provincial/city/municipal
nutrition committees to:
i.
Assessthelocal nutrition situation;
ii.|
Oversee the implementation and provide technical support to lower
levels to ensure the effective andefficient delivery of services in the
continuum ofcare;
iii.|
Formulate the LNAPs complementary to and integrated with other
plans of the LGU andhigher-level plans with focus on thefirst one
thousand (1,000) daysoflife;
iv.
Coordinate,
monitor,
and
evaluate
plan
implementation
and
recommend and adopt appropriate actions related to the first one
thousand (1,000) days oflife;
v.
Mobilize resourcesto ensure the plan is implemented;
vi.
Hold at least quarterly meetings to monitor and document program
performance; and
vii.
Extend technical assistance to Municipal and Barangay nutrition
committees
(MNCs/BNCs)
on
planning,
Nutrition
Program
management, and related concerns, including the conduct ofperiodic
visits and meetings.
b.
LCEs shall designate or appoint NAOsto coordinate nutrition and nutrition-
related strategies and activities across different offices and stakeholders in their
respective LGUs. In addition to their role as described in Rule 7, Section 4—
NAOsshall also spearhead the provision of technical assistance to “lower-level”
LGUson nutrition program management.
c.
Barangay LGUsshall be responsible for the implementation at the barangay
level, with technical and policy support from their respective
Sangguniang
Barangay, Sangguniang Bayan, or Sangguniang Panlungsod,
through health
centers,
rural
health
units,
and/or
barangay
health
stations,
such as the
following:
Page 27 of 34ie

ae
(1) Functionas the primary planning and implementing arm of the Program in
the
community,
with
technical
support
and
supervision
from
the
city/municipality of the barangay.. It shall also serve as a forum for the
community as regards to the appropriate implementation of the program;
(2) Integrate the First One Thousand (1,000) Days Integrated Framework and
Strategy into their respective barangay
development plans (BDPs) and
annual budget, with clear and appropriate guidance and extensive support
from NGAsandhigher LGUs;
(3) Build and
implement
CDPs, LDIPs, and AIPs with clear
appropriate
guidance and extensive support from NGAs, their regional offices, and
provinces;
(4) Ensure the effective and efficient delivery of services in the continuum of
care;
(5) Involve community groups, leaders, and families in planning, budgeting,
implementing, and monitoring activities and create accountability for the
results;
(6) Support in
delivering
social and
behavior
change
communication
in
organizing and mobilizing communities,and in identifying local champions
who can becomedrivers of change in their communities;
(7) Invest in strengthening capacities of frontline service providers such as the
BNS, the BHW, and CDW, amongothers, and sustaining their motivation
to deliver quality services;
(8) Submit to the
Sangguniang
Bayan or
Sangguniang Panlungsod such
suggestions or recommendations for the improvementof the well-being of
the residents relevant to the application of the First One Thousand (1,000)
Days Strategy; and
(9) Ensure functionality and effectiveness of their BNCsto:
i.
Assess the barangay nutrition situation;
ii.
Formulate a Barangay Nutrition Action Plan (BNAP);
iii.|
Coordinate the nutrition activities of the barangay;
iv.
Organize groups to implement nutrition intervention activities;
v.
Assess the progress of nutrition interventions; and
vi.
Hold regular meetings to monitor program performance.
d.
The BHWs, BNSs, and CDWsshall be mobilized and provided with resources
and benefits as stated in Rule 7, Section 3 of this IRR, to effectively and
efficiently carry out their tasks, such as the following:
.
(1) Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNSs)are trained community workers who
voluntarily
render nutrition services and other related activities in the
barangay and must, at the minimum, be able to perform the following:
i.
Identify and locate targets for the First One Thousand (1,000) Days
Strategy,
primarily
through
Operation
Timbang
(OPT)
Plus,
including the monthly weighing and height measurementof children
under-five (<5) years old, per NNC OPT Plus Guidelines;
Page 28 of 34
| lhe

li.
ill.
iv.
vi.
Vii.
viii.
ix.
Assist
the BNC in formulating,
coordinating,
monitoring,
and
evaluating the BNAPthat shall includeactivities related to the First
One Thousand(1,000) DaysStrategy;
Assist service providersin delivering services related to the first one
thousand (1,000) daysoflife;
Maximize every opportunity of contact with parents, mothers and
caregivers
of
infants
and
young
children,
especially
the
malnourished or members of vulnerable groups to provide needed
support or service together with BHWsandstaff in health centers,
rural health units, and/or barangay health stations;
Identify, care for the malnourished and vulnerable groups, and refer
to specialized services as needed, and build linkages to ensure that
available services are accessed and utilized;
Effectively deliver key messages, provide skilled counselling, and
encourage the adoption of key behaviors for the first one thousand
(1,000) days;
Work with other community-based volunteers and workers to visit
homes of pregnant women, adolescent mothers, and those with
infants and young children zero to twenty-three (0-23) months old
regularly to provide needed support or to follow-up care;
Together
with BHWs, organize and mobilize
communities
and
support
groups
for pregnant
and
lactating
women
particularly
adolescent mothers, womenof reproductive age, adolescent females,
and caregivers of children who are newly born upto age twenty-four
(24) months;
Support the barangay chairperson during meetings of the BNC and
submit excerpts of the minutes to the city/municipal NAO;and
Support their BNCin the preparation of reports as needed and keep
records of barangay nutrition activities.
(2) Barangay Health Workers
(BHWs)are trained community workers who
voluntarily render primary health care services and otherrelated activities
in the
community and must, at the minimum, be able to perform the
following:
i.
ii.
Recognize
signs
and
symptoms
of
common
illnesses
and
malnutrition,
and
recognition
and
referral of those
needing
appropriate
care
especially
at-risk
mothers,
at-risk
adolescent
females, andat-risk infants and children;
Assist the midwives and/or nurses in the care of mothers and
children in the promotion andutilization of maternaland child health
and
nutrition
services,
including
preventive
and
curative
care
outlined in the program components;
Page 29 of 34
pe

iii.
Effectively deliver key messages, provide skilled counselling, and
encourage the adoption of key behaviors forthe first one thousand
(1,000) daysoflife;
iv.
Lead the organization and mobilization of communities and support
groups for pregnant and lactating women particularly
adolescent
mothers, women of reproductive
age,
adolescent
females,
and
caregivers of children who are newly born up to age twenty-four (24)
months;
v.
Assist BNSsin the identification, care and referral of malnourished
and vulnerable groups; and
vi.
Support the midwives and/ornurses in the preparation of reports as
neededand keeprecordsoftheir activities.
(3) Child Development Workers (CDWs)are trained child care workers in a
Child
Development
Centers
(CDCs)
trained to provide
supplemental
parental care and early
childhood
enrichment activities to ensure that
physical,
cognitive,
social, and emotional needs of children are being
addressed and must, at the minimum,be able to perform the following:
i.
Ensure the presence and maintenance
of facilities and supplies in
CDCs;
ii.
Orient, facilitate and guide the children in the hygiene routines and
the importance ofa healthy body and good nutrition;
iii.
Provide
opportunities
for early
stimulation and/or learning and
support parents to provide responsive care;
iv.
Organize the parents and community leaders in implementation of
the First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy in the context of
ECCD; and
v.
Implementhealth, nutrition, and other key activities in coordination
with BHWsand BNSsand educate the children and the parents on
the
available
health,
nutrition,
and early
education
and
social
services in the community andits importance.
SECTION 4. The provisions on allocation of government responsibilities in these
Rules shall be adjusted to the government structure of Bangsamoro
Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM),as needed.
RULE
14:
PARTICIPATION
OF
CSOs
AND
THE
ACADEME
SECTION
1. For a comprehensive
and effective
implementation of the program,
including monitoring and review, the DOH and the NNCshall recognize the assistance
of representatives from CSOs, and other proponents from the private sector with no
conflicts of interest in the advocacy, monitoring and reviewingofthe application of the
First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy by LGUs.
The pertinent provisions of the
LGC shall serve as guide to LGUsin encouragingparticipation of CSOs andtheprivate
Page 30 of 34tI

sector in the delivery of the services under the program includingraising awareness and
information to the affected population.
Stakeholders’ meetings shall be regularly
conducted
including similar advocacy activities, to encourage the involvement and
participation of the CSOs and other stakeholders, with no conflicts of interest, in the
implementation
ofthe Strategy.
SECTION2. To ensure the integration and to foster the enhancement of the First One
Thousand
(1,000) Days Strategy, the academe shall collaborate in reviewing and
updating relevant pre-
and
in-service
curricula
to
integrate
nurturing
care
in
coordination with NGAs, such as DepEd, TESDA, and CHED.It shall likewise support
NGAsin generating evidence
onthefirst one thousand (1,000) days oflife to evaluate
its impact on current and future generations, to determine the cost-effectiveness of
programs, and to study how to adapt proven interventions and programs to improve
access, effectiveness, quality, and coverage, among others.
RULE 15: MONITORING, REVIEW AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE PROGRAM
SECTION 1. The NGAs and LGUs concerned shall regularly monitor, review, and
assess the effectivity of the program in consultation with their stakeholders. As for
CSOs, they shall also submit regular reports to LGUs or NGAsusing standard reporting
tools subject to their involvement in the implementation of the First One Thousand
(1,000) Days Strategy.
SECTION 2. NNC Member Agencies and key NGAsshall update routine information
and surveillance systems, data collection tools, scorecards, and dashboards to include
indicators identified in the M&Eplan, allowing disaggregation. Data shall be made.
available
to all
stakeholders,
including
families
and
communities
to
support
transparency and joint action.
SECTION 3. DOH and NNCshall plan and conduct joint monitoring and reviews
across sectors every six (6) months and annually at the national level to track progress
and
generate
information
to
enable
cross-sectoral
decision-making.
The
NGAs
concemed and LGUsshall submit mid-year and end-of-year reports to the NNC and
DILG, respectively, which includes status/progress on the indicators identified in the
M&Eplan, documentation of challenges, lessons and good practices, and other related
information.
SECTION 4. The DOH, NNC, and DILG—in coordination with key NGAs—shall
review and update incentives and awards systems to recognize performing NGAs,
CSOs, LGUsandpersonneland their complianceto set standardsin these Rules.
SECTION 5. The DOH, NNC, PSA, NAPC, and member agencies shall support
periodic
population-based
assessments of children’s overall developmental status and
home-care practices, as well as risk factors and protective factors for nurturing care.
Page 31 of 34ig

a)
SECTION6. The provisions on monitoring
responsibilities in these Rules shall be
adjusted to the governmentstructure of BARMM,as needed.
RULE 16: REPORTORIAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 1.
Before the end ofthe fiscal year, the DOH, as chair of the NNC, shall
submit to the Office of the President, the Office of the Senate Secretary, and to the
Office of the Secretary-General ofthe House of Representatives an annual consolidated
report prepared by the NNCproviding definitive and comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of the program by the DILG and other NGAs involvedinthe program.
The annualreport shall contain the report of LGUs, components ofthe program, current
implementation,
relevant
studies,
recommendations
and plans, and impact of the
program
in
ensuring
the
improvement of nutritional
status and
prevention of
malnutrition.
SECTION2. To streamline the collection, collation, and processing of data for any
andall reports required by these Rules, all DOH offices and units shall coordinate with
one another, and with LGUs and NGAsconcerned, in accordance with the RA No.
10173. Electronic, portable, and real-time transfer of reports shall be implemented to
minimize the burden ofpaperwork forfield implementation offices and units.
RULE 17: PROGRAM INSTITUTIONALIZATION,
COMPLIANCE, AND INCENTIVES
SECTION1. The DOH, NNC, LGUs, and key NGAs involvedin the implementation
shall formulate and institutionalize the policies, programs, and projects related to the
First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy and shall identify specific sentinel indicators
appropriate to measure the agency performance. Submission of monitoring report by
the concerned agencies
involved in the
implementation of the Strategy shall be
integrated in their respective agency performance targets and individual employees as
one ofthe requirementsin eligibility for performance-based bonus.
RULE 18: PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES
SECTION1. The provisions of RA No. 9184, otherwise known as the “Government
Procurement Reform Act,” notwithstanding, the government agencies concerned are
hereby mandated to establish a liberalized mode of procurement for this program,
subject to the approval of the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB).
SECTION 2. This
liberalized
mode of procurement can initially be covered by
guidelines of the GPPB on community
participation
procurement and community-
managed
procurement.
Additional
mechanisms may be developed, subject to the
approval of the GPPB.
SECTION3. Thepublic procurementfor this program shall prioritize the participation
of local and community-based producers, suppliers, and/or service contractors.
Page 32 of 34
Ae

RULE 19: APPROPRIATIONS
SECTION 1. The amount needed for the initial implementation of this Act shall be
charged against the appropriations of the DOH, DA, NNC, and key agencies mentioned
in this
IRR.
Thereafter,
such sums as may be
necessary
for the
continued
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act
(GAA). LGUs are encouraged to include related appropriations in their respective
budget.
SECTION2. The DBM,in coordination with the Department of Finance, DOH, DA,
NNC,and key agencies
shall
consider the prevalence of malnutrition and child
mortality,
including
maternal
mortality in so far as applicable under the law, in
determining the annual appropriations for the implementation
ofthis Act.
SECTION3. Priority LGUsidentified by the NNC, shall be eligible to receive from
NGAs concerned supplementary funds necessary for the implementation of this Act.
Said subsidy shall be included in the GAA of specific agencies with appropriate
guidelines for utilization and reporting.
SECTION 4.
Forthe prevention of irregular, unnecessary, and extravagant expenses
in the implementation of the First One Thousand (1,000) Days Strategy: all funding
requirements hereof shall be subject to the evaluation of the DBM based on existing
budgeting,
accounting, and auditing rules and regulations. The
DBMshall assist in
establishing a tagging system to strengthen the process for tracking, monitoring, and
reporting of expenditures related to this Act.
RULE 20: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.If any ofthe provisions of these Rules and
Regulations shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void,
or
unconstitutional—such
provision shall be deemed deleted and shall not affect the
validity of the rest of the provisions which shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 2. TRANSITORY AND REPEALING CLAUSE. All provisions of laws,
presidential decrees, letters of instruction, existing administrative orders, circulars,
rules, and regulations, and other presidential or executive issuances incompatible or
inconsistent with the provisions of the foregoing IRR are hereby deemed amended or
repealed accordingly.
SECTION 3: PROVISION OF AMENDMENTSTO THEIRR. This IRR shall be
reviewed and amended, as needed, every five (5) years. The DOH and NNCshall
organize and lead an ad hoc technical working group (TWG)for this purpose. Should
specific
provisions be changed
between review years, DOH and
NNCshall also
organize an ad hoc TWG.In both instances, revisions in the IRR shall be subjected to
public consultation. Final provisions shall be covered by the appropriate DOH and NNC
policy documents,
Page 33 of 34
[

SECTION 4. EFFECTIVITY. These Rules and Regulations shall take effect after
fifteen days from the filing of at least three (3) certified copies of this IRR to the
University of the Philippines
Office of the National
Administrative
Register (UP
ONAR) and publication in Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
This Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (RA) 11148,
Otherwise Known as the “Kalusugan at Nutrisyon ng Mag-Nanay
Act”is hereby
approved by the Department of Health this O2 day of MAY. in
m0
, Republic of
the Philippines.
Chairperson of the National Nutrition Council Governing Board
Page 34 of 34le