GeO

IVIL SERVICE COMMISSION hae
Republic of the Philippines CC Tes oe SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM

S .

IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11210
(AN ACT INCREASING THE MATERNITY LEAVE PERIOD TO ONE HUNDRED
FIVE (105) DAYS FOR FEMALE WORKERS WITH AN OPTION TO EXTEND
FOR AN ADDITIONAL THIRTY (30) DAYS WITHOUT PAY, AND GRANTING
AN ADDITIONAL FIFTEEN (15) DAYS FOR SOLO MOTHERS,

AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES)

Leave Period to One Hundred Five (105) Days for Female Workers with an Option to
Extend for an Additional Thirty (30) Days Without Pay, and Granting an Additional
Fifteen (15) Days for Solo Mothers, and for Other Purposes, the following
implementing rules and regulations are hereby issued:

RULE |
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Title. — These rules and regulations shall be known as the “Implementing
Rules and Regulations of the 105-Day Expanded Maternity Leave Law’.

Section 2. Declaration of Policy. —\t is the declared policy of the State under Article
XIII, Section 14 of the 1987 Constitution to protect and promote the rights and welfare
of working women, taking into account their maternal functions, and to provide an
enabling environment in which their full potential can be achieved.

Article Il, State Policies, Section 12 of the 1987 Constitution provides that the State
recognizes the sanctity of family life and shall protect and strengthen the family as the
basic autonomous social institution and that it shall equally protect the life of the
mother and the life of the unborn from conception. Moreover, Sections 17 and 22 of
Republic Act No. 9710, otherwise known as “The Magna Carta of Women”, provides
for women’s rights to health and decent work.

To achieve these, and in recognition of women’s maternal function as a social
responsibility, the State shall institutionalize a mechanism to expand the maternity
leave period of women workers. This will provide them with ample transition time to
regain health and overall wellness as well as to assume maternal roles before
resuming paid work. The Act and this Rules are consistent with local and international
legal instruments that protect and promote the rights of women.

¢ A

to

RULE II
DEFINITION OF TERMS

Section 1. Definition of terms. — As used in this Rules, the following terms shall be
understood to mean:

a. “Alternate caregiver” refers to a relative within the fourth civil degree of
consanguinity of the female worker or to her current partner.

b. “Current partner” refers to a person who shares an intimate relationship and
lives with the female worker.

c. “Emergency termination of pregnancy” refers to pregnancy loss on or after
the 20th week of gestation, including stillbirth.

d. “Employer” refers to any person, natural or juridical, in the public and private
sector, employing the services of another, or any person acting in the interest
of an employer, which shall include the government and all its branches,
subdivisions and instrumentalities, all government-owned or controlled
corporations and institutions, as well as non-profit private institutions, or
organizations: Provided, That the self-employed shall be an employer and
employee at the same time.

e. “Employment status in the public sector” refers to the status of
appointment. It may be permanent, temporary, coterminous, fixed term, casual,
contractual, substitute or provisional.

f. “Employment status in the private sector” refers to the type of employment
which may be regular, probationary, casual, project or seasonal.

g. “Female workers in the private sector covered by the SSS” — Female
workers in the private sector who may avail of the maternity benefit shall include
those who are covered under Republic Act No. 11199, or the Social Security
Act of 2018, particularly in Section 9, Section 9-A and 9-B, as follows:

1. “Employed female worker” refers to a female worker, including a domestic
worker, who performs services for an employer in which either both mental
or physical efforts are used and who receives compensation for such
services, where there is an employer-employee relationship: Provided, That
a self-employed person shall be both employee and employer at the same
time.

2. “Self-employed female member’ refers to any female worker whose income
is not derived from employment, including those in the informal economy,

a 2

as defined under the Social Security Act of 2018, as well as those workers
enumerated in Section 9-A thereof.

3. “Overseas Filipino Worker (OFW)” refers to any female worker who is to be
engaged, is engaged or has been engaged in a remunerated activity in a
State of which she is not a citizen, or on-board a vessel navigating the
foreign seas other than a government ship used for military or non-
commercial purposes, or on an installation located offshore or on the high
seas. A “person to be engaged in a remunerated activity” refers to an
applicant worker who has been promised or assured employment overseas.

4. Female members who are voluntary contributors to the SSS” shall include
the following:

i. A spouse of a member who devotes full time to managing the household
and family affairs but does not engage in other vocation or employment
which is subject to compulsory or mandatory coverage (Non-Working

ii. An OFW upon the termination of her employment overseas who
continues to pay her contributions;

iii. A covered employee who was separated from employment who
continues to pay her contributions; and

iv. A self-employed member who realizes no income in any given month who
continues to pay her contributions.

h. “Female workers in the public sector” refer to women in government service
who, in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations, hold public office
by virtue of an appointment issued by the proper appointing officer/authority or
by way of election in National Government Agencies (NGAs), Local
Government Units (LGUs), Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations
(GOCCs), State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), or Local Universities and
Colleges (LUCs).

i. “Female workers in the informal economy” refer to self-employed,
occasionally or personally hired, subcontracted, paid and unpaid family workers
in household incorporated and unincorporated enterprises, including home
workers, micro-entrepreneurs and producers, and operators of sari-sari stores.

j. “Full pay” refers to actual remuneration or earnings paid by an employer to a
worker for services rendered on normal working days and hours not lower than
the wage rate fixed by the Regional Tripartite Wages and Productivity Board

to

(RTWPB) including allowances provided for under existing company policy or
collective bargaining agreement, if any. Full pay in the public sector, on the
other hand, includes the basic salary and allowances as may be provided under
existing guidelines.

“Miscarriage” refers to pregnancy loss before the 20th week of gestation.

“National athletes” refer to athletes including persons with disabilities who are
Filipino citizens, members of the national training pool, recognized and
accredited by the Philippine Olympic Committee (POC) and the Philippine
Sports Commission (PSC), including athletes with disabilities (AWD) who are
recognized and accredited by the National Paralympic Committee of the
Philippines (NPC PHIL) and the PSC and who have represented the country in
international sports competitions.

. “Pregnancy” refers to the period from the conception up to the time before

actual delivery or birth of a child, miscarriage or emergency termination.

“Relative within the fourth degree of consanguinity” refers to a person who
is related to the female worker by blood and shares the same ancestry or
lineage.

. “Solo parent” refers to a covered female worker who falls under the category

of a solo parent defined under Republic Act No. 8972, otherwise known as the
“Solo Parents’ Welfare Act of 2000”.

RULE Ill
COVERAGE AND TYPES OF BENEFITS

Section 1. Who are Covered. — The 105-Day Expanded Maternity Leave Law (EMLL)
shall cover the following:

RoON>

Female workers in the Public Sector;

Female workers in the Private Sector;

Female workers in the Informal Economy;

Female members who are voluntary contributors to the Social Security System
(SSS); and

Female national athletes.

to

Section 2. What Benefits are Granted. — The following benefits are granted under
the 105-Day Expanded Maternity Leave Law (EMLL) to the corresponding sectors:

1. Paid leave benefit granted to a qualified female worker in the public sector, for
the duration of:

a. One Hundred Five (105) days for live childbirth, regardless of the mode of
delivery, and an additional fifteen (15) days paid leave if the female worker
qualifies as a solo parent under Republic Act No. 8972, or the “Solo Parents’
Welfare Act of 2000”; or

b. Sixty (60) days paid leave for miscarriage and emergency termination of
pregnancy;

2. Paid leave benefit granted to a qualified female worker in the private sector
covered by the SSS, including those in the informal economy, for the duration
of:

a. One Hundred Five (105) days for live childbirth, regardless of the mode of
delivery, and an additional fifteen (15) days paid leave if the female worker
qualifies as a solo parent under Republic Act No. 8972, or the “Solo Parents’
Welfare Act of 2000”; or

b. Sixty (60) days paid leave for miscarriage and emergency termination of
pregnancy;

Employed female workers shall receive full pay which consists of (i) SSS
maternity benefit computed based on their average daily salary credit and (ii)
salary differential to be paid by the employer, if any;

3. An option to extend for an additional thirty (30) days without pay in case of live
childbirth;

4. Paid maternity leave, allowances and benefits granted to female national
athletes; and

5. Health care services for pre-natal, delivery, postpartum and pregnancy-related
conditions granted to female workers, particularly those who are neither
voluntary nor regular members of the SSS, as governed by the existing rules
and regulations of the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth).

to

RULE IV
GRANT OF MATERNITY LEAVE BENEFITS

Section 1. Grant of Maternity Leave. — All covered females regardless of civil status,
employment status, and the legitimacy of her child, shall be granted one hundred five
(105) days maternity leave with full pay, and an additional fifteen (15) days with full
pay in case the female worker qualifies as a solo parent under Republic Act No. 8972,
or the “Solo Parents’ Welfare Act of 2000”.

In cases of miscarriage or emergency termination of pregnancy, sixty (60) days
maternity leave with full pay shall be granted.

Section 2. Manner of Enjoyment of the Benefit. — Enjoyment of maternity leave
cannot be deferred but should be availed of either before or after the actual period of
delivery in a continuous and uninterrupted manner, and such that:

a. Incases of live childbirth, one hundred five (105) days maternity leave with full
pay shall be granted; or

b. Incases of miscarriage or emergency termination of pregnancy, sixty (60) days
maternity leave shall be granted.

In all of the above instances, the maternity leave can be credited as combinations of
prenatal and postnatal leave as long as it does not exceed one hundred five (105)
days or sixty (60) days, as the case may be. In no case shall postnatal care be less
than sixty (60) days.

Section 3. Extended Maternity Leave. — |n cases of live childbirth, an additional
maternity leave of thirty (30) days, without pay, can be availed of, at the option of the
female worker, provided that the employer shall be given due notice.

Due notice to the employer must be in writing and must be given at least forty-five (45)
days before the end of the female worker's maternity leave. However, no prior notice
shall be necessary in the event of a medical emergency but subsequent notice shall
be given to the employer.

The above period of extended maternity leave without pay shall not be considered as
gap in the service.

Section 4. Frequency of the Grant. — Maternity leave shall be granted to a qualified
female worker in every instance of pregnancy, miscarriage or emergency termination
of pregnancy regardless of frequency.

Section 5. Grant of Maternity Leave Benefits After Termination of Employment.
— Maternity leave with full pay shall be granted even if the childbirth, miscarriage, or

As 6 ,

emergency termination of pregnancy occurs not more than fifteen (15) calendar days
after the termination of an employee’s service, as her right thereto has already
accrued. Such period is not applicable when the employment of the pregnant woman
worker has been terminated without just cause, in which case the employer will pay
her the full amount equivalent to her salary for one hundred five (105) days for
childbirth and sixty (60) days for miscarriage or emergency termination of pregnancy
based on her full pay, in addition to the other applicable daily cash maternity benefits
that she should have received had her employment not been illegally terminated.

Section 6. Maternity Leave of a Female Worker with Pending Administrative
Case. — The maternity leave benefits granted under Republic Act No. 11210 and this
Rules shall be enjoyed by a female worker in the public sector and in the private sector
even if she has a pending administrative case.

Section 7. Non-Diminution of Benefits. — Nothing in this Rules shall be construed
as to diminish existing maternity benefits currently enjoyed whether or not these are
granted under collective bargaining agreements (CBA), or present laws, if the same
are more beneficial to the female worker. Any other working arrangement which the
female worker shall agree to, during the additional maternity leave period, shall be
allowed: Provided, That this shall be consented to in writing by the female worker and
shall primarily uphold her maternal functions and the requirements of postnatal care.

Section 8. Security of Tenure. — Those who avail of the benefits of Republic Act No.
41210 or this Rules, whether in the public or private sector, shall be assured of security
of tenure. As such, the exercise of this option by them shall not be used as basis for
demotion in employment or termination. The transfer to a parallel position or
reassignment from one organizational unit to another in the same agency or private
enterprise shall be allowed: Provided, That it shall not involve a reduction in rank,
status, salary, or otherwise amount to constructive dismissal.

Section 9. Non-Discrimination. — No employer whether in the public or private sector
shall discriminate against the employment of women in order to avoid the benefits
provided for in this Rules.

RULE V

MATERNITY LEAVE FOR
FEMALE WORKERS IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR

Section 1. Eligibility. — Any pregnant female worker in the government service,
regardless of employment status and length of service, in National Government

to

Agencies (NGAs), Local Government Units (LGUs), Government-Owned or -
Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), or Local
Universities and Colleges (LUCs) shall be granted maternity leave of one hundred five
(105) days with full pay regardless of the manner of delivery of the child, and an
additional fifteen (15) days paid leave if the female worker qualifies as a solo parent
under Republic Act No. 8972, or the “Solo Parents’ Welfare Act of 2000”.

She shall be entitled to maternity leave of sixty (60) days with full pay for miscarriage
or emergency termination of pregnancy.

Section 2. Notice of Pregnancy and Application for Maternity Leave. — The
female worker shall give prior notice to the head of agency of her pregnancy and her
availment of maternity leave at least thirty (30) days in advance, whenever possible,
specifying the effective date of the leave. The female worker shall use the prescribed
civil service form in the filing of the maternity leave application, supported by a medical
certificate.

Section 3. Maternity Leave in the Teaching Profession. — Female teachers in the
teaching profession may also avail of maternity leave even during long vacations, i.e.,
summer and Christmas vacations, in which case, both the maternity leave benefits
and the proportional vacation pay (PVP) shall be granted.

Section 4. Extended Maternity Leave. —|n cases of live childbirth, the female worker
has the option to extend her maternity leave for an additional thirty (30) days without
pay, or use her earned sick leave credits for extended leave with pay. In case the sick
leave credits are exhausted, the vacation leave credits may be used.

Section 5. Manner of Payment of Maternity Leave Benefits. — The female worker
shall be entitled to full pay during maternity leave which shall be paid by the agency.
The female worker shall have the option to receive full pay either through lump sum
payment or regular payment of salary through agency payroll. A clearance from
money, property and work-related accountabilities shall be secured by the female
worker. Money, property and work-related accountabilities as well as pending
administrative case shall not deprive the female worker of the availment of her
maternity leave benefits.

Section 6. Consecutive pregnancies and multiple childbirths. — \n case of
overlapping maternity benefit claims, e.g., one miscarriage or emergency termination
of pregnancy after the other or followed by live childbirth, the female member shall be
granted maternity benefits for the two contingencies in a consecutive manner. The
female worker shall be paid only one maternity benefit, regardless of the number of
offspring, per childbirth/delivery.

to

Section 7. Dispute Resolution. — Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or
relating to the payment of full pay shall be filed by the concerned female worker initially
to the head of agency and may be appealed to the Civil Service Commission (CSC)
Regional Office having jurisdiction over the agency, and to the Commission Proper,
respectively. The agency shall not hold or delay the payment of full pay to the female
worker pending the resolution of the dispute, controversy or claim.

RULE VI
MATERNITY LEAVE FOR
FEMALE WORKERS IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR

Section 1. Eligibility. — To qualify for the grant of maternity leave benefit, the female
worker must meet the following requirements:

a. She must have at least three (3) monthly contributions in the twelve-month
period immediately preceding the semester of childbirth, miscarriage, or
emergency termination of pregnancy.

In determining the female member's entitlement to the benefit, the SSS shall
consider only those contributions paid prior to the semester of contingency; and

b. She shall have notified her employer of her pregnancy and the probable date
of her childbirth, which notice shall be transmitted to the SSS in accordance
with the rules and regulations it may provide.

Section 2. Notice Requirement. — The notification process for SSS-covered female
workers and/or members and employers shall be governed by the following rules:

a. The female member, upon confirmation of pregnancy, shall immediately inform
her employer of such fact and the expected date of childbirth;

b. The employer shall, in turn, notify the SSS through the prescribed manner;
c. The above rules notwithstanding, failure of the pregnant female worker to notify
the employer shall not bar her from receiving the maternity benefits, subject to

guidelines to be prescribed by the SSS; and

d. Self-employed female members, including those in the informal economy,
OFWs and voluntary SSS members may give notice directly to the SSS.

Section 3. Amount of Benefit. - Covered female workers availing of the maternity
leave benefits must receive their full pay. Full payment of the maternity leave benefit
shall be advanced by the employer within thirty (30) days from the filing of the maternity
leave application.

In the case of self-employed female members, including those in the informal
economy, OFWs and voluntary SSS members, the SSS shall directly pay the maternity
benefit.

Section 4. Reimbursement. — The SSS shall immediately reimburse to the employer
the maternity benefits advanced to the employed female member, only to the extent
of one hundred percent (100%) of her average daily salary credit for one hundred five
(105) days, one hundred twenty (120) days or sixty (60) days, as the case may be,
upon receipt of satisfactory and legal proof of such payment.

Section 5. Salary Differential, Exceptions. — Employers from the private sector shall
pay for the difference between the full salary and the actual cash benefits received
from the SSS.

Female workers employed by exempt establishments and enterprises, which satisfy
the requirements and criteria listed below, shall not be entitled to the salary differential.
The said female workers shall be entitled to receive only their SSS maternity benefits.

Upon submission of proofs and other necessary documents, the following
establishments in the private sector may be exempted from paying the salary
differential herein prescribed, provided the criteria below are satisfied:

1. Those operating distressed establishments.
A. For corporation/cooperative:

When the actual net loss amounts to 25% of total assets or when the
corporation/cooperative registers capital deficiency, i.e. negative
stockholders’ equity immediately preceding the application for exemption.

B. For sole proprietorship and partnership:

When the accumulated net losses for the last two (2) full accounting periods
immediately preceding application for exemption amounts to 20% or more of
the total invested capital at the beginning of the period under review or when
the sole proprietorship/partnership registers capital deficiency, i.e. negative
net worth as of the last full accounting period immediately preceding
application for exemption.

he 10

C. For Non-stock, non-profit organizations:

When the accumulated net losses for the last two (2) full accounting periods
immediately preceding application for exemption amounts to 20% or more of
the fund balance/members’ contribution at the beginning of the period or
when an establishment registers capital deficiency, i.e. negative fund
balance/members; contribution as of the last full accounting period or interim
period, if any, immediately preceding application for exemption.

D. For banks and quasi-banks

When there is a certification from the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas that it is
under receivership or liquidation as provided in Section 30 of RA 7653,
otherwise known as the New Central Bank Act.

2. Those retail/service establishments and other enterprises employing not more
than ten (10) workers:

When it is engaged in the retail sale of goods and/or services to end users for
personal or household use and it is regularly employing not more than ten (10)
workers regardless of status, except the owner/s, for at least six (6) months in
any calendar year.

3. Those considered as micro-business enterprises and engaged in the
production, processing, or manufacturing of products or commodities including
agro-processing, trading, and services, whose total assets are not more than
Three Million Pesos (P3,000,000.00) in accordance with the Barangay Micro
Business Enterprises (BMBE's) Act of 2002; and

4. Those who are already providing similar or more than the benefits herein
provided under an existing Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), company
practice or policy.

That said exemptions shall be subject to an annual submission of justification by the
employer claiming exemption for the approval of the Department of Labor and
Employment (DOLE).

Section 6. Bar to Recovery of Sickness Benefits. - The payment of daily SSS
maternity benefits shall be a bar to recovery of sickness benefits provided under
Republic Act No. 11199, for the same period for which daily maternity benefits have
been received.

(
jf 71,

Section 7. Consecutive Pregnancies and Multiple Childbirths. —- The payment of
the SSS maternity benefits in cases of consecutive pregnancies resulting in
overlapping maternity leaves and in cases of multiple childbirths shall be governed by
the following rules:

a. In case of the overlapping of two (2) maternity benefit claims, the female
member shall be granted maternity benefits for the two contingencies in a
consecutive manner. However, the amount of benefit corresponding to the
period where there is an overlap shall be deducted from the current maternity
benefit claim; and

b. The female member shall be paid only one maternity benefit, regardless of the
number of offspring, per childbirth/delivery.

Section 8. Liability of the Employer. — The employer shall pay to the SSS damages
equivalent to the benefits which said female member would otherwise have been
entitled to in any of the following instances:

a. Failure of employer to remit to the SSS the required contributions for the female
worker; or

b. Failure of the employer to transmit to SSS the female worker's notification on
the fact of pregnancy and probable date of childbirth.

Section 9. Dispute Resolution. — Any dispute, controversy, or claim as regards the
grant of SSS maternity leave benefit under this Rules shall be filed before the Social
Security Commission (SSC). The filing, determination, and settlement of disputes shall
be governed by the Rules and Regulations of the SSC, which provide that all petitions
shall be filed with the Office of the Executive Clerk of the Commission or his/her
Deputy, or at any Regional Commission Legal Department.

Any dispute, controversy, or claim arising out of or relating to the payment of salary
differential shall be filed before the DOLE Field/Provincial/Regional Office having
jurisdiction over the workplace and shall be subject to existing enforcement
mechanisms of the DOLE.

RULE VII
MATERNITY LEAVE BENEFITS
FOR WOMEN IN THE INFORMAL ECONOMY

Section 1. Maternity Leave Benefits for Women in the Informal Economy and
Voluntary Contributors to the SSS. — Maternity benefits shall cover all married and
unmarried women, including female workers in the informal economy.

to

Female workers in the informal economy are entitled to maternity leave benefits if they
have remitted to the SSS at least three (3) monthly contributions in the twelve (12)-
month period immediately preceding the semester of her childbirth, miscarriage, or
emergency termination of pregnancy.

RULE VIII
ALLOCATION OF MATERNITY LEAVE CREDITS

Section 1. Allocation to the Child’s Father or Alternate Caregiver. — A female
worker entitled to maternity leave benefits may, at her option, allocate up to seven (7)
days of said benefits to the child’s father, whether or not the same is married to the
female worker. The allocated benefit granted to the child’s father under this law is
over and above that which is provided under Republic Act No. 8187, or the “Paternity
Leave Act of 1996”.

In case of death, absence, or incapacity of the child’s father, the female worker may
allocate to an alternate caregiver who may be any of the following, upon the election
of the mother taking into account the best interests of the child:

a. A relative within the fourth degree of consanguinity; or

b. The current partner, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity, of the
female worker sharing the same household.

The option to allocate maternity leave credits shall not be applicable in case the female
worker suffers miscarriage or emergency termination of pregnancy.

Section 2. Allocation for the SSS-Covered Female Workers. — \n case the female
worker avails of the option to allocate, the SSS shall pay her the amount of the
maternity benefit corresponding to the period not allocated.

As applicable, the father or, in his death, absence, or incapacity, the alternate
caregiver shall be granted by his employer a leave with pay equivalent to a period from
one (1) to seven (7) days, which may be enjoyed either in a continuous or in an
intermittent manner not later than the period of the maternity leave availed of.

The female worker shall notify her employer of her option to allocate with her
application for maternity leave. The father or alternate caregiver, as the case may be,
shall notify the employer concerned of his or her availment of the allocated leave and
the inclusive dates therefor.

This written notice to the employers shall be required even if the child’s father or the
alternate caregiver is employed in the public sector.

to

Section 3. Allocation of Maternity Leave Credits for Female Workers in the
Public Sector. — In case the female worker avails of the option to allocate, she shall
submit a written notice to the head of agency or the head of agency's authorized
representative, with her application for maternity leave.

The allocated maternity leave may be enjoyed by the child’s father or the alternate
caregiver either in a continuous or in an intermittent manner not later than the period
of the maternity leave availed of.

In case full pay has been given to the female worker, the child’s father or the alternate
caregiver, as the case may be, shall only be excused from work (leave without pay).
The leave without pay shall not be considered as a gap in the service.

Section 4. Death or Permanent Incapacity of the Female Worker. — |n the event
the beneficiary female worker dies or becomes permanently incapacitated, the
balance of her maternity leave benefits, if any, shall accrue to the child’s father or toa
qualified alternate caregiver as provided in the preceding sections subject to the
following conditions:

a. That the maternity leave benefits have not yet been commuted to cash, if
applicable; and

b. That a certified true copy of the death certificate or medical certificate or
abstract is provided to the employers of both the female worker and the child’s
father or alternate caregiver.

In case the maternity leave benefits of the deceased or permanently incapacitated
female worker have already been paid to the latter in full, the child’s father or alternate
caregiver shall be entitled to enjoy the remaining unexpired leave credits of the female
worker, if there be any, without pay: Provided, That such leave without pay shall not
be considered as a gap in the service of the child’s father or alternate caregiver, in
both the public and private sector.

RULE IX
MATERNITY LEAVE FOR FEMALE NATIONAL ATHLETES

Section 1. Maternity Leave for Female National Athletes. — |n the event that a
national athlete who is in the roster of national athletes of the National Sports
Association (NSA) to which she is affiliated becomes pregnant, she will be referred to
a physician of the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) or an obstetrician-gynecologist
to determine her fitness to continue training. She will be allowed to participate in all
team-related activities, unless the physician advises that participation is not medically
safe or should be limited. Upon medical advice, she shall go on maternity leave until
cleared to return to training. She shall continue receiving her allowance and be entitled

he

to the same benefits while on maternity leave prior to childbirth and up to six (6) months
after, unless she can resume sooner as advised by her physician, in which case, she
will continue to receive the same allowances and benefits she received prior to and
during the pregnancy: Provided, That a female national athlete employed in the public
sector shall not receive double compensation or benefits.

RULE X
PENALTIES

Section 1. Penalties. — Whoever fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of R.A.
No. 11210 shall be punished by a fine of not less than Twenty thousand pesos
(P20,000.00) nor more than Two hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00), and
imprisonment of not less than six (6) years and one (1) day nor more than twelve (12)
years or both. If the act or omission penalized by R.A. No. 11210 shall be committed
by an association, partnership, corporation, or any other institution, its managing head,
directors, or partners shall be liable to the penalties herein provided.

Failure on the part of any association, partnership, corporation, or private enterprise
to comply with the provisions of R.A. No. 11210 shall be a ground for non-renewal of
business permits.

RULE XI
FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Periodic Review. — The CSC, the DOLE, the SSS, and the Gender Ombud
of the Commission on Human Rights (CHR), in consultation with trade unions, labor
organizations, and employers’ representatives shall, within one (1) month after the
publication of this Rules, conduct a review of the maternity leave benefits of female
workers in the public and private sector, respectively. Thereafter, they shall include
maternity leave benefits in their validation report conducted every four (4) years for the
SSS and the DOLE and every three (3) years for the CSC, or more frequently as may
be necessary, with the end in view of meeting the needs of pregnant women and
newly-born infants, and improving their welfare.

Section 2. Separability Clause. — |f any provision of this Rules is declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the other provisions shall not be
affected thereby.

Section 3. Repealing Clause. — All orders, rules and regulations, and other
issuances, or parts thereof inconsistent with this Rules are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

he |

Section 4. Effectivity. — This Rules shall be effective fifteen (15) days after date of its
publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

ALICYA ‘dela ROSA-BALA

Chairperson, CSC Secretary, DOLE

4 7
RORA C. IGNA'
President and CEO, SSS

San Fernando, Pampanga, Philippines, 01 May 2019.