G

NATIONAL ECONOMIC AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT

Joint Memorandum Circular No. O]- 2614
Series of 2019

Subject: The Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No.
11203, “An Act Liberalizing the Importation, Exportation and
Trading of Rice, Lifting for the Purpose the Quantitative Import
Restriction on Rice, and for Other Purposes.”

Introduction. This Joint Memorandum Circular implements the provisions of Republic
Act No. 11203, “An Act Liberalizing the Importation, Exportation and Trading of Rice,
Lifting for the Purpose the Quantitative Import Restriction on Rice, and for Other
Purposes” pursuant to Section 17 thereof.

ARTICLE |
DECLARATION OF POLICY

SECTION 1. Section 2 of Republic Act (R. A.) No. 8178, as amended, is hereby further
mended to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the State to ensure food security
and to make the country's agricultural sector viable, efficient and globally competitive.
The State adopts the use of tariffs in lieu of non-tariff import restrictions to protect local
producers of agricultural products.

XXX

ARTICLE II
DEFINITION OF TERMS

SEC. 2. Section 3 of R. A. No. 8178, as amended is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

“SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — The following definitions apply to the terms used in
this Act:

“(a) “Agricultural products” shall refer to specific commodities classified under
Chapters 1-24 of the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System (HS)

adopted and used in Section 1611 of R. A. NO. 10863, otherwise known as the “Customs
Modernization and Tariff Act” (CMTA);

XXX

“(c) “ATIGA Rate” refers to tariff rate commitments under the ASEAN Trade in
Goods Agreement (ATIGA) applicable to importations originating from Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member States;

“(d) “Bound rate” refers to the agreed maximum tariffs on products committed by
the Philippines to the World Trade Organization (WTO) under the Uruguay Round
Final Act, and under the ATIGA, in accordance with its tariff schedule (Annex 2: Tariffs
under the ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement (ATIGA)- PHILIPPINES);

“(e) “Buffer Stock” refers to the optimal level of rice inventory that shall be
maintained at any given time to be used for emergency situations and to sustain the
disaster relief programs of the government during natural or man-made calamities;

“(f) “In-Quota Tariff Rate” refers to the tariff rates for minimum access volumes
committed by the Philippines to the WTO under the Uruguay Round Final Act;

“(g) “Out-Quota Tariff Rate” refers to the higher rate of customs duty that is levied
on the quantities of an imported agricultural product in excess of its minimum access
volume (MAV);

“(h) “Minimum Access Volume” refers to the volume of a specific agricultural
product that is allowed to be imported with a lower tariff as committed by the
Philippines to the WTO under the Uruguay Round Final Act;

“(i) “Most Favoured Nation (MFN) Rate” refers to Philippine tariff rates that are
applicable to imports from all sources as prescribed in the CMTA;

“() “Quantitative Import Restrictions” refer to non-tariff restrictions used to limit the
amount of imported commodities, including, but not limited to, discretionary import
licensing and import quotas, whether qualified or absolute;

“(k) “Rice” refers to all products classified under the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding System (HS) heading 10.06;

“(l) “Rice Shortage” is a situation where the quantity available or the supply of the
commodity in a market falls short of the quantity demanded or required at a given
time;

“(m) “Tariff? refers to a tax levied on a commodity imported from another country.
It earns revenues for the government and regarded as instruments to promote local
industries by taxing their competitors. The benefit is accorded to the local producers
by the maintenance of a domestic price at a level equal to the world price plus the
tariff;

co

“(n) “Tariff Equivalent’ refers to the rate of tariff that provides comparable protection
under existing quantitative import restrictions, reflected by the average price gap
between domestic prices and world prices; and

“(0) “Tariffication” refers to the lifting of all existing quantitative restrictions such as
import quotas or prohibitions, imposed on agricultural products, and replacing these
restrictions with tariffs.”

Rule 2.1. Other terms used in this Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR)
are defined as follows:

Rule 2.1 (a). “Optimal Level” is the level of rice inventory that shall be
strategically positioned and maintained by the National Food Authority
(NFA) at any given time which includes the following:

i. Level of stocks to be used for emergency situations; and
ii. Level of stocks needed to sustain disaster relief operations of the
government.

Rule 2.1 (b). “Emergency Situations” refer to situations which are
unforeseen or sudden occurrence, especially danger, demanding
immediate action.

Rule 2.1 (c). “Disaster Relief Programs” refer to programs of the
government that help the community or persons at risk from pre or post
disasters such as but not limited to earthquakes, tornadoes, massive fire,
severe drought, civil disaster, war or armed conflict, tsunami, storm
surge, and the like. Disaster relief programs also include:

i. Disaster Preparedness;
ii. Disaster Prevention; and
iii. Disaster Response as provided in Republic Act No. 10121 or the
Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010.

Rule 2.1 (d). “Natural calamities” refer to major adverse events or
incident resulting from the natural processes of the environment
including, but not limited to typhoons, flooding, fire, catastrophic weather
events and other fortuitous events which cannot be prevented and cause
damage to life and property.

Rule 2.1 (e). “Man-made calamities” refer to critical and disaster
situations which are caused by human decisions and activities and may
include, but not be limited to, economic sabotage, war, rebellion, or any
similar situation.

Rule 2.1 (f). The “Act” refers to Republic Act No. 11203 or An Act
Liberalizing the Importation, Exportation and Trading of Rice, Lifting for
the Purpose the Quantitative Import Restriction on Rice, and for Other
Purposes.

ARTICLE Ill

REMOVAL/TRANSFER OF NFA’s REGULATORY POWERS

SEC. 3. Section 4 of R. A. No. 8178, as amended is hereby further amended to read

as follows:

“Sec. 4. Repeal. — The following laws and all other laws or provisions of law
prescribing quantitative import restrictions or granting government agencies the power
to impose such restrictions on agricultural products or hindering the liberalization of
the importation, exportation and trading of rice are hereby repealed:

XXX

“(8) Subparagraphs i, v, vi, vii, xi, xii, xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, xviii, xix, xxii, xxiii, and
xxv of Section 6(a) of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 4, as amended.”

Rule 3.1. Effective March 05, 2019, the following functions and powers of the
National Food Authority (NFA) in Section 6(a) of PD No. 4 of 1972, as amended,
are repealed:

i)

v)

vi)

To institute the negotiable warehouse receipt or quedan system in
palay, corn and other grains not later than two (2) years after the
approval of the Act. Pending the institution of said quedan system,
however, the Authority shall implement the price support by procuring
grains at the announced floor price in such quantities and in such
places as may be necessary; provided, That no such grains shall be
procured unless they are stored in a bonded warehouse under a bond
of not less than thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3) per centrum of the
value of the stocks of said grains;

Provided, however, that in areas where there are no bonded
warehouses or adequate space in bonded warehouses, the Authority
shall start to purchase grains at the beginning of every harvest and
for this purpose shall send its men and facilities to the places of
harvest where the farmers can directly sell the harvested grains;
Provided, further, that the Authority shall take measures to expedite
the establishment of bonded warehouses in areas where they are
needed but do not exist; Provided; finally, that such stocks shall be
fully insured against loss due to fire.

To oversee and enforce (Sec. 6 A (v), the provisions of Republic Act
numbered Three Thousand Eighteen.

To inspect palay, rice, corn, corn grits and other grains and their
substitutes and or their by-products/end-products (Sec. 6 A (vi), stored
by any person, partnership, corporation or association, for purposes
of taking inventory and record of such commodities, and to enter the
premises thereof by the use of reasonable means.

vii)

xi)

xii)

xiii)

xiv)

To order the seizure, whenever there is concerning or hoarding, as
may bedefined by the Authority of rice and/or corn and/or other
grains and substitutes and/or their byproducts/end-products thereof,
including facilities and equipment (Sec 6 A (vii), used in said
concerning hoarding, or whenever there is a scarcity of supply of
such commodity in the consumer market and/or an unwarranted
increase in the price thereof, of the hoarded commodity and its public
sale in such quantity as may be needed to stabilize prices to normal
levels.

To register, license and supervise warehouses, whether bonded or
not (Sec. 6 A (XI), and mills; and to prescribe, impose and collect fees,
charges, and/or surcharges in licensing and regulating warehouses
and mills.

To establish rules and regulations governing the importation of rice,
corn and other grains and their substitutes and/or by-products/end-
products and to (Sec. 6 A (xii) license, impose and collect fees and
charges for said importation for the purpose of equalizing the selling
price of such imported grains and their substitutes and/or their by-
products/end-products with the normal prevailing domestic prices

In the exercise of this power, the Council after consultation with the
Office of the President shall first certify to a shortage of grains and/or
their substitutes that may occur as a result of a shortfall in production,
a critical demand-supply gap, a state of calamity or other verified
reasons that may warrant the need for importation. The Authority shall
undertake the direct importation of grains and/or their substitutes or it
may allocate import quotas among certified and licensed importers,
and the distribution thereof through cooperatives and other marketing
channels, at prices to be determined by the Council regardless of
existing floor prices and the subsidy thereof, if any, shall be borne by
the National Government.

To establish rules and regulations governing the export of rice, corn
and other grains and/or their substitutes and their by-products/end-
products (Sec. 6 A (xiii) and to collect fees and charges for such
exportation at rates to be determined by the Council.

In the exercise of this power the Authority shall directly undertake the
exportation of rice, corn and other grains and/or their substitutes
and/or by-products/end-products whenever there is an excess in
production and/or supply, or it may allocate export quotas among
certified and licensed exporters; Provided, however that the Council
shall first certify after to such excess production and/or supply after
proper consultation with the Office of the President.

To register, license and supervise persons, natural or juridical, who
shall engage (Sec. 6 A (xiv) in the business of providing goods and
services in support of the different activities involved in the production,

xv)

xvi)

xvii)

xviii)

processing, transporting, marketing and trading of grains and//or their
substitutes and to prescribe, impose and collect fees, charges and/or
surcharges in licensing and regulating the operations of such persons.

To register, license and supervise persons, natural or juridical,
engaged in the wholesale and/or retail business of rice, corn and other
grains and their substitutes and/or their by-products/end-products
(Sec. 6A, XV) and to impose and collect fees to be determined by the
Council.

To register, license and supervise persons, natural or juridical,
engaged in the processing or manufacture of goods where rice, corn
and other grains and/or their substitutes (Sec. 6A, xvi) are used as
ingredients in the manufacture of starch, oil and animal feeds and/or
other similar commodities and/or by-products/end-products (Sec.
6A,xvi) in which case it shall impose the nominal fees to be determined
by the Council.

To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this Decree or any
Letter of Instructions, General Orders or Rules and Regulations
issued or which may hereafter be issued pursuant thereto, or any
other Decree, Letter of Instructions, General Order, the
implementation and enforcement of which is vested with the
Authority, and for violation thereto, to authorize the Administrator or
his duly authorized representatives to impose administrative fines and
penalties, to conduct investigations and to require by subpoena and/or
subpoena duces tecum the attendance and testimony of witnesses,
the production of books, papers, documents, exhibits, records,
evidence; to administer oath by himself or his duly authorized
representative, and to make arrests. Any case of contumacy shall
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Section five hundred
eighty of the Revised Administrative Code. Any fine imposed and
collected under this paragraph shall form part of the Authority's
corporate funds, (Sec. 6 A, xvii).

Whenever the Authority determines that to accomplish its production,
processing, marketing and other incidental functions, it is necessary
to contract indebtedness, it shall be a resolution, stating the purpose
for which the indebtedness is to be incurred and citing the project
study designed for the purpose, so declare and authorized the
Authority's execution or issuance of, and establish the terms and
conditions to be contained in such bonds, loan agreements, other
evidences of indebtedness necessary thereof, such resolution shall
become valid and effective upon approval by the President of the
Philippines, and upon prior recommendation of the Secretary of
Finance.

With respect to domestic indebtedness to be incurred by the Authority,
the bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued for the purpose

shall contain such terms, conditions, privileges, exemptions and
guarantees as are specified below (Sec. 3 (A) P.D. 699).

1) Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness; a) shall be

)

~~

registered with and transferable at the Central Bank of the
Philippines; b) shall not be sold at less than par; c) shall be
payable ten years or more from date of issue, as may be
determined by the Secretary of Finance before their issuance, but
shall be redeemable, upon the election of the Council, after five
years from such date of issue; and d) shall bear interest at an
annual rate to be determined before their issuance by the
Secretary of Finance. The interest may be payable quarterly,
semiannually or annually, as determined by the Secretary of
Finance in consultation with the Monetary Board of the Central
Bank of the Philippines before the date of issuance, and both the
principal and interest shall be payable in legal tender of the
Philippines (Sec. 3(A) P.D. 699.

The Bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall be exempt
from the payment of all taxes by the Republic of the Philippines,
or by any authority, branch, division or political subdivision thereof
which fact shall be stated upon their faces; and by virtue of this
Decree are hereby made securities in which all public offices,
political subdivisions, commercial banks, insurance companies
and associations, investment houses, financing companies,
savings banks and savings institutions, including savings and
loan associations, executors, administrators, guardians, trustees
and fiduciaries in the Philippines may properly and legally invest
their own funds or the funds within their control, and the same
shall be receivable as collateral in any transaction with the
government, its agencies and_ instrumentalities, including
government-owned or controlled corporations and government
banking and financial institutions in which such collateral is
required. Said instruments may be made payable both as to
principal and interest in the Philippine currency or any readily
convertible currency.

A sinking fund shall be established by the National Grains
Authority in such manner that the total annual contribution
thereto, accrued to such rate of interest as may be determined by
the Secretary of Finance in consultation with the Monetary Board,
shall be sufficient to redeem at maturity the bonds issued under
this subsection. A sinking fund shall be under the custody of the
Central Bank of the Philippines, which shall invest the same,
subject to the approval of the Council and the Secretary of
Finance in consultation with the Monetary Board; provided, that,
the proceeds thereof shall accrue to the Authority. (Sec. 3 (A)
P.D. 699).

4) The Republic of the Philippines hereby guarantees the payment
by the Authority of both the principal and the interest in case the
Authority fails to do so; and there are hereby appropriated out of
general funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated
the sum necessary to make the payments so guaranteed;
provided, that, the Authority, to assure such refunding, shall
establish reserves or sinking funds and comply with such other
restrictions and conditions as the Secretary of Finance may be
prescribe and establish that purpose.

With respect to foreign indebtedness to be incurred by the
Authority, such may be contracted, in the form of loans, credits
convertible foreign currencies, or other forms of indebtedness
from foreign governments or any international financial institution
or fund sources, including foreign private lenders, the total
outstanding amount of such indebtedness, exclusive of interest,
shall not exceed five hundred million United States dollars
(US$500m) or the equivalent thereof in other currencies. The
President of the Philippines, by himself or through his duly
authorized representative, is hereby authorized to negotiate and
to so contract with foreign governments or any international
financial institution or fund source in the name and on behalf of
the Authority; and is further authorized to guarantee, absolutely
and unconditionally, as primary obligor and not merely as a
surety, in the name and in behalf of the Republic of the
Philippines, as the payment thereon of any due interest charge,
up to the limited amount authorized by the foregoing, which shall
be over and above the amounts which the President is authorized
to guarantee under Republic Act No. 6124, and also to guarantee
the performance of all or any of the obligations undertaken by the
Authority in the territory of the Republic of the Philippines
pursuant to loan agreements entered into pursuant to this
paragraph. Any indebtedness contracted under this paragraph
and the payment of the principal thereof and of any interest or
other charges thereon, as well as the importation of machinery,
equipment, materials, supplies and contracted indebtedness,
shall also be exempt from direct and indirect taxes, fees imposts,
other charges and restrictions, by the Republic of the Philippines,
or by any authority, branch, division, or political subdivision
thereof.

Investment in bonds, promissory notes, debentures and other
evidences of indebtedness of the Authority acquired by financial
institutions, subject to the provisions of Republic Act No. 6389, as
amended, including its implementing regulations, shall be
considered sufficient compliance with the requirements of said
Act and its implementing regulations. All funds so acquired and
realized by virtue of this power to contract indebtedness, interests
and other income incidental thereto and income from other
operations, projects or activities of the Authority shall be

administered by it except such other funds the administration of
which specifically provided for by other provisions of Presidential
Decree No. 4.

xix) To purchase, lease or otherwise acquire lands, whether public or
private, for the cultivation and production of rice, corn and other
grains.

In the exercise of this power, the Authority shall have the authority to
engage and retain any person, firm or corporation, private or public,
to render technical services in the developments, cultivation or
operations of such lands as it may have acquired by purchase, lease
or other means. Moreover, the Authority shall have also the power to
effect the advance payment of the stipulated fees.

xxii) In order to immediately implement the program envisioned in this
Decrees, an initial sum of ten million pesos (P10,000, 000.00) is
hereby set aside from the Authority's corporate funds and for this
purpose, the Administrator is hereby authorized to dispose the said
amount as he may deem fit, subject to the usual accounting and
auditing requirements.

xxiii) To promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of the Act. Such rules and regulations shall
take effect fifteen (15) days following their publication once in at least
one daily newspaper of national circulation (Sec. 6A (xxiii).

xxv) To create and establish subsidiary corporations to undertake the
related and integrated business operations of Authority (Sec. 6A (xxv).

Rule 3.2. All permits, licences, registrations shall cease to be given by NFA to
importers, traders, warehouse operators, wholesalers, retailers, among others,
starting March 5, 2019 pursuant to Rule 3.1 of this IRR. All other government
agencies, such as Bureau of Customs (BOC), Department of Agriculture (DA),
Bureau of Plant Industry (BPI), among others, shall cease to include the NFA
permit, license, or registration as part of the requirement for trade and
importation/exportation of rice.

Rule 3.3. The DA shall issue a department order/circular on the conduct of local
and international rice trade within the transition period provided in Rule 3.4 of
this IRR. Provided, further, that the said DA issuance shall be consistent with
the provisions of this IRR.

Rule 3.4. A transition period of at most sixty (60) days, after the effectivity of
this IRR, shall be provided to allow the NFA to restructure in order to perform
its function under the Act.

Rule. 3.4.1. The NFA shall, within thirty (30) days from effectivity of this

IRR, submit to the Governance Commission for GOCCs (GCG) the NFA’s
Restructuring or Reorganization Plan, for its review and approval within

thirty (30) days. During this period, NFA shall conduct due consultation with the
GCG, Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and other relevant
agencies on the NFA’s Restructuring or Reorganization Plan. The NFA’s
Restructuring or Reorganization Plan shall include the applicable retirement
and separation benefits in accordance with existing laws, rules, and regulations.

Rule 3.4.1.1. The NFA shall propose to the GCG a new corporate structure of the
NFA, including all positions in its plantilla, staffing patterns for its officers and
employees in a way that is responsive to the requirements of the NFA to execute
its key function of managing the buffer stocks and ensuring its financial stability.

Rule 3.4.1.2. The NFA’s Reorganization Plan shall include the following: (i) a
recommendation as to the compensation package for those employees who shall
be considered redundant, (ii) a workforce plan for those positions that will be
created or retained by virtue of the reorganization, (iii) a job matching exercise
which will entail a retooling of the personnel, (iv) a re-learning and capacity
building program, and (v) other institutional systems developed/designed to suit
the transformed role of NFA on managing the buffer stocking and an open market
player in the rice industry.

The compensation package under this Rule for affected officials and personnel of
NFA is subject to the approval of the President. Affected officials and personnel of
the NFA, whether regular or casual/contractual personnel, may avail of the
following separation benefits in addition to retirement benefits allowed under
existing laws:

Years in Service E Rates

First 20 years | 1.00 x MBS* x No. of Years
20 years and 1 day to 30 years | 1.25 x MBS x No. of Years
30 years and 1 day and above | 1.50 x MBS x No. of Years
* Monthly Basic Salary

Funding for the separation benefits of affected officials and personnel of the NFA
shall be sourced from NFA’s corporate funds and from the National Government
(NG). Provided that, the use of NG funds for the purpose shall be the last recourse.

Rule 3.4.2. The Department of Agriculture (DA) and NFA shall formulate the
guidelines and organizational modification plan on the transfer of the Food
Development Center (FDC) from NFA to the DA within fifteen (15) days upon the
effectivity of the IRR for submission to the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM). The FDC is the department of NFA in charge of providing scientific support
on food safety particularly on testing, research, and training. The DBM shall, within
fifteen (15) days upon the submission of DA of the organizational modification plan,
issue the corresponding Notice of Organization Staffing and Compensation Action
(NOSCA) for the creation of the positions under the DA-Office of the Secretary (DA-
OSEC). Should the NOSCA take longer than the prescribed 15-day period, the
relevant NFA Staff shall be seconded to the DA, pursuant to existing CSC rules and
regulations, to ensure the FDC to remain functional and operational. The funding for
the initial operations and existing transactions of the FDC shall be sourced from the
NFA funds until the end of 2019 subject to the usual budgeting, accounting, and
auditing rules and regulations. The budgetary requirements for the ensuing year shall
be provided in the succeeding annual budget of the DA-OSEC.

Rule 3.5. The NFA shall continue to perform its Commercial Rice Stocks
Survey (CSS) until December 31, 2019. During this period of transition, the
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) will be closely coordinating with NFA to
prepare PSA personnel and systems with the CSS instrument, survey
coverage, sampling design, and others, and for possible adjustments of CSS
to conform with PSA quality data collection and standards. By the first quarter
of 2020, the PSA and NFA shall jointly undertake the CSS. The final turnover
of the CSS from the NFA to PSA shall be on July 1, 2020. In 2019, PSA will
prepare the budgetary requirements and action plan for the implementation of
CSS in 2020. Preparatory work by PSA for this undertaking in 2019 shall be
charged to the budget of PSA and to other appropriate funding sources as the
DBM may identify, subject to the usual budgeting, accounting, and auditing
rules and regulations. The budgetary requirements for the ensuing year shall
be provided in the succeeding annual budget of the PSA.

ARTICLE IV
ISSUANCE OF SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY IMPORT CLEARANCE FOR
RICE

SEC. 4. A new Section 5 is hereby inserted after Section 4 of R. A. No. 8178, as
amended, to read as follows:

“SEC. 5. Issuance of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Import Clearance for Rice for the
Sole Purpose of Ensuring Food Safety. — All importers of rice are required to secure a

nitary and Phytosanitary Import Clearance (SPSIC) from the Bureau of Plant Industry
(BPI) prior to importation in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations:
Provided, That the clearance shall not provide for import volume and timing restrictions:
Provided, further, That failure on the part of the BPI to release the SPSIC without informing
the rice importer of any error, deficiency, omission, or additional documentary requirement
shall mean automatic approval of the SPSIC applied for within seven (7) days after
submission of the complete requirements.

“The imported rice should arrive before the expiration of the SPSIC from the BPI.

“The food safety regulatory function of the NFA under Item (i), Section 16 of R.A. No.
10611, otherwise known as the “Food Safety Act of 2013”, is hereby transferred to the
BPI.”

Rule 4.1. Importation of rice shall comply with the provisions of all existing laws,
rules and regulations on Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) measures and food
safety, as well as relevant provisions of international agreements to which the
Philippines is a signatory.

Rule 4.2. All importations of rice for purposes of donation during calamities and
other emergency situations shall comply with SPS and food safety
requirements. In the case of private entities, the same shall be treated as first
and last importation. The recipient agency/office/organization or the private

entities, the same shall be treated as first and last importation. The recipient
agency/office/organization or the private entities if they are based in the
country, shall apply and secure the needed Sanitary and Phytosanitary Import
Clearance (SPSIC).

Rule 4.3. The DA shall, within 15 days upon the effectivity of this IRR, review
and revise appropriate guidelines, rules and regulations on the issuance of
SPSIC for imported rice taking into account the relevant provisions of this IRR,
including, but not limited to, the following:

Rule 4.3.1. All importers of rice shall register with the BPI and be part of
the DA Trade System for purposes of application and issuance of SPSIC.
The application form for importer registration (BPI “Q” Form No. 1c) shall
also be reviewed by the DA consistent with the timelines in Rule 4.3 to
streamline the documentary requirements to ensure all eligible traders are
able to participate.

Rule 4.3.2. The application for the issuance of the SPSIC shall be online
following the revised guidelines in Rule 4.3 and shall be acted upon within
seven (7) calendar days from submission of the complete requirements
under applicable rules and regulations. Incomplete application or non-
compliance to SPSIC requirements shall be communicated online by the
BPI through the account of the applicant in the Data Trade System (DTS)
before the end of the seven-day period; failure to do so shall mean
automatic approval of the application for SPSIC which shall also be made
available/communicated online through the same account of the applicant
in the DTS. Provided, that the clearance shall not provide for import
volume and timing restrictions. Provided further, that the imported rice
should arrive before the expiration of the SPSIC from the BPI.

Rule 4.3.3. The BPI shall regularly publish and update in its website the
list of accredited importers issued with SPSIC, including the volume of
imports.

Rule 4.4. The food safety regulatory agency for imported and domestic rice,
corn, and other grains for purposes of the implementation of RA 10611 or the
Food Safety Act of 2013 shall be the BPI. The DA shall submit the resulting
organization and staffing modification of the BPI to the DBM for its review and
approval within fifteen (15) days upon the effectivity of this IRR. The creation of
positions in the BPI shall be at the barest minimum. The DBM shall, within
fifteen (15) days upon submission by the DA, issue the corresponding NOSCA
for the creation of the positions under the BPI. The funding shall be sourced
from existing appropriation of the BPI and such other appropriate funding
sources as the DBM may identify, subject to the usual budgeting, accounting
and auditing rules and regulations. The budgetary requirements for the ensuing
year shall be provided in the succeeding annual budget of the BPI.

Rule 4.5. For purposes of ensuring the efficient and immediate transfer and
implementation of the food safety function of the NFA to BPI pursuant to Section
4 of RA No. 11203, the NFA is directed to coordinate, advise, and

assist BPI in the implementation of food safety regulations pending the
issuance of the NOSCA for the creation of positions under the BPI.

ARTICLE V
TARIFFICATION

SEC. 5. Section 6 of R. A. No. 8178, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

“Sec. 6. Tariffication. —|In lieu of quantitative import restrictions, the maximum
bound rates committed under the Uruguay Round Final Act shall be imposed on the
agricultural products whose quantitative import restrictions are repealed by this Act.
XXX.

XXX

“For the tariff equivalent of the quantitative import restrictions on rice, the bound rate
shall be as notified by the Philippines to the WTO as follows:

“(a) For the minimum access volume committed by the Philippines to WTO, the in-
quota tariff rate indicated in the applicable provisions of the WTO Agreement on
Agriculture shall apply;

“(b) For rice imports originating from ASEAN member states, the import duty rate
under the ATIGA shall apply; and

“(c) For rice imports originating from non-ASEAN WTO member states, the out-
quota tariff rate is one hundred eighty percent (180%) or the tariff equivalent calculated
Agriculture upon the expiration of the waiver relating to the special treatment for rice
of the Philippines, whichever is higher, shall apply.

“The calculated tariff equivalent shall be determined by the Tariff Commission and
approved by the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA) Board within forty-
five (45) days upon the effectivity of this Act.”

Rule 5.1. For the tariff equivalent of the quantitative import restrictions on rice,
the bound rate shall be as notified by the Philippines to the WTO, as follows:

(a) For rice imports originating from ASEAN member states, the import duty
rate under the ATIGA shall apply;

(b) For rice imports originating from non-ASEAN WTO member states, the
bound rate is one hundred eighty percent (180%) or the tariff equivalent
calculated in accordance with Paragraph 10 of Annex 5, Section b, of
the WTO Agreement on Agriculture upon the expiration of the waiver
relating to the special treatment for rice of the Philippines, whichever is
higher; and

(c) The tariff equivalent referred to under para (b) above shall be determined
by the Tariff Commission and approved by the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA) Board within forty-five (45) days after the
effectivity of the Act.

Rule 5.2. For the minimum access volume committed by the Philippines to
WTO, the in-quota tariff rate indicated in the applicable provisions of the WTO
Agreement on Agriculture shall apply.

Rule 5.3. The applied rate on rice shall be as indicated under Section 1611 of
the Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA), unless otherwise amended
case of rice for sowing, a review of the modification of its preferential rate under
ATIGA shall be undertaken immediately upon the effectivity of this IRR.
Availment of preferential rates under the ATIGA shall be subject to the
submission of the appropriate Certificate of Origin.

Rule 5.4. In case the calculated out-quota tariff rate referred to under Section
6(c) of R.A. No. 8178, as amended by the Act, exceeds one hundred percent
(100%), the provision of Paragraph 1, Section 1608(a) of the CMTA shall not
apply.

ARTICLE VI
THE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT

SEC. 6. A new Section 7 is hereby inserted after Section 6 of R. A. No. 8178, as
amended, to read as follows:

“SEC. 7. Powers of the President. — Consistent with the Philippine national interest
and the objective of safeguarding Filipino farmers and consumers, the President is
hereby empowered to act with full delegated authority subject to the provisions of the
CMTA, in the following circumstances:

“(a) The President may increase, reduce, revise, or adjust existing rates of import
duty up to the bound rate committed by the Philippines under the WTO Agreement on
Agriculture and under the ATIGA, including any necessary change in classification
applicable to the importation of rice: Provided, That the power herein delegated to the
President shall only be exercised when Congress is not in session: Provided, further,
That any order issued by the President adjusting the applied tariff rates shall take
effect fifteen (15) days after publication;

“(b) In the event of any imminent or forecasted shortage, or such other situation
requiring government intervention, the President is empowered for a limited period
and/or a specified volume, to allow the importation at a lower applied tariff rate to
address the situation. Such order shall take effect immediately and can only be issued
when Congress is not in session; and

“(c) In case the calculated out-quota tariff rate referred to under Section 6(c) of this
Act exceeds one hundred percent (100%), the provision of Paragraph 1, Section
1608(a) of the CMTA shall also not apply.

“The power herein delegated to the President may be withdrawn or terminated by
Congress through a Joint Resolution.”

Rule 6.1. The President, upon the recommendation of the NEDA Board, as may
be advised by the NFA Council, may increase, reduce, revise, or adjust existing
rates of import duty up to the bound rate committed by the Philippines under
the WTO Agreement on Agriculture and under the ATIGA, including any
necessary change in classification applicable to the importation of rice:
Provided, that the power herein delegated to the President shall only be
exercised when Congress is not in session: Provided, further, that any order
issued by the President adjusting the applied tariff rates shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after publication.

Rule 6.2. In the event of any imminent or forecasted shortage, or such other
situation requiring government intervention, upon the recommendation of the
NEDA Board, as may be advised by the NFA Council, the President is
empowered for a limited period and/or a specified volume, to allow the
importation at a lower applied tariff rate to address the situation. Such order
shall take effect immediately and can only be issued when Congress is not in
session. For the purposes of this IRR, the lower applied tariff rate shall apply
for a period no more than ninety (90) days or when the shortage ceases to exist,
whichever comes first. This period may be extended for a similar period upon
@ recommendation of NEDA Board, as may be advised by the NFA Council.

Rule 6.3. The NFA Council may create a Technical Working Group (TWG)
tasked to provide the relevant information.

Rule 6.4. In the event of rice supply shortage, the President may direct the
Secretary of Trade and Industry and the Philippine International Trading
Corporation (PITC) to expeditiously participate in the rice industry thru contracts
with private traders that would purchase the needed rice supplies from domestic
and foreign sources to enhance market competition and stabilize rice prices.

ARTICLE VII
TRADE NEGOTIATION AUTHORITY

SEC. 7. A new Section 7-A is hereby inserted after the new Section 7 of R. A. No.
| 8178, as amended to read as follows:

a “SEC. 7-A. Trade Negotiation Authority. — In the interest of the Philippine rice
industry and Philippine consumers, and upon the recommendation of the NEDA and
the Department of Agriculture (DA), the President may enter into trade negotiations or
renegotiations of the Philippine international trade commitments on rice.”

Rule 7.1. In accordance with Section 1609 of the CMTA, the NEDA Board
Committee on Tariff and Related Matters (CTRM) shall determine the need for
negotiation and renegotiation of international trade agreements/commitments
for rice and recommend to the President the Philippine position and tariff
modification, as necessary.

These trade commitments consist of but are not limited to the following:

a. WTO Agreements;

b. ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement (ATIGA);

c. ASEAN Plus trade agreements: to date these cover ASEAN-China FTA,
ASEAN-Japan FTA, ASEAN-Republic of Korea FTA, ASEAN-India FTA,
ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand FTA.

d. Bilateral and regional agreements, i.e. Philippines Japan
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement and European Free
Trade Association-Philippines Free Trade Agreement

e. Agreement on ASEAN Plus Three Emergency Rice Reserve (APTERR),
and ASEAN Food Security Reserve (AFSR) Agreement.

ARTICLE VIII
MAINTENANCE OF RICE BUFFER STOCK

SEC. 8. A new Section 8 is hereby inserted after the new Section 7-A of R. A. No.
8178, as amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8. Maintenance of Rice Buffer Stock. - The NFA shall, in accordance with
the rules, regulations and procedures to be promulgated, maintain sufficient rice buffer
stock to be sourced solely from local farmers.”

Rule 8.1. The NFA shall continue to perform its role in ensuring food security
by maintenance of buffer stock sourced from local farmers as provided in the
Act.

Rule 8.2. The NFA Council shall promulgate rules, regulations and procedures
involving the acquisition, maintenance and distribution of buffer stocks.

Rule 8.2.1 No later than December 31, 2019 or earlier, the NFA Council
shall promulgate rules, regulations, and procedures involving the
acquisition, maintenance, and distribution of buffer stocks. NFA Council
shall commission an independent study to inform and accordingly revise
these rules, regulations, and procedures. The study shall cover, among
others:

e The optimal level of rice inventory to be held as national buffer stocks;

e The rules and procedures for procurement, composition, storage,
processing, rotation or replenishment, and release of rice stocks;

e The locations and amounts of prepositioned stocks in anticipation of
emergency and disaster; and

e The transaction flow and procedures for the release of rice stocks to
government agencies as emergency response and disaster relief.

Rule 8.3. Prior to the approval and adoption by NFA Council of the results and
recommendations of the independent study in Rule 8.2.1 by December 31,
2019 or earlier, the NFA shall implement the following rules, regulations, and
procedures involving the acquisition, maintenance, and operations of buffer
stocks:

Rule 8.3.1. NFA adopts an optimal level of rice inventory equivalent to 15
to 30 days of national rice consumption. NFA shall acquire the optimal level
under its current palay procurement program sourced only from local
farmers. Procurement shall be funded by its 2019 appropriations for palay
procurement.

Any borrowings by NFA, if any, for its buffer stocking requirements, to
supplement the 2019 appropriations for palay procurement shall be
accounted for separately. Proceeds from such borrowings shall form part
of the revolving fund for NFA’s buffer stocking.

Rule 8.3.2. NFA shall maintain the optimal level of buffer stocks at all times,
except to make releases in response to emergencies, in support of disaster
relief programs of the government, or to dispose stocks, as necessary
before the quality of rice deteriorates/become unacceptable/unsafe.
Storage, sale, and distribution of stocks shall be done in accordance within
existing guidelines, provided these guidelines are consistent with Rule

Rule 8.4. The NFA shall submit a monthly report to the NFA Council on the
actual buffer stock level as compared to the optimal level.

Rule 8.5. The NFA shall issue a pre-determined volume of palay to be
purchased every year with respect to their bufferstocking function for
compliance with the Philippines’ obligation on market price support under the
WTO Agreement on Agriculture.

Rule 8.6. The budgetary requirements for the acquisition, maintenance, and
operations of buffer stock shall be generated via NFA corporate receipts and
supplemented by the national government, including but not limited to the
General Appropriations Act (GAA), subject to the usual budgeting, accounting,
and auditing guidelines.

Rule 8.7. The NFA shall engage the DSWD and LGUs in distributing the buffer
stock during emergency situations. In lieu of cash subsidy for the purchase of
rice, the NFA through DSWD, may distribute actual rice to intended
beneficiaries in areas where it is logistically efficient to do so. This option shall
be considered in the independent study indicated in Rule 8.2.1.

ARTICLE IX
LIFTING OF QUANTITATIVE EXPORT RESTRICTIONS ON RICE

SEC. 9. A new Section 9 is hereby inserted after the new Section 8 of R. A. No. 8178,
as amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 9. Lifting of Quantitative Export Restrictions on Rice. — Any and all laws,
rules, regulations, guidelines, and other issuances imposing quantitative export
restrictions on rice are hereby repealed. The exportation of rice shall be allowed in
accordance with the established rules, regulations and guidelines.”

Rule 9.1. Any and all laws, rules, regulations, guidelines, and other issuances
imposing quantitative export restrictions on rice are hereby repealed. The
exportation of rice shall be allowed in accordance with the established rules,
regulations and guidelines, and shall not be restricted in volume.

ARTICLE X
SPECIAL RICE SAFEGUARD

SEC. 10. A new Section 10 is hereby inserted after the new Section 9 of R. A. No.
8178, as amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 10. Special Rice Safeguard. —|n order to protect the Philippine rice industry
from sudden or extreme price fluctuations, a special safeguard duty on rice shall be
imposed in accordance with R.A. No. 8800, otherwise known as the “Safeguard
Measures Act” and its implementing rules and regulations.”

Rule 10.1. The DA shall impose a special rice safeguard duty in accordance
with Chapter IIl of R.A. No. 8800 or the Safeguards Measure Act and its
implementing rules and regulations. For this purpose, the DA shall monitor the
quantity and prices of imported rice in any given year.

Rule 10.2. All tariff lines under the heading 10.06 in the AHTN shall be added
in the Annex of the IRR of RA 8800 on the list reflecting the agricultural products
eligible for special safeguard (SSG) imposition.

ARTICLE XI
MECHANISM FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF MINIMUM ACCESS VOLUME
(MAV)

SEC 11. Section 7 of R. A. No. 8178, as amended, is hereby renumbered as Section
11 and is amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 11. Mechanism for the Implementation of Minimum Access Volume (MAV).
— An equitable and transparent mechanism for allocating the MAV of agricultural
products whose quantitative restrictions are herein lifted, shall be developed and

established, having the least government intervention, addressing the requirements
of each geographical area, and without entailing any cost to importers/users of these
products to the detriment of local consumers and other end-users.

“In the case of rice, its MAV will revert to its 2012 level at three hundred fifty
thousand metric tons (350,000 MT) as indicated in the Philippine commitment to the
WTO.

XK X X.”

Rule 11.1. The MAV Management Committee (MMC) created pursuant to
Section 7 of RA 8178, shall revise its existing guidelines thru the amendment
of Administrative Order (AO) No. 8, series of 1997, as amended, to include the
allocation of the MAV for rice through auction consistent with the provisions of
the Act. The Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) and the Landbank of the Philippines
(LBP) shall implement the rice MAV auction in accordance with the revised
guidelines formulated by the MMC. The said revised guidelines shall also
provide that the MMC, if it deems appropriate, shall recommend to the
President revisions, modification or adjustment of the MAV for rice in case of
shortages or abnormal price increases, within fifteen (15) days from the receipt
of confirmation from the DA on the existence of shortage and the size of the
additional MAV required to address such shortage. The MMC shall amend AO
No. 8 of 1997, as amended, within fifteen (15) days upon the effectivity of this
IRR.

ARTICLE XiIl
AGRICULTURAL COMPETITIVENESS ENHANCEMENT FUND (ACEF)

SEC. 12. Section 8 of R. A. No. 8178, as amended, is hereby renumbered as Section
12 and is amended to read ag follows:

“SEC. 12. Agricultural Competitiveness Enhancement Fund. — To implement the
policy enunciated in this Act, there is hereby created the Agricultural Competitiveness
Enhancement Fund, herein referred to as the Fund. The Fund shall consist of all duties
collected from the importation of agricultural products, except rice, under the MAV
mechanism, including unused balances and collections from repayments from loan
beneficiaries including interests, if any. The Fund shall be automatically credited to
Special Account 183 in the General Fund of the National Treasury: Provided, That
fund releases shall not be subject to any ceiling by the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM).

XXX”
Rule 12.1. The Bureau of Customs (BOC) shall upon the effectivity of the Act

exclude from the ACEF tariff revenue or customs duties, the revenue accruing
from the importation of rice.

Rule 12.2. The existing guidelines in the implementation and utilization of the
ACEF shall be valid and remain in force and the new guidelines to be formulated
by the MMC mentioned in Rule 11.1 must be harmonized with the existing
ACEF guidelines, except for the use of tariff revenues or customs duties from
the importation of rice.

ARTICLE XIll
RICE COMPETITIVENESS ENHANCEMENT FUND (RCEF)

SEC. 13. A new Section 13 is hereby inserted after the renumbered Section 12 of R.
A. No. 8178, as amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 13. Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund. — There is hereby created a
Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund, herein referred to as the ‘Rice Fund. The
Rice Fund shall consist of an annual appropriation of Ten billion pesos
(P10,000,000,000.00) for the next six (6) years following the approval of this Act and
shall be automatically credited to a Special Account in the General Fund of the
National Treasury which shall be in place within ninety (90) days upon the effectivity
of this Act.

Rule 13.1. The DBM shall include in the annual National Expenditure Program (NEP)
the amount of Ten Billion Pesos (P10,000,000,000.00) under the budget of the DA-
Office of the Secretary-Central Office for the next six (6) years. The said amount shall
constitute the Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund (RCEF), which, upon the
effectivity of the Annual Appropriations Act, shall be transferred as a Special Account
in the General Fund (SAGF-RCEF), to the concerned implementing agencies (IAs)
(includes national government agencies and government corporations). The SAGF-
RCEF shall be in place within ninety (90) days upon the effectivity of the Act.

Rule 13.2. The DBM shall release the corresponding Special Allotment Release Order
(SARO) and Notice of Cash Allocation (NCA) chargeable against the SAGF-RCEF,
directly to the IAs, in accordance with the allocation provided in the Act and consistent
with the respective special provision of the IAs concerned under the Annual
Appropriations Act.

Rule 13.3. The DBM shall create a Fund Code under the Unified Accounts Code
Structure (UACS) for the SAGF-RCEF. The same UACS Fund Code shall be used in
all financial transactions related to SAGF-RCEF by all the IAs identified in the Act. The
IAs shall open their respective Modified Disbursement System (MDS) sub-account
with their servicing banks copy furnished the DBM.

Rule 13.4. The DBM shall transfer the appropriations from the annual programmed
appropriations under the General Fund to the SAGF-RCEF through a SARO, copy
furnished the DA, Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) and the Commission on Audit (COA).

Rule 13.5. The BTr, upon receipt of SARO, shall issue a Journal Entry Voucher (JEV)
recognizing the appropriated amounts as SAGF-RCEF of the IAs, and furnish the IAs,
DA, DBM and the COA a copy thereof. The IAs shall, within thirty (30) days after the
end of each quarter, submit to the BTr the quarterly

utilization reports and statement of accounts using the forms prescribed by the
BTr, and conduct periodic reconciliation with the BTr. The IAs shall furnish the
COA Auditors concerned and the DA copies of the quarterly utilization reports
and statement of accounts duly reconciled with the BTr.

Rule 13.6. The usual budgeting and accounting procedures in the incurrence
and payment of obligations shall be followed.

Rule 13.7. The COA shall prescribe the appropriate accounting entries and the
financial reporting requirements for the purpose.

Rule 13.8. The IAs shall submit to the DBM and COA the required budget and
financial accountability reports on SAGF-RCEF pursuant to DBM-COA Joint
Circular No. 2014-1 dated July 2, 2014, and other applicable COA and DBM
issuances.

Rule 13.9. The DA shall submit consolidated annual financial statements and
other financial reports on SAGF-RCEF to the Government Accountancy
Sector, COA on or before March 31 of each year.

“At the end of the sixth (6'") year, a mandatory review shall be conducted by the
Congressional Oversight Committee on Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization
(COCAFM) to determine whether the Rice Fund and its use as provided for under this
Act shall be continued, amended, or terminated. The COCAFM shall utilize the
increase or decrease in farmers’ incomes as a primary benchmark in determining the
effectiveness of the interventions under the program and its possible extension.

ule 13.10. The Rice-Based Farm Household Survey (RBFHS) 2016-2017
conducted by Philippine Rice Research Institute (PhilRice) may be used as a
source of baseline information for the evaluation. A similar survey may be
conducted for provinces not covered in the RBFHS by the DA/PhilRice.
Increase in income shall be measured in terms of income of rice farming
household.

“The Secretary of Agriculture shall be accountable and responsible for the Rice
Fund in coordination with other government agencies concerned.

Rule 13.11. A Program Steering Committee (PSC) shall be established to
oversee and provide policy directions on the integrated implementation of the
programs funded by the Rice Fund, in accordance with the Philippine Rice
Industry Roadmap. The PSC shall be chaired by the Secretary of Agriculture,
and co-chaired by the Secretary of Socioeconomic Planning with heads of
implementing agencies as members. The PSC shall be supported by the DA —
Field Operations Service (DA-FOS) as its Secretariat. The Secretary of
Agriculture through the Undersecretary for Operations shall coordinate joint
planning and integrated implementation of the programs under the Act and the
Rice Industry Roadmap including the mobilization of DA Regional Field Offices
(DA-RFOs), National Irrigation Administration (NIA), NFA, concerned LGUs
and other entities.

Rule 13.12. Within 30 days upon the effectivity of this IRR, the Secretary of the
DA, upon consultation with the PSC, shall prepare an over-all plan for the
integrated utilization of the RCEF and the fund in excess of PhP 10 billion tariff
revenue as provided for in the Act, as well as the regular budget of the DA’s
National Rice Program to show their impact on the implementation of the
Philippine Rice Industry Roadmap and how they shall improve and sustain farm
productivity and farmers’ incomes despite climate change and the periodic
occurrence of natural disasters. It shall include putting in place a system to
ensure transparency and accountability of transactions especially the
procurement system and ensuring that COA audits are used to guide proper
procurement and disbursement of the Fund. It shall include a system of
structuring award of grants to ensure beneficiaries utilize grants properly and
achieve economies of scale as applicable. It shall also include a results based
monitoring system to better evaluate the use and allocation of the fund. It shall
provide for TWGs for each component of the Rice Fund, as itemized in Section
13 of RA 11203, comprised of experts external to the DA.

Rule 13.13. To facilitate monitoring, the DA shall create a website to inform the
public on the Plan mentioned in Rule 13.12, the progress of each components,
information and means to participate. To provide a solid empirical basis in
determining the impact of the Rice Fund, the DA shall set up a “Rice Fund
Impact Monitoring System” within one (1) year after the issuance of this IRR.
The Rice Fund Impact Monitoring System shall include impact on income taking
into consideration from RBHFS and other relevant surveys. The Rice Fund
Impact Monitoring System shall also consider broad range of variables central
to understanding the impact of the Rice Fund on farmers’ welfare.

“The amount allocated shall be released directly to the implementing agencies as
provided for in this Act based on the objectives and plans of the rice industry roadmap:
Provided, That the unutilized portion of the Rice Fund allocated to the implementing
agencies shall not revert to the General Fund but shall continue to be used for the
purpose for which it was set aside. Fund releases charged against the Rice Fund shall
not be subject to any ceiling by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).

Rule 13.14. The PhilRice and the Philippine Center for Postharvest
Development and Mechanization (PHilMech) shall prepare the organizational
modification, if necessary, to effectively implement their expanded functions
under the Act to be submitted to the DBM for review and evaluation within
fifteen (15) days upon the effectivity of the IRR. The creation of new positions
in PhilRice and PhilMech shall be at its barest minimum. In the case of
PHilMech, the DBM shall issue the corresponding NOSCA to PhilMech for the
creation of new positions within thirty (30) days upon the receipt of the
submission. For PhilRice, the DBM shall issue the approved plantilla positions
based on the submitted proposal on the organizational modification within thirty
(30) days upon the receipt of the submission. The funding shall be sourced
from existing appropriation of the IAs and such other appropriate funding
sources as the DBM may identify, subject to the existing budgeting, accounting
and auditing rules and regulations. The budgetary requirements for the ensuing
year shall be provided in the succeeding annual budget of the IA’s.

“Any program undertaken in accordance with this Act shall only be deemed
complementary and supplementary to and shall not be a replacement of any existing
programs for rice and rice farmers already implemented by the DA and other agencies
concerned.

Rule 13.15. The DA, in consultation with DBM, shall ensure that the RCEF
shall be complementary and supplementary to and shall not be a replacement
fund for any existing programs for rice and rice farmers already implemented
by the DA and other agencies concerned.

“Subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations, the Rice Fund
shall be allocated and disbursed to rice producing areas, as follows:

“(a) Rice Farm Machineries and Equipment — fifty percent (50%) of the Rice Fund
shall be released to and implemented by the Philippine Center for Postharvest
Development and Mechanization (PHilMech) as grant in kind to eligible farmers
associations, registered rice cooperatives and local government units (LGUs), in the
form of rice farm equipment, such as tillers, tractors, seeders, threshers, rice planters,
harvesters, irrigation pumps, small solar irrigation, reapers, driers, millers, and the
like, for purposes of improving farm mechanization: Provided, That the PHilMech
shall, whenever feasible, procure from accredited local manufacturers to assist in the
promotion of locally manufactured farm machineries and equipment;

Rule 13.16. The 50% of the RCEF shall be released to the PHilMech for the
implementation of the component on Rice Farm Machineries and Equipment.

Rule 13.16.1. The PHilMech, in coordination with DA-RFOs, LGUs,
private sector and farmers’ groups, shall, within sixty (60) days,
formulate the implementing guidelines on Rice Farm Machineries and
Equipment consistent with the Rice Industry Roadmap which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) eligibility criteria for prospective recipients;

(b) modality of selection; and

(c) mode of implementation and the accountability system as to how
the grant in kind rice farm equipment will be procured and
distributed.

The Implementing Guidelines shall be reviewed by the PSC and shall be
approved by the Secretary of the DA.

Rule 13.16.2. The program shall give priority to eligible farmers, farmer-
members of associations and farmer associations and registered rice
cooperatives over LGUs. The PHilMech together with the DA-RFOs and
other relevant DA agencies shall conduct the necessary needs
assessment and screening of the proposed recipients in consultation
with the concerned LGUs and shall identify the eligible recipients based
on the established criteria.

Rule 13.16.3. The PHilMech shall conduct or cause the procurement of
the rice farm machineries and equipment for the identified recipients in
accordance with the Government Procurement Act (RA No. 9184). Farm
Machineries and equipment that will be procured shall comply with the
Philippine Agricultural Engineering Standards (PAES), or in the absence
of PAES, the equivalent international standards as determined by the
PhilMech.

Rule 13.16.4. The procurement of locally manufactured farm
machineries and equipment shall be given priority, whenever feasible, in
consultation with the DTI and provided that these machineries and
equipment pass the PAES.

Rule 13.16.5. The PHilMech shall establish an RCEF Program
Management Office (PMO), if necessary, for the effective
implementation of its responsibilities in the Rice Mechanization Program.
Appropriate monitoring, transparency, and accountability systems shall
be put in place.

“(b) Rice Seed Development, Propagation and Promotion — Thirty percent (30%)
of the Rice Fund shall be released to and implemented by the Philippine Rice
Research Institute (PhilRice) and shall be used for the development, propagation and
promotion of inbred rice seeds to rice farmers and the organization of rice farmers into
seed growers associations and/or cooperatives engaged in seed production and
trade;

Rule 13.17. PhilRice, in consultation with relevant agencies, LGUs, DA-RFOs,
private sector and farmers’ groups, shall, within sixty (60) days, develop the
implementing guidelines for rice seed development, propagation, and
promotion consistent with the Rice Industry Roadmap, including, but not limited
to the following:

\ (a) eligibility criteria for prospective recipients;
hi, (b) modality of selection; and
(c) mode of implementation
The Implementing Guidelines shall be reviewed by the PSC and shall be
approved by the Secretary of the DA.

will spearhead the seed component program management, planning,
implementation, and monitoring. Appropriate transparency and
accountability systems shall be set up in the RCEF PMO. The PMO shall
be PhilRice’s coordinating arm with other implementing agencies to
ensure complementation of various program interventions.

K Rule 13.17.1. PhilRice shall establish an RCEF PMO, if necessary, that

Rule 13.17.2. PhilRice shall allocate the Rice Fund-seed component to
the following: (i) Research and development; (ii) Propagation of nucleus,
breeder, foundation, registered, and certified seeds; (iii) Promotion and
distribution of seeds and associated crop management technology; and
other similar activities necessary to implement the program.

“(c) Expanded Rice Credit Assistance — Ten percent (10%) of the Rice Fund shall
be made available in the form of credit facility with minimal interest rates and with
minimum collateral requirements to rice farmers and cooperatives, to be managed
equally by the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) and the Development Bank of the
Philippines (DBP); and

Rule 13.18. Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) and the Development Bank of
the Philippines (DBP), in consultation with the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
(BSP), and concerned agencies shall, within sixty (60) days, formulate
implementing guidelines consistent with the Rice Industry Roadmap, subject for
approval of the PSC. The new guidelines shall enable beneficiaries to access
the fund subject to minimum requirements.

Rule 13.19. Upon effectivity of the Act, the LBP, DBP and BTr shall enter into
a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), on the utilization and operations of the
expanded rice credit assistance of the RCEF. This MOA shall contain, among
others, the fees to be charged by the LBP and DBP and all cost related issues.

Rule 13.20. Credit assistance shall be over and above the regular credit
programs of LBP and DBP for rice farming.

“(d) Rice Extension Services — Ten percent (10%) of the Rice Fund shall be made
available for the extension services provided by PHilMech, PhilRice, Agricultural
Training Institute (ATI) and Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
(TESDA) for teaching skills on rice crop production, modern rice farming techniques,
seed production, farm mechanization, and knowledge/technology transfer through farm
schools nationwide as follows: seventy percent (70%) to TESDA, ten percent (10%)
each to ATI, PhilRice and PHilMech.

Rule 13.21. A TWG to be led by the ATI shall be established for the formulation
of a relevant Rice Extension Services Program and the corresponding
implementing guidelines, within sixty (60) days consistent with the Rice Industry
Roadmap. The TWG shall consist of the PHilMech, PhilRice, BPI, ATI and
TESDA. The Implementing Guidelines shall be reviewed and approved by the
PSC. The TWG shall prepare the Guidelines in close coordination with the DA
RFOs.

Rule 13.22. Each agency shall formulate their respective plans for their
component extension services based on the approved Rice Extension Services
Program by issuing a Joint Memorandum Circular.

Rule 13.23. ATI, Philrice, PHiIMech and TESDA shall closely coordinate with
the relevant DA agencies, NIA, other government agencies, and LGUs in the
implementation of their respective component extension services.

\.

Rule 13.23.1. In the implementation of the ATI’s allocation of the Rice
Extension Service Fund, it shall:

Rule 13.23.1.1.| Conduct benchmarking of Agricultural Extension
Workers (AEW) and farmer beneficiaries;

Rule 13.23.1.2 Develop the RCEF Extension Tool Kit and training
modules;

Rule 13.23.1.3 Implement IEC activities;

Rule 13.23.1.4 Conduct training and capacity building activities of AEW
and farmer beneficiaries;

Rule 13.23.1.5 Establishment and enhancement of rice-based Learning
Sites;

Rule 13.23.1.6 Conduct monitoring and evaluation of the program; and

Rule 13.23.1.7 The ATI shall also establish a Program Management
Office (PMO), if necessary, that shall spearhead the planning,
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of programs under RCEF.

Rule 13.24. TESDA shall also recognize/accredit the training modules
developed under the program for its trainees to be eligible for TESDA
scholarship grant.

“Provided, That the percentage allocation be reviewed on the third year of the
effectivity of this Act for possible revisions should intervention priorities change.

Rule 13.25. On the third year, the PSC shall engage a third party to conduct
an evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness of the percentage allocation
of the PhP 10 billion RCEF in terms of its contribution in achieving the
objectives and plans of the Rice Industry Roadmap, and to inform the Secretary
of the DA on the challenges and possible solution to improve its
implementation. Funding for the study shall be charged against the regular
budget of the DA.

Rule 13.26. The results of the review shall be submitted to the COCAFM for
possible revision or amendment of the percentage allocation.

“Provided, further, That preferential attention should be given to rice farmers,
cooperatives and associations adversely affected by the tariffication of the quantitative
import restriction on rice in accordance with the thrust and priorities of R. A. No. 8435,
as amended, otherwise known as the “Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act”
and the Philippine Development Plan (PDP). The increase or decrease of farmers’
incomes shall be the primary benchmark in granting these interventions.

Rule 13.27. DA, together with other relevant government agencies, shall

formulate guidelines and criteria in identifying the adversely affected farmers,
cooperatives and associations. The criteria identified in the guidelines shall be

used as inputs in updating and expanding the Registry System for Basic
Sectors in Agriculture (RSBSA), and in the provision of specific interventions
to target beneficiaries.

“Provided, furthermore, That if the annual tariff revenues from rice importation
exceeds Ten billion pesos (P10,000,000,000.00) in any given year within the six (6)
year period following the effectivity of this Act, the excess tariff revenues shall be
earmarked by Congress and included in the General Appropriations Act (GAA) of the
following year:

Rule 13.28. The BOC shall issue a certification, not later than April 15 of every
fiscal year, on the total annual tariff revenue from rice importation of the
preceding year to the DBM, copy furnished the DA, DOF and BTr, commencing
upon the effectivity of the Act. This certification shall likewise include the
amount in excess of Ten Billion Pesos (P10,000,000,000.00), if any, from the
tariff revenue from rice importation of the preceding year.

Revenue arising from the issuance of tax expenditure subsidy, that maybe
required by government agencies, GOCCs, or government instrumentalities for
the importation of rice in special circumstances, shall not be included in the
determination of the tariff revenue from rice importation.

“(a) Rice Farmer Financial Assistance — A portion of the excess rice tariff revenues
shall be released to the DA and shall be used for providing direct financial assistance
to rice farmers who are farming two (2) hectares and below regardless of whether they

ntinue farming rice or not as compensation for the projected reduction or loss of farm
income arising from the tariffication of the quantitative import restrictions on rice;

“(b) Titling of Agricultural Rice Lands — A portion of the excess rice tariff revenues
shall be released to the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR), Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and Land Registration Authority (LRA),
and shall be used for the subdivision and titling of agricultural rice lands or parts
thereof awarded to farmer-beneficiaries under the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform
Program (CARP) and other similar programs of the government;

“(c) Expanded Crop Insurance Program on Rice — A portion of the excess tariff
revenues shall be released to the Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation (PCIC) and
shall be used for the provision of crop insurance to qualified rice farmer-beneficiaries
under its existing agricultural insurance programs; and

“(d) Crop Diversification Program — A portion of the excess tariff revenues shall be
released to the DA and shall be used for productivity-enhancement programs for rice
farmers seeking to diversify production towards other crops.

Rule 13.29. The DA, DENR, DAR, LRA, and PCIC shall prepare and submit
their respective proposal for the purpose of allocating the fund equivalent to the
amount of excess tariff collection for consideration and approval of the PSC.
The PSC, through the DA-OSEC, shall submit the proposals to DBM for review
and subsequent recommendation for inclusion in the NEP, limited to the amount
of revenue in excess of the P10 Billion.

“The Congressional Oversight Committee on Agricultural and Fisheries
Modernization (COCAFM) shall conduct a periodic review of the use of the Rice
Fund.”

Rule 13.30. The PSC shall submit to the COCAFM a yearly report on the usage
of the Rice Fund and the excess tariff collection including their impact.

ARTICLE XIV
BENEFICIARIES OF THE RICE FUND

SEC. 14. A new Section 14 is hereby inserted after the new Section 13 of R. A. No.
8178, as amended, to read as follows:

“SEC. 14. Beneficiaries of the Rice Fund. — The beneficiaries of the Rice Fund
shall be those farmers and farmworkers and their dependents listed in the Registry
System for Basic Sectors in Agriculture (RSBSA), and rice cooperatives and
associations accredited by the DA. Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the
effectivity of this Act, the DA, in consultation with farmers’ cooperatives and
organizations and LGUs, shall validate and update the masterlist of eligible
beneficiaries to ensure that those listed are legitimate farmers, farmworkers and rice
cooperatives and associations.

Rule 14.1. The DA shall release protocol and guidelines in updating and expanding
the RSBSA and in harmonizing all existing registry in agriculture and fisheries sector.
The RSBSA shall be updated regularly by the DA, while maintaining a record of rice
farmers and farm workers who exited the sector. The funding shall be sourced from
existing appropriation of the DA-OSEC and such other appropriate funding sources as
the DBM may identify, subject to existing budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and
regulations.

Rule 14.2. The DSWD and DA shall organize a joint task force that will work toward
the harmonizing and crossmatching of the RSBSA and Listahanan or the National
Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR) of DSWD to identify
the poor farmers and to constantly coordinate to ensure that the list of poor farmers in
the RSBSA is up to date. The DA and DWSD shall issue a Joint Memorandum Circular
to ensure proper coordination of procedures and guidelines between the two agencies.
The DA shall share its database (including its interventions database) and/or related
systems to other implementing agencies identified in this IRR (e.g. DAR, LRA,
PhilRice, PhilMech, TESDA, ATI, PCIC, ACPC, LBP, DBP, etc). Similarly,
implementing agencies shall also share their data to DA. Likewise, the DA shall
endeavor to also harmonize the RSBSA with other farmer databases, such as those
held by Land Bank, PhilRice, PCIC, and similar agencies. A progress report on the
results of the database harmonization shall be submitted by DA by the end of 2020 to
PSC.

“In order to focus on the targeted rice farmer beneficiaries, cooperatives and
associations for the Rice Fund, the list of rice producing provinces and LGUs, as
provided for by PhilRice as of 2015-2018, shall be the basis and shall be added to the
roadmap as an appendix.”

Rule 14.3. PhilRice, in consultation with DA-RFOs, NIA and LGUs, shall
validate the list of rice-producing municipalities. Likewise, the DA shall revisit
the RSBSA’s definition of “farmers” and “farmworkers”.

ARTICLE XV
RICE INDUSTRY ROADMAP

SEC. 15. A new Section 15 is hereby inserted after the new Section 14 of R. A. No.
8178, as amended, to read as follows:

“SEC. 15. Rice Industry Roadmap. — Upon the effectivity of this Act, the DA,
together with the NEDA, Department of Finance (DOF), DBM, DAR, National Irrigation
Administration (NIA), TESDA, PCIC, National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC) Farmer
Sectoral Council Representative and other government agencies concerned, including
rice farmer representatives, shall be given a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days
to formulate and adopt the rice roadmap to restructure the government’s delivery of
support services for the agriculture rice sector.

“The following principles shall govern the development and implementation of the
roadmap for the rice industry:

“(a) Raise sustainable investments in the rice industry particularly on rice support
infrastructure and post-harvest facilities;

) Improve the productivity, efficiency and profitability of small rice farmers and
landless farmworkers;

“(c) Strengthen research and development programs that will enhance the
resiliency of the rice industry;

“(d) Preserve and enhance the rice production capabilities of future generations;

“(e) Provide accessible, targeted and technology-oriented support services that
cover the entire value chain;

“(f) Set up responsible, participatory and effective governance mechanisms; and
“(g) Address impact of income loss caused by rice tariffication.

“The rice industry roadmap shall be implemented through a complementation of

x the DA’s rice sector programs as funded by the GAA, and the Rice Fund created under
this Act.”

Rule 15.1. The DA shall lead the crafting of the Rice Industry Roadmap, with
NEDA, DOF, DBM, DAR, DTI, NIA, TESDA, PCIC, NAPC Farmer Sectoral
Council Representative, and other rice industry stakeholders.

The DA, shall conduct stakeholder consultations with the various rice industry
stakeholders towards the formulation of the Rice Industry Roadmap. The DA,
together with NEDA, DOF, DBM, DAR, DTI, NIA, TESDA, PCIC, NAPC Farmer
Sectoral Council Representative, and other rice industry stakeholders shall
adopt the Rice Industry Roadmap on or before September 05, 2019.

Rule 15.2. The Rice Industry Roadmap shall include the participatory structure,
mechanisms, modalities, platforms and programs/activities for farmers to
actively and meaningfully engage in the implementation of the Act. It shall serve
as the guidepost in the priority setting of the programs and formulation of the
more detailed implementing guidelines of the Implementing Agencies compliant
with the principles as set out in Section 15 of the Act. It shall provide the
mechanisms and timetable for the formulation and implementation of localized
Rice Value Chain Corridor Action Plans. These action plans will substantiate
the Rice Industry Roadmap implementation at economic cluster/area specific
basis and will reflect the different eco-systems and climate change impacts.
The Rice Industry Roadmap will specify, inter alia, the conduct of rapid
appraisals of rice and rice-other commodity value chains, the engagement of
LGUs and other key stakeholders at local (municipal) levels in planning and
decision-making, the investment and institutional requirements, and the
implementation and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements.

Rule 15.3. DA, DBM, NEDA, DOF and other concerned agencies shall ensure
that the activities and investments necessary for the effective and efficient

plementation of the Rice Industry Roadmap are funded in accordance with
the annual Budget Priorities Framework annually approved by the Development
Budget Coordinating Council (DBCC) to be covered by National Budget
Memorandum issued annually by the DBM in the Budget Preparation of any
given budget year.

Rule 15.4. The DA, together with NEDA, DOF, DBM, DAR, DTI, NIA, TESDA,
PCIC, NAPC Farmer Sectoral Council Representative, and representatives
from the PCAF Committees on Food Staples and Agricultural and Fisheries
Mechanization shall conduct periodic review of the Rice Industry Roadmap.

ARTICLE XVI
NATIONAL SINGLE WINDOW

SEC. 16. A new Section 16 is hereby inserted after the new Section 15 of R. A. No.
8178, as amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 16. National Single Window Program. — To ensure the accurate collection of
tariff as provided in Section 6 of this act, the National Single Window (NSW) program
of the Bureau of Customs (BOC) shall be implemented within one hundred eighty
(180) days from the effectivity of this Act in accordance with Executive Order No. 482.”

Rule 16.1. For the purpose of issuing SPSIC, the BPI trade system procedures
shall be operationally linked with the NSW and/or its subsequent version.

ARTICLE XVII
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 17. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — These implementing rules and
regulations are jointly issued by the DA, NEDA and DBM as mandated by Section 17
of RA no. 11203.

Rule 17.1. The IRR of the Act may be jointly amended and/or updated, if the
need arises, by the DA, NEDA, and DBM.

SEC. 18. Separability Clause. — |f any provision of these implementing rules and
regulations is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 19. Repealing Clause.— All laws, decrees, executive issuances, rules and
regulations inconsistent with the provisions of RA no. 11203 and these implementing
rules and regulations are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 20. Effectivity. — Thi shall take effect immediately.

EMMANUEL F.PINOL iu TT
Secretary, Department of Agriculture Far tienes e-03:19-088s
Received : 03/28/2019 04:12 PM
OSEC-02043

ERNESTO M. PERNIA
Secretary, National Economic and Development Authority

JANET B. ABUEL ©&

OlC-Secretary, Departitent of f Budget and Management