IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10968:
AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING THE PHILIPPINE QUALIFICATIONS FRAMEWORK
(PQF), ESTABLISHING THE PQF-NATIONAL COORDINATING COUNCIL (NCC)
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Pursuant to Section 14 of Republic Act No. 10968, “An Act Institutionalizing the
Philippine Qualifications Framework (PQF), Establishing the PQF-National Coordinating
Council (NCC) and Appropriating Funds Therefor”, hereinafter referred to by its short title
“PQF Act”, the Department of Education (DepEd), the Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), the
Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), and the Professional Regulation
Commission (PRC), in consultation with relevant stakeholders, hereby issue the
following rules and regulations for the effective implementation of PQF Act.

RULE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Short Title. This shall be known and cited as the “/mplementing
Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the PQF Act’.

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy. As provided in Section 2 of the PQF Act,
pursuant to the constitutional guarantee for the State to promote the right of all citizens
to quality and accessible education at all levels, the State shall establish, maintain, and
support a complete, adequate and integrated system of education relevant to the needs
of the people and society.

In recognition of the important role of education and training in national
development, it is hereby declared the policy of the State to institutionalize the Philippine
Qualifications Framework to encourage lifelong learning of individuals, provide
employees specific training standards and qualifications aligned with industry standards,
ensure that training and educational institutions comply with specific standards and are
accountable for achieving corresponding learning outcomes, and provide government
with a common taxonomy and qualifications typology as bases for recognizing education
and training programs as well as the qualifications formally awarded and _ their

equivalents.

SECTION 3. Definition of Terms. As used in this Rules:

a. Assessment is the process of appraising learning outcomes in terms of the
domains of knowledge, skills, values, application, and degree of independence of
an individual against predefined criteria or standards;

b. Basic Education refers to that part of the educational system intended to meet
basic learning needs and provides the foundation on which subsequent learning
can be based. It encompasses kindergarten, elementary and secondary
education as well as alternative learning systems for out-of-school youth and
those with special needs;

c. Career Progression in professional life is the process of developing or moving
towards a more advanced state in a person’s qualifications, job, title, position, or
profession; it outlines the route one may follow in order to reach identified career
development goals;

d. Equivalency refers to a process that involves assigning equivalent credits to the
competencies demonstrated by a learner through assessment, thereby providing
entry points to different levels of qualifications, the purpose of which is to provide
opportunities to the leaner to continue to learn and to re-enter the educational
and training programs at various higher levels without retaking courses on which
a learner has already demonstrated competence and knowledge;

e. Formal Education refers to the systematic and deliberate process of
hierarchically structured and sequential learning corresponding to elementary,
secondary, technical-vocational education and training, and higher education.

f. Higher Education refers to post-secondary education offered usually by
universities, colleges, academies or professional/technical institutions with
programs leading to academic degrees at the baccalaureate level and academic
degrees, diplomas or certificates at the post-baccalaureate levels;

g. Informal Education is a lifelong process of learning by which every person
acquires and accumulates knowledge, skills, attitudes and insights from daily
experiences at home, at work, at play and from life itself.

h. Learning outcomes are clear statements of what a learner can be expected to
know, understand and/or do as a result of a learning experience;

i. Level Descriptor is a general statement that summarizes the learning outcomes
appropriate to a specific level in the PQF grouped in domains of learning. It
describes what an individual should be able to know, perform or demonstrate at a

particular level.

Page 2 of 11

A

j. Lifelong learning refers to all learning activities whether formal, non-formal or
informal, undertaken throughout life, which results in improving knowledge, know-
how, skills, competencies and/or qualifications for personal, social and/or
professional reasons;

k. Non-Formal Education is any organized, systematic educational activity carried
outside the framework of the formal system to provide selected types of learning
to a segment of the population. This shall also cover learning outcomes derived
from professional development in the practice of profession which leads to
qualifications.

|. Pathways refers to mechanisms or access ramps which provide access to
qualifications and assist people to move easily and readily between the different
education and training sectors and between these sectors and the labor market;

m. Qualification refers to a formal certification that a person has successfully
achieved specific learning outcomes relevant to the identified academic, industry
or community requirements. A qualification confers official recognition of value in
the labor market and in further education and training;

n. Recognition of prior learning refers to the acknowledgment of a person’s skills
and knowledge acquired through previous training, work or life experience, which
may be used to grant status or credit;

0. Technical Vocational Education and Training refers to the education involving
the study of technology-related sciences, in addition to general education, as well
as the acquisition of practical skills relating to occupations in various sectors of
economic life and social life, and which comprise formal (organized programs as
part of the school system) and non-formal (organized classes outside the school
system) approaches;

p. Trifocalized Education and Training refers to the shared administration of the
education system by the three (3) agencies responsible for each education level:
Department of Education (DepEd) for basic education; the Technical Education
and Skills-development Authority (TESDA) for technical-vocational education and
training; and Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for higher education;

RULE Il: PHILIPPINE QUALIFICATIONS FRAMEWORK

SECTION 4. Philippine Qualifications Framework. Pursuant to Section 4,
Paragraph 1 of the PQF Act, a PQF shall be established which shall describe the levels
of educational qualifications and set the standards for qualification outcomes. It is a
quality assured national system for the development, recognition and award of
qualifications based on standards of knowledge, skills and values acquired in different
ways and methods by learners and workers of the country.

Page 3 of 11 g

SECTION 5. Objectives. The PQF shall have the following objectives:

a. To adopt national standards and levels of learning outcomes of education, which
shall cover formal, informal, and non-formal education.

b. To support the development and maintenance of pathways and equivalencies
that enable access to qualifications and to assist individuals to move easily and
readily between the different education and training sectors and between these
sectors and the labor market.

c. To align domestic qualification standards with the international qualifications
framework thereby enhancing recognition of the value and comparability of
Philippine qualifications and supporting the mobility of Filipino students, workers
and professionals.

SECTION 6. Framework and Level Descriptors. Pursuant to Section 8 of the
PQF Act, the PQF shall incorporate the qualifications level descriptors defined in terms
of knowledge, skills and values, application, and degree of independence.

The PQF National Coordinating Council (PQF-NCC) shall make detailed
descriptors for each qualification level following the principles of lifelong learning and the
recognition of prior learning from previous informal experiences, while incorporating the
learning standards in basic education, competency standards of training regulations, and
the policies and standards of higher education academic programs. The level
descriptors shall also incorporate or take into consideration standards of career
progression for professionals, specializations, and multi-disciplinary fields of study.

The PQF-NCC members shall jointly implement national pilot programs to
determine the relevance and applicability in all levels of education. The DOLE shall
provide the necessary and updated labor market information regarding the demand for
specific qualifications and emerging occupations as bases for the prioritization for
learning standards development.

SECTION 7. Review of Present PQF. Upon convening of the PQF-NCC under
the PQF Act, it shall undertake a comprehensive review of the present PQF. Thereafter,
the PQF shall be updated as necessary.

SECTION 8. Review of Assessment System. Pursuant to Section 9 of the PQF
Act, the PRC and the CHED shall periodically review the system of assessment of
learning outcomes and align them with those of the PQF. The PRC and CHED shall
agree on the coverage and parameters of the review, and shall report the same to the
PQF-NCC.

SECTION 9. Participation of the Industry Sector. As provided in Section 7 of
the PQF Act, industry sector representatives shall be consulted and tapped in the

JS

Page 4 of 11

development and implementation of the PQF to ensure the alignment of educational
outcomes with industry requirements and add to the value of qualifications within the
workplace.

SECTION 10. Participation of Relevant Stakeholders. The PQF-NCC shall
provide consultation and feedback mechanisms through which relevant stakeholders
may articulate and submit comments, concerns, and recommendations with respect to
PQF development and implementation. The PQF-NCC shall also exert efforts and
provide resources to bring PQF mechanisms and processes to the regional and local
levels.

SECTION 11. Identification of Priority Sectors. Pursuant to Section 11 of the
PQF Act, as a preliminary approach to the implementation of the PQF and to ensure its
more focused implementation, the CHED, the TESDA and the DepED, in consultation
with the industry and relevant stakeholders, the DOLE, the PRC, and the Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI), the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA),
the Department of Science and Technology (DOST), and other related agencies, are
directed to identify priority sectors and programs for the PQF, taking into account labor
market realities.

SECTION 12. Support from Other Government Agencies. As provided in
Section 12 of the PQF Act, the DOST, the NEDA, the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), and other related agencies shall extend the necessary support and
provide relevant inputs towards the effective implementation of the POF.

RULE Ill: PHILIPPINE QUALIFICATIONS FRAMEWORK - NATIONAL
COORDINATING COUNCIL

SECTION 13. The Philippine Qualifications Framework — National
Coordinating Council (PQF-NCC). The PQF Act established the PQF-NCC to
harmonize and promote a seamless education and training system.

SECTION 14. Composition. As provided in Section 5 of the PQF Act, the PQF-
NCC shall have seven (7) members, composed of the following:

The Secretary, DepED, as Chairperson;

The Secretary, DOLE, as member;

The Chairperson, CHED, as member;

The Director General, TESDA, as member;

The Chairperson, PRC, as member;

One (1) representative of the economic sector, as member; and
One (1) representative of the industry sector, as member.

aroao009

SECTION 15. Selection of Sector Representatives. The representatives of the
economic sector and industry sector as members of the PQF-NCC shall be selected by

Page 5 of 11 We

the PQF-NCC from nominees submitted by organizations coming from the economic and
industry sectors. The following procedure shall be observed in the selection process:

a. The PQF-NCC, through its Secretariat, shall announce the period for the
nomination of the economic sector and industry sector representatives. The
announcement shall include information on the qualifications and responsibilities of the
economic sector and industry sector representatives.

b. Duly recognized organizations from the industry sector and economic sector
shall submit their nomination, with express acceptance by the nominee, to the PQF-NCC
Secretariat.

c. The PQF-NCC shall deliberate and select the industry sector and economic
sector representatives from the submitted nominees based on the following criteria:

1. Expertise, taking into account professional or trade practice, experience
and recognitions;

2. In-depth knowledge of education and training, employment, business, or
technology; and

3. Track record of nominees and nominating organizations.
The economic sector and industry sector representatives shall have a term of
three (3) years. They shall be entitled to actual transportation and accommodations
expenses incurred in the discharge of their responsibility as members of the PQF-NCC

and to a modest remuneration. They may waive these privileges.

SECTION 16. Powers and Functions. The PQF-NCC has the powers and
functions to:

a) Harmonize qualification levels across basic, technical-vocational and higher
education;

b) Align education standards and learning outcomes with the level descriptors
contained in the PQF;

c) Promote the PQF and its elements, including the principles, key features,
definitions or terminologies, structure, and governance arrangements, and
provide information and guidelines in the implementation of the PQF;

d) Rationalize the quality assurance mechanisms in Philippine education;

e) Develop and recognize pathways and equivalencies;

f) Maintain the national registry of qualifications;

Page 6 of 11

te

g) Ensure the international alignment of the PQF with the qualification
frameworks of other countries or regions;

h) Create technical working groups in support of the development and
implementation of the PQF;

i) Represent the country in international fora or negotiations in line with
qualifications agreements or arrangements;

j) Review and update the PQF;

k) Submit to the Office of the President, the Senate of the Philippines, and the
House of Representatives an updated report on the progress and
accomplishments in relation to the PQF; and

|) Perform such other functions that may be related to the implementation of the
POF.

SECTION 17. Review and Evaluation of PQF Implementation. To ensure the
efficient and effective implementation of the PQF Act, the PQF-NCC shall develop a
system of monitoring and evaluation of all its policies, programs and activities against
the mandates and objectives of the PQF Act.

SECTION 18. Internal Rules. The PQF-NCC shall adopt its internal rules
covering meetings, voting, quorum, and other rules of procedure necessary for the
discharge of its powers and functions.

SECTION 19. Permanent Secretariat. The PQF-NCC shall organize a
permanent technical Secretariat to be headed by a full-time Executive Director with a
rank of Assistant Secretary.

The Secretariat may contract the services of technical experts and authorities on
relevant areas of concern such as equivalencies, accreditation, curriculum development,
educational measurement and testing.

The PQF-NCC shall determine the appropriate structure, composition, plantilla
items needed, and staff qualifications and the location of the permanent secretariat in
accordance with existing Civil Service Commission, Career Executive Service Board,
and Department of Budget and Management rules, regulations, and guidelines.

The Secretariat shall provide the necessary technical and administrative support
to the PQF-NCC in the performance of its powers and functions.

Page 7 of 11 A

RULE IV: PQF-NCC WORKING GROUPS

SECTION 20. Establishment of PQF-NCC Working Groups. To pursue the
implementation of the PQF, the following working groups are hereby established:

a. Qualifications Register Working Group. The Qualifications Register (QR)
Working Group shall establish and maintain the Qualifications Register, which is the
national database of quality assured qualifications authorized under the PQF. It shall
perform related functions, including the following:

(1) Maintain and update the database of professional, skilled and other
recognized qualifications;

(2) Coordinate with relevant agencies or institutions for the inclusion of their
respective qualifications in the register;

(3) Provide information to employers, trainers and trainees, and other
stakeholders, on education and training opportunities, assessment and
certification, and/or licensure, in professional, skilled and other recognized
qualifications;

(4) Maintain quality assurance of the Registry; and

(5) Perform other functions as may be assigned by the PQF-NCC.

b. Quality Assurance Working Group. The Quality Assurance (QA) Working
Group shall:

(1) Provide information on the quality assurance systems of the various
subsectors of Philippine education and training system;

(2) Initiate studies and submit recommendations to the PQF-NCC on current
quality assurance systems on the four key processes of:

(a) the registration of education and training providers

(b) supervision of assessment systems that leads to the award of
qualifications

(c) accreditation of qualifications

(d) regulation of the issuance of certificates;

(3) Initiate studies and submit recommendations to the PQF-NCC on the
alignment of the quality assurance standards of Philippine education and
training system to international QA standards;

(4) Perform other functions as may be assigned by the PQF-NCC.

c. Pathways and Equivalencies Working Group. The Pathways and
Equivalencies (PE) Working Group shall support and assist the PQF-NCC in facilitating
the development and implementation of pathways and equivalency systems. It shall
perform related functions, including:

(1) Recommend to the PQF-NCC pathways and equivalency system and

access ramps for seamless education transfer and/or career progression

between education levels corresponding to the POF levels;

) Develop a national system of credit transfer;

(3) Recommend facilitative actions for the enhancement and adoption of the
Ladderized Education Program consistent with the PQF; and

(4) Perform other functions as may be assigned by the PQF-NCC.

Page 8 of 11 t

d. Information and Guidelines Working Group. The Information and
Guidelines (IG) Working Group shall ensure access to information on PQF
implementation. It shall perform related functions, including:

(1

wm

Develop a communication plan for implementation of information activities

geared towards promoting, advocating, and the effective socialization of

the PQF;

(2) Develop information, education and communication (IEC) materials to
promote and advocate POF;

(3) Disseminate important guidelines, circulars, and policy issuance on the
PQF to stakeholders and the general public; and

(4) Perform other functions as may be assigned by the PQF-NCC.

e. International Alignment Working Group. The International Alignment (IA)
Working Group shall initiate comparability and benchmarking activities of the PQF with
other countries and regional/international groupings; and perform other functions as may
be assigned by the PQF-NCC.

f. Government-Industry-Education Sector Working Group. The Government-
Industry-Education Sector (GIE) Working Group shall be responsible for facilitating
coordination and linkages among government, industry, and the education sector and
academic/research community on cross-cutting issues towards making PQF responsive
and relevant to the broader economy and society. It shall perform related functions,
including:

(1) Recommend strategy and direction, map priorities and gaps;

(2) Initiate studies, provide platforms _ for consultations, formulate
recommendations;

(3) Promote GIE initiatives that will enhance the impact of the PQF on
employment, upgrading of the economic sectors, and enhancement of the
knowledge and productivity of workers; and

(4) Perform other functions as may be assigned by the PQF-NCC.

g. The Lifelong Learning Working Group. The Lifelong Learning (LL) Working
Group shall have the following functions:

(1) Initiate research and consultation on lifelong learning;

(2) Compile and disseminate information on lifelong learning through database,
conferences, symposia;

(3) Initiate studies and pilot programs for the recognition of lifelong learning within
the PQF; and

(4) Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the PQF-NCC.

SECTION 21. Composition of Working Groups. The Working Groups shall be
composed of designated representatives of the respective members of the PQF-NCC
and other relevant stakeholders and experts, as identified by the PQF-NCC. Each
Working Group shall be chaired by a member-agency as designated by the PQF-NCC.

Page 9 of 11

SECTION 22. Administration and Reporting. The Working Groups shall
develop their respective workplans and targets aligned to their mandates, and prepare
the corresponding budget for approval and inclusion in the overall budget for PQF
implementation. Working Groups may adopt internal rules, procedures and
administrative systems for the efficient and effective exercise of their mandate and
functions, subject to applicable laws, rules and regulations. The Working Groups shall
provide the PQF-NCC a semestral report of the progress of their work.

SECTION 23. Creation or Dissolution of Working Groups. The PQF-NCC may
create additional working groups, or dissolve existing working groups, as may be
necessary.

RULE V. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 24. Interim Secretariat. Pending the organization of the Permanent
Secretariat, the existing Secretariat shall perform its ongoing functions and tasks, and
such other tasks as may be assigned by the PQF-NCC. The Secretariat shall develop
and design, for the consideration and approval of the PQF-NCC, the appropriate
structure and composition of the Permanent Secretariat, and the staff qualifications in
accordance with existing Civil Service Commission, Career Executive Service Board,
and Department of Budget and Management, and consistent with the provision of the
Salary Standardization Law.

The Permanent Secretariat shall be organized within one year from the
promulgation of this Rules.

RULE VI. FINAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 25. Appropriations. As provided in Section 13 of the PQF Act, the
amount necessary for the initial implementation of the PQF Act shall be sourced from the
current budgets and development funds of the CHED, TESDA and DepEd. Thereafter,
the funds necessary for the continuous implementation of this Act shall be included in
the annual General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 26. Authority to Amend the IRR. The PQF-NCC is authorized,
whenever necessary, to promulgate supplemental rules or amend this Rules.

SECTION 27. Separability Clause. If any provision of this IRR is declared
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain in force and
effect.

SECTION 28. Effectivity. This IRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its

publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. It shall be

Page 10 of 11 He

registered with the Office of the National Administrative Register at the University of the
Philippines Law Center, UP Diliman, Quezon City.

APPROVED, January 15, 2019.

Ls

KE OLIS BRIONES

Chairperson, PQF-NCC
Secretary
Department of Education

     
  

 
  

. BE
Secretary
epartment of Labor and Employment

Dept. of Labor & Employ!
Office of the al

LL) pA

   

J. PROSPERO E. DE VERA III
Chairperson
Commission on Higher Education

cmd Ce PhD., CSEE ©
Secretary/Director Gener.

Technical Education and Skills
Development Authority

FEL

TEOFILO S. PILANDO, JR.
Chairperson
Professional Regulation Commission

Page 11 of 11