JOINT MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 2019-001
Series of 2019

The Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No.
11032 otherwise known as the “Ease of Doing Business and
Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018”
WHEREAS, Articte i, Séction 27 of the Constitution provides that the State shail
maintain honesty and integrity i in the public service and shall take positive and effective
measures against graft and corruption;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 9485 otherwise known as the Anti-Red Tape Act of
2007 was enacted on June 2, 2007 io eliminate red tape and to simplify frontiine

service procedures, formulate service standards to observe in every transaction, and
make known these standards to the client;

a WHEREAS, Republic Act No. a4 032 -othenwise: _Known.as the F Ease of Doing E Business

wee enor phic lomo DO 2048;

amending Republic Act No. 9485, to to provide a program for the adoption of simplifi ied

requirements and procedures that will reduce red tape and expedite business and
=== Oripusiness related transactions-in-government:

WHEREAS, Section 18 of Republic Act No. 11032 sets its effectivity “.. fifieei cays

after its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general

circulation.” R.A. No. 11032 was published in two (2) newspapers of general circulation

on 2 June 2018 and thus became effective on 17 June 2018;

WHEREAS, Section 30 of Republic Act No. 11032 manaates the Anti-Rea Tape
Authority with the Civil Service Commission (CSC), and the Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI), and in coordination with the Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT), Department of Finance (DOF), Department of
the Interior and Local Government (DILG), National Economic and Development

wider be 31 ws wnt inating Ar (POA\ CO ar Do
Authority (NEDA), Philippine Siatistics Authority (PSA), Cooperative Development

Authority (CDA), Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Office of the
Ombudsman, Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), and the Union of
Local Authorities of the Philippines (ULAP) to promulgate the necessary rules and
regulations within ninety (90) working days from the effectivity of Republic Act No.

AANDO
TIVE,

NOW, THEREFORE, these Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRRs) are hereby
promulgated and issued as Joint Memorandum Circular No. 2019-004 __ to guide
all concerned departments, offices, agencies, and stakeholders, in the me ntatio

A Rin 44099
of RA. INV. Tivwe.



Page 1 of 48

RULE |
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Title

These Rules and Regulations shall be known as the Implementing Rules and
Regulations of Republic Act No. 11032, otherwise known as the “Ease of Doing
Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018”.

Section 2. Declaration of Policy

These Rules and Regulations are promulgated consistent with and in
furtherance of the State policy to promote integrity and accountability in government
service, to foster proper management of public affairs and public property, to establish
effective practices aimed at the efficient turnaround in the delivery of government
services, and the prevention of graft and corruption in government.

To maintain honesty and responsibility among public officials and employees,

.-these-Rules-and-Regulations-hereby-adopt,-institutionalize and-supportthe-promotion.

of transparency in the transactions of the government with the public, encompassing

a program for the adoption of simplified requirements and procedures aimed at the
——-_-_—-—-eduetion-ef-red-tape-and-te-expedite-business-and-nen-business-telaied-iransactions—_____—

in government.
Section 3. Construction and Interpretation

These Rules and Regulations shall be construed and interpreted in light of the
Declaration of Policy found in Section 2 of Republic Act No. 11032. Any doubt in the
interpretation of these Rules and Regulations shail be resolved in a manner consistent
with the policy of the State to promote integrity, accountability, and proper
management of public affairs and public property. Doubt will be resolved in a manner
that will establish effective practices, aimed at efficient turnaround of the delivery of
government services and the prevention of graft and corruption in government.

Section 4. Definition of Terms

All the terms in Republic Act No. 9485, otherwise known as the “Anti-Red Tape
Act of 2007", not amended or altered by the Ease of Doing Business and Efficient
Government Service Delivery Act of 2018, shall retain their respective meanings in
these Rules and Regulations. In addition, the term:

a)  Act-—refers to Republic Act No. 11032, otherwise known as the “Ease of
Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018”;

b) Action — refers to the written approval or disapproval made by a government
office or agency on the application or request submitted by an applicant or
requesting party for processing;

Page 2 of 48 ; :



d)



Agency — is any of the various units of the Government, including a
department, bureau, office, instrumentality, or government-owned and
controlled corporations (GOCCs), or a local government or a-distinct unit
therein. This includes any department, bureau, office, commission, authority
or officer of the National Government authorized by law or executive order to
make rules, issue licenses, and grant rights or privileges; research
institutions with respect to licensing functions; government corporations with
respect to functions regulating private rights, privileges, occupations or
businesses;

Applicant or Requesting Party — with reference to the Citizen’s Charter,
are those who availed and will avail of the services provided by the
concerned agency;

Applications or requests — are formal requests to an authority for access
to government service;

_ Authority.—-is.the.Anti-Red_ Tape. Authority_created_under Section. 17. of

Republic Act No. 11032;

9) —Authorization-—-means-a-permission-embodied_in.a-document-.granted_by.



afi agency to a natural or juridical person wiio has submitted an application
for government service in order to implement or sanction specific acts or to
engage in a particular line of business. The authorization can take the form
of a permit, a clearance, a license, a certificate of registration, accreditation,
compliance, or exemption, or any similar document;

Barangay Clearance —‘shall refer to any and ail documents issued by the
barangay with or without corresponding fees as defined in their ordinances
relative to or in relation to the issuance of business permit and building permit
by the city or municipality or any other permit as may be required;

Bureau — is any principal subdivision of the department performing a single
major function or closely related functions;

Business One Stop Shop (BOSS) — a single common site or location, or a
single online website or portal designated for ihe Business Permit and
Licensing System (BPLS) of an LGU to receive and process applications,
receive payments, and issue approved licenses, clearances, permits, or
authorizations;

Business Permit — is a document that must be secured from the city or

municipal government, usually through its Business Permits and Licensing
Office (BPLO), for a business to legally operate in A locality;

Page 3 of 48

)) Business Registration — refers to a set of regulatory requirements that an
entrepreneur must comply with, to start operating a business entity in a
city/municipality, including but not limited, to the collection or preparation of
a number of documentation, submission to government authorities, approval
of application submitted, and receipt of a formal certificate or certificates,
licenses, permits, and similar documents which confirm the eligibility to
operate as a legitimate business entity in the city or municipality;

Business-related transactions — a set of regulatory requirements that a
business entity must comply with to engage, operate or continue to operate
a business, such as, but not limited to, collection or preparation of a number
of documents, submission to national and local government authorities,
approval of application submitted, and receipt of a formal certificate or

certificates, periiits, ticenses which include primary anda secondary,
clearances and such similar authorization or documents which confer
eligibility to operate, continue to operate, or to cease operation as a legitimate
business;

<-

of). 0) Certificate of Fire Incidents for Fire Insurance — is a document issued by

a theBureau_of_FireProtection_(BEP)_to_a_fire_viciim_in_lieu_of the Final
Investigation Report (FIR) for purposes of insurance claims and for other

lawtut applicatior iS;

p) Citizen or Client — persons or entities whose interests and values are
addressed by a particular government service and, therefore, includes not
only the citizens of the Republic of the Philippines, but also all the
otalenh nlAass i Jes ade ie at ennthal ode rim aan  hanafininsian ath ne

StaxendiGers, iMCiuGaiig but not limited to, users, beneficiaries, other

government offices and agencies, and the transacting public;

q) _Citizen’s Charter — is an official document, a service standard, or a pledge,
that communicates, in simple terms, information on the services provided by
the government to its citizens pursuant to Section 6 of Republic Act 11032.
Ht describes in detail the comprehensive and uniform checklist of
requirements for each type of application or request; procedure to obiain a
particular service; person/s responsible for each step; maximum time to
conclude the process; document/s to be presented by the applicant or
requesting party, if necessary; amount of fees, if necessary; and procedure

fae flin a compla tens
Mr THY GUriiViall its;

r) Clearance — a formal authorization to pursue some lawful purpose;

s) Complete requirements — are all the necessary or appropriate documents
that are required to be submitted togetner with an application form by ihe
applicant or requesting party, which fully satisfy the formal and substantive

requirements of the relevant law. For processes that involve several stage

Page 4 of 48 O :

with different requirements per stage, it is complete when the applicant or
requesting party has fully satisfied or submitted all the requirements
necessary for each stage, as enumerated in the Citizen’s Charter of the
agency;

t) Complex transactions — applications or requests submitted by applicants
or requesting parties of a government office which necessitate evaluation in
the resolution of complicated issues by an officer or employee of said
government office, such transactions to be determined by the office
concerned;

u) Compliance Cost Analysis — is the analysis of the costs that are incurred
by businesses or other parties at whom regulation may be targeted in
undertaking actions necessary to comply with the regulatory requirements,
as well as the costs to the government of regulatory administration and
enforcement;

v) Concession or concession contract/agreement — it is a contract between

“the government and a private individual or entity that gives the latter tre right —

to engage in certain activities within the jurisdiction of the government,
subject to certain conditions;

w) Council — is the Ease of Doing Business and Anti-Red Tape Advisory
Council pursuant to Section 19 of RA 11032;

x) Electronic Signature — is any distinctive mark, characteristic and/or sound
in electronic form, representing the identity of the person and aitached to or
logically associated with the electronic data message or electronic document,
or any. methodology or procedures employed or adopted. by a person and
executed or adopted by such person with the intention of authenticating or
approving an electronic data message or electronic document;

y) Employee - refers to a person who works for an agency and occupies a
position in either the first or second level whose functions are not managerial
in nature;

z) Final Complaint — issued by the Authority once all investigations and
processes have been completed and there is a finding by the Authority that
the Formal Complaint merits the filing of proper case(s);

aa) Fire Safety Evaluation Clearance (FSEC) — is a document issued by the
BFP after payment of the required fees prior to the issuance of the building
permit, and the balance, after final inspection and prior to the issuance of the
Usé arid occupancy permit;

bb) Fire Safety Inspection Certificate (FSIC) — is a document issued by the

BFP after the conduct of Fire Safety Inspection and payment of, ae
Page 5 of 48 oR

fees charged by the building official, or by the Local Government, or by other
govemment agencies concerned in the granting of pertinent permits or
licenses;

cc) Fixer — any individual or a group of individuals, whether or ‘not officially
involved in the operation of a government office or agency, who has/have
access to people working therein, and whether or not in collusion with them,

facilitates speedy completion of transactions for pecuniary gain or any other
advantage or consideration.

Pecuniary gain or any other advantage or consideration shail
include, but not be limited to the following:

i. Receiving gifts or anything of monetary value as payment for the services
rendered;

ii. Gaining advantage in employment or promotions;

iii. Asking for sexual favors in exchange for any request;

iv. Securing a loan from the applicant or requesting party:

dd) Fixing —refers to the-act-thatinvelves-undue facilitation_of transactions for

pecuniary gain or any other advantage ‘orconsiderationy

ee) Formal Complaint — is a sworn written statement charging a public officer

or employee, and/or any private peTsorrfound-to-be-eolluding-with-a-purslic——
officer or employee, with a violation of this Act;

ff) Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporation (GOCC) — is any agency
organized as a stock or non-stock corporation, vested with functions relating
to public needs whether govemmental or proprietary in nature, and owned
by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines directly or through its
insttumentalities either wholly or, where applicable -as in the case of stock
corporations, to the extent of at least a majofity of its outstanding capital
stock, provided, however, that the term "GOCC" shall also include
Government Financial Institutions (GF) and Government Instrumentalities
with Corporate Powers (GICP) or Government Corporate Entities (GCE);

gg) Government Service - the process or transaction between applicants or
requesting parties and government offices or agencies involving applications
for any privilege, right, reward, license, clearance, permit or authorization,
concession, or for any modification, renewal or extension of the enumerated
applications or requests, which are acted upon in the ordinary course of
business of the agency or office concerned. This includes frontline services
enrolled in the existing Citizen's Charter (whether or not related to business),
corresponding back-end/support services and regulatory functions related to
permitting, licensing and issuance of a privilege, right, reward, clearance,
authorization or concession; f

Page 6 of 48 t



i)

i)

kk)

Highly technical application or transaction —a transaction which requires
the use of technical knowledge, specialized skills and/or training in the
processing and/or evaluation thereof;

Initial Complaint — is any initial statement, in any form, including but not
limited to verbal, written or electronic means, received by the Authority from
the general public alleging that a public officer or employee, and/or any
private person found to be colluding with a public officer or employee, for any

Tolentino

aol 4
VidialiOn PSiacea 16 tt his Act

Instrumentality — is any agency of the National Government, not integrated
within the department framework vested with special functions or jurisdiction
by law, endowed with some if not all | corporate powers, administering special
funds, and enjoying operational autonomy, usually through a charter. This

term includes regulatory agencies, chartered institutions, and government-
owned or -controlled corporations;

License — is a privilege evidenced by a certificate or document to perform
cetainacis ora series_of.acts that would othenwise be | unlawiul._ his inctudes

the whole or any part of any agency permit, certificate, passport, clearance,
approval, registration, charter, membership, statutory exemption or other

——form._ofpermission,orregulationof the exercise of a right or privilege:

WwW
7}

mm)

iy

=

00)

pp)

wee Foe oe ee mine nm det

Local Business Tax — means an enforcea mone tary conti bution, levied by
the law-making body on persons and property subject to its jurisdiction for
the precise purpose of supporting governmental needs which shall be paid
by business entities within the first twenty (20) days of January or of each
subsequent quarter;

Local Government Units — are political subdivisions established by or in
accordance with the Constitution composed of provinces, cities,
municipalities, barangays, and autonomous regions as provided by law,

a

wae tind Wh odin
iS wial Nave Suosianiia, widespread

Major reguiations - are regula tiGi
impact on the economy and/or affect a large number of businesses or
communities;

Ministerial — is an act or duty which an officer or tribunal performs ina given
state of facts, in a prescribed manner, in obedience io the mandate of a tegal
authority, without regard to or the exercise of his own judgment upon the
propriety or impropriety of the act done. A duty is ministerial only when the
discharge of the same requires neither the exercise of official discretion or

judgment;

National Government Agency (NGA) — refers to a unit of the National
Government;

‘

Page 7 of 48

qa)

Negative List - contains the names of establishments that have outstanding
noncompliances with statutory requirements imposed by government
agencies, including government-owned or controlled corporations such as
the BFP, the SSS; and the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHC)
and other regulatory agencies and local government departments, which will
trigger an action from the LGU to inform the establishment to act on the non-
compliance findings within fifteen (15) working days from receipt of notice.
The negative list is usually provided by the concerned national government

Anan AiAn dha Aiden retain ol mas ean onl mariana:

aye cies to it tc city/i ri iicipality pr ior to th iG busir ness renewar peiVeU,

Non-business transactions — all other government transactions not falling
under Rule |, Section 4 (0) of these Rules and Regulations;

Office — is any major functional unit of a departnent or bureau inclucing
regional offices. It may also refer to any position held or occupied by
individual persons, whose functions are defined by law or regulation;

Officer — - Tefers to a person whose duties, not being | of a a clerical or manual

=< Of. governmental-power

seek

w)

spay

x)

yy)

of the government It includes any ; government employee, agent, or body
having authority to do an act or perform a particular function in the exercise

vovernment agency or instrumentality.

Prescribed processing time — is the period prescribed by the government
agency stated in their Citizen’s Charter which shall not exceed the maximum
period of the three (3), seven (7), and twenty (20) working days to complete

oN OES alafin nal Rm. I Gaatia A Dar fas harninoftar indiantad
a process, aS Gsiniea by Rus 1, OSTUON 4, rar. Ly) NSrsinanci inGiCaea,

based on the classification of transactions, unless otherwise indicated in
special laws or these Rules. It shall also include the period when a
transaction has been extended for justifiable reasons;

Primary License — is a privilege evidenced by a certificate or document
issued by a licensing authority permitting an applicant or requesting party to
engage, operate, or start a business;

Privilege —is a Special right or advantage granted only toa particular person
OF Group oF people. tt is a particular and peculiar benefit or advantage enjoyea
by a person, company, or class, beyond the common advantages of other

citizens;

Processing time — is the time consumed by all government offices and
agencies covered under Section 3 of this Act from the acceptance of an

application or request with complete requirements, accompanyin

Page 8 of 48

documents, and payment of fees, up to the issuance of certification or such
similar documents approving or disapproving an application or request.

For processes that involve several:stages, each stage shall have its own

processing time. The processing time commences on the date/time that the
applicant has satisfactorily completed the previous stages and all the
requirements for the stage being applied for, and has paid ihe applicable fees,
if any;

ZZ)

aaa)

bbb)

Proportionality rules — are rules which require the balancing of risks and
benefits against costs of supervision and enforcement of the regulation;

Red tape — any regulation, rule, or administrative procedure or system that
is ineffective or detrimental in achieving its intended objectives and, as a
result, produces slow, suboptimal, and undesirable social outcomes;

Regulation — any legal instrument that gives effect to a government policy
intervention and includes licensing, imposing information obligation,

_..compliance-to-standards-or_payment.of_any_form.of-_fee,levy,.chargeorany. ..

other statutory and regulatory requirements necessary to carry out activity or
modify behavior;

ccc)

ddd)

Regulatory agency — are national government offices empowered to codify
and enforce rules and regulations and impose supervision and oversight. The
following are regulatory agencies: (i) Bureau of Fire Protection (BFP); (ii)
Department of Trade and Industry (DT1); (iii) Food and Drug Administration
(FDA); (iv) Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); (v) Department of
the Environment and Natural Resources (DENR); and (vi) such other
government agencies vested with regulatory powers;

Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) — is a tool to design and evaluate
policies, laws, and regulations that are targeted, proportionate, accountable,
transparent and consistent. It involves a systematic process that examines
the expected consequences of a rarige of alternative policy options that could
be used to address a particular policy problem or issue. The policy options
shall include evidence-based information to decision-makers, regulators, and
stakeholders.

The RIA aims to reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens and costs to

enhance the quality of existing regulations and regulatory proposals;

eee)

Report Card Survey —- refers to an evaluation tool that provides a
quantitative measure of actual government service user perceptions on the
quality, efficiency and adequacy of different government services, as well as
a Critical evaluation of the office or employee. it is an instrument that also
solicits user feedback on the performance of government services, for the
purpose of exacting public accountability, and when

Page 9 of 48

change. It shall also be used to measure management support in
institutionalizing agency service delivery reforms,

fff) Rewards and Incentives - a sum of money or other forms of recognition
conferred to agencies, officers, and/or employees for exemplary
performance and/or initiatives,

ggg) Right — is a moral or legal entitlement to have or to obtain something or to
act in a certain way;

hhh) Secondary License — is a privilege evidenced by a certificate or document
issued by a licensing authority permitting an applicant or requesting party to
engage, operate or continue with the operation of a business with ancillary,
incidental or additional purpose;

ii) | Simple transactions — applications or requests submitted by applicants or
requesting parties of a government office or agency which oniy require
ministerial actions on the part of the public officer or employee, or that which
present only inconsequential~issues for-the—resolution~by-an—officer—or————-——~

employee of said government office;

_jji) __Stage_—_is_a_specific and distinct_step in a defined work process which
involves the application of special or highly fechnicai skills, compliance with
procedural requirements under special laws, or compliance with obligations
pursuant to international obligations;

kkk) Technology-neutral platform — means the platform should not impose
preferences for or against specific kinds of technology;

iW)  Time-and-motion study — is a tool to track the progress of customer
interface, processing, queuing and waiting times, and linked processes that
are within and beyond the control of the service office. It is an essential step
in the process mapping of services for the formulation and/or updating of the
Citizen’s Charter.

The time and motion study has three stages:

i. Planning stage. During this stage, service offices must prepare a
list of services to be subjected for time and motion studies, ihe
employee/s who will conduct the study, number of clients to be
observed as subject of the study, and a time and motion
checklist.

| ii. Implementation stage. During this stage, employee/s assigned to
| conduct the time and motion studies shall observe a transacting
| client from the first step up to the last step : his/her transaction,

(
Page 10 of 48

taking note of the time when each step started and ended as well
as the waiting time.

an Tooele imtionn ote . thin

fi, EVaIUaION Stays. wulily ule
conducted:
processing of data such as variance (committed processing time
in the Citizen’s Charter less the actual processing time and
waiting time), total waiting time, total actual processing time,
atantin adaad ar meaittend ane plan rand em livamanta addac
SLO aGusa Ure uiniitcu, anG@ GQOCuriGriteuy PEQUILCHIeIS auucu

or omitted;

mmm) Websites — refer to a collection of interlinked Web pages that share a
single domain name and provide information and services to the citizens. For
the purposes of this Act, websites may also refer to web pages or sectoral

Rana OMS Imteaianad aye nities ane omimsiaingliting anel ath +
payss mainansca vy vUuco anG@ Maniipalics anu Vero GOUVeINerit

agencies in the National Government Portal (www.gov.ph);

__nnn) Whole-of-Government Approach — refers to the ability of government
agencies fo work together-ItalsoTefers tothe change-inemphasis away from_—— a

structural devolution, disaggregation, ‘and’ single-purpose organizations

towards a more integrated approach to public service delivery characterized
————by_Seamless__government transactions, integrated policy design and

implementation across several agencies, inter-operability or government

processes, horizontal coordination, and strengthened linkages among

government units.

It also means that government systems and processes work together to
provide ease of access and use by the citizens. Implementing the whole-of
government approach implies a more integrated approach to public service
delivery, policy making, interoperability of government processes,
strengthening vertical ana horizontal linkages and coordination among
agencies, and clustering of basic services into government to citizens,
government to businesses, and government to government, and designating
points of service in accordance with the life cycle of citizens and businesses,

respectively;

| 000) Working day — refers to a day where officers and employees are required to
render work;

| RULE II

SAVER ART
LVUVENRAGE

Section 1. Coverage and Scope

The provisions of the Act and these Rules and Regulations shall apply to all
goverment offices and agencies in the Executive Department including tocal
government unit (LGUs), government-owned or -controlled corporations and other

I

| Page 11 of 48

government instrumentalities, located in the Philippines or abroad, that provide
services covering business-related and nonbusiness transactions as defined in these
Rules.

The Act and these Rules and Regulations shall cover business-related and
nonbusiness transactions referring to permitting, licensing, and the issuance of any
privilege, right, reward, clearance, authorization, or concession, including frontline
services enrolled in the existing Citizen's Charter, whether or not related to business,
corresponding back-end/support services, and regulatory functions related to
permitting, licensing, and the issuance of a privilege, right, reward, clearance,
authorization or concession.

The initial list of all the permits, licenses, and issuances pertaining to any
privilege, right, reward, clearance, authorization, or concession that shall be covered
by the Act and these Rules shall be issued in accordance with Section 10 of the Act.
The list may be reviewed and updated as may be necessary.

Section 2. International Laws and Agreements

The Act and these Ruies and Regulations shall respect and observe
international Jaws, rules and regulations as well as the treaties, international, or
_____—.-_ executive agieemenis to which the Government of the Philippines is a signatory.

RULE Ill
REENGINEERING OF SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES

Section 1. Streamlining of Government Services

All agencies which provide government services shall undertake compliance
cost analysis, conduct time and motion studies, undergo evaluation and improvement
of all their government services, and reengineer the same, if deemed necessary, to
reduce bureaucratic red tape and processing time, and to promote efficiency and
simplicity of processes.

Each office or agency shall designate a unit to perform the above-mentioned
functions, as well as other roles stated in the Act. The unit shall be charged with
conducting regulatory impact assessment of their proposed regulations to establish
that these do not add undue regulatory burden and cost to their respective agencies
as well as applicants or requesting parties.

Section 2. Coverage and Procedures
The streamlining and process improvement of the government services shall cover

Government-to-Citizens (G2C), Government-to-Businesses (G2B), and Government-
toGovernment (G2G) transactions as cite harter. Agencies

din the agency's Citizen’s C
Page 12 of 48 r ea

shall submit a comprehensive list of their respective government services to the
Authority, which shall include:

a) Steps. For each government service, departments/agencies shall report in
detail the steps necessary to complete the service/process, including a
flowchart indicating the front end/back end;

b) Transaction Costs. These are the costs incurred by an applicant or requesting
party in the course of availing of a government service. These costs are

categorized as follows:

i. Primary Transaction Costs/Fees. These are fees declared in the
agency's Citizen’s Charter to be paid to the agency by an
applicant or requesting party for availing a government service.
Examples of these fees are application fees, registration fees,
etc.

ii. Other Transaction Costs. These are the other fees to be paid by

— any applicant or requesting party to-obtain-supporting-information_—__—__—__.
from another agency in order to secure a necessary primary”
information;

¢) Substantial Compliance Cosis. These are the incremental costs, other than———————
administrative costs, incurred by a transacting public in the course of complying
with a regulation. These costs may include implementation costs, direct labor
costs, overhead costs, equipment costs, material costs, and external service

costs;

d) Number of Signatures. Departments/Agencies shall, declare the number of
signatures required to complete each service/process. However, ihe number of
signatories in any document shall be limited to a maximum of three (3)
signatures which shall represent officers directly supervising the office or
agency concerned,

Number of Documents. For each government service, departments/agencies
shall indicate the total number of documenis necessary to complete the
transaction cycle. The number of documents shall refer to the documents
required from the applicant or requesting party, the type of documents, and the
number of copies for each document to be used or required to complete/deliver
the government service to the applicant or requesting party;

e

—

Government agencies must initiate a review for each of their government
services/processes through any or all of the following:

a) Reduction in the number of signatures to not more than three (3);

f

b) Simplification of application forms or documentary requirements;
Page 13 of 48 hy aa

c) Automation or computerization of the processes/services;
d) Reduction in the processing time; and
e) Reduction in costs

There shall also be a review of the location of the offices providing these
government services and the feasibility of establishing one-stop shops.

Section 3. Adoption of Whole-of-Government Approach in Reengineering
Government Services

Pursuant to the functions of the Authority in Section 17 (a) (b) and (f) of the Act
to implement ard oversee 4 national policy on anti-red tape and ease of doing
business: to implement various ease of doing business and anti-red tape reform
initiatives aimed at improving the ranking of the Philippines in world competitiveness
surveys; and to recommend policies, processes and systems to improve regulatory

“management to increase the. ‘productivity, efficiency, and-effectiveness-of business———-_--_--

permitting and licensing agencies, the Authority shall adopt the Whole-of-Government”
Approach in the streamlining of government services.

The Whole-of-Government Approach entails the review and harmonization of
existing and applicable laws, regulations, issuances, and policies to make legal
interpretations consistent across agencies. inter-agency reviews shall be adopted for
horizontal integration or end-to-end processing in the delivery of government services.

The reengineering process shall include an interagency review of key permitting
and licensing laws, rules, and issuances, with the end in view of eliminating undue
regulatory burden from the transacting public.

The Authority, in coordination with National Economic Development Authority
(NEDA), Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and Civil Service
Commission (CSC), shall be authorized to issue further guidelines in implementing the
Whole-ofGovermment Approach in reengineering and streamlining government
services.

Section 4, Regulatory Management System

Pursuant to the Act, the Authority shall develop and establish a Regulatory
Management System (RMS) to improve regulatory management towards the
improvement of regulatory quality. The RMS shall be comprised of, but not limited to,
a regulatory management framework, institutional arrangements, a regulatory policy
cycle, and enforcement & compliance strategies.

The Authority, by itself or in partnership with other institutions, shall provide and
conduct training programs that offer tools needed to promote goog-regulatory

\
Page 14 of 48 DN >

govemance and to raise awareness on new disciplines and promote a new culture
among regulators and regulatees. The Authority, in consultation with appropriate
agencies, shall prepare regulatory management manuals for all government agencies
and/or instrumentalities and LGUs. The manuals issued by the Authority shall include
the proportionality rules and threshold parameters.

Section 5. Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA)

Pursuant to the mandate of the Authority under this Act, and to ensure the
compliance with the obligations set forth, the Authority requires all agencies to conduct

a

Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) for the purpose of reviewing, simplifying,
modifying, modernizing regulations, laws, issuances, and ordinances to reduce
regulatory burden and cost. All agencies shall conduct a RIA for all its proposed major
regulations subject to proportionality rules. It shall likewise apply to existing regulations
or regulatory changes that are outdated, redundant, and adds undue regulatory
burden to the transacting public.

"Each agency. shall Conduct & RIA and raft the Regulatory Impact-Statement —————-—
(RIS). The RIS is a document prepared by a regulatory body before a new regulation
is introduced, or an existing regulation is modified or repealed. The RIS assists in

—_—----decisionmaking-by-presenting the RIA in a clear, _concise, and structured framework.

The Authority shall review the quality of a RIA in order to avoid the overlapping
of regulations across agencies and to reduce regulatory burden and cost.

When necessary, a proposed regulation may undergo pilot implementation to
assess regulatory impact subject to the clearance of heads of agencies.

Section 6. Notification and Regulations Review Process

a) Compulsory notification. All government agencies covered under Section 3 of
the Act shall notify the Authority of every formulation, modification, and repeal
of regulations. The submission of an intent to formulate, modify, or repeal a
regulation to the Authority by a regulatory agency shall include the rationale for
the proposed and existing regulation and all the necessary documentations
used in conducting the research for the proposed and existing regulation.

b) RIA requirement. All government agencies covered under Section 3 of the Act
shall conduct a RIA. The agencies shall conduct consultations to ensure the
quality of a regulation. The regulatory agency shall properly disseminate the
result of the RIA on a particular regulation as a feedback and feedforward
mechanism.

c) Submission of RIS to the Authority. RIS submitted by any agency shall be
reviewed by the Authority. Meetings shall be organized, as deemed necessary
by the Authority, for the purpose of reviewing the results of the RIA.

\

Page 15 of 48 “a J2

——icenses—The classification-is-intended.to.synchronize.the periods for payment of jocal
Business taxes And Tor payments elated to the issuance of business permits-—-—~-~- ~~~

d) Approval of RIS by the Authority. The Authority shall approve or disapprove the
RIS, based on the results of the review.

e) Provide RIA to Congress. The Authority, if it deéms necessary, may forward the
RIA and the results of its review to Congress, for appropriate action.

Section 7. Review, Impact Analysis, and Repeal of Regulations

Within six (6) months from the effectivity of the Rules, all offices, agencies, and
local government units covered by Section 3 of the Act, shall review and harmonize
their existing regulations relative to business-related and non-business transactions
and repeal unnecessary and redundant policies to lessen regulatory burdens, subject
to the corresponding guidelines issued by the Authority.

In addition, ali local government units, in coordination with the DILG, shall

scrutinize and classify existing ordinances according to prescribed dates of inspection
for regulation purposes and those related to the issuance of business permits and

The Authority, motu proprio or upon receipt of a complaint that a regulation is

outdated, redundant, or adds Undue reguiatory burderr to the transacting public-may
exercise its power of review in accordance with the Act and recommend the repeal of
the reviewed law, executive issuance, and/or jocal ordinance, if warranted.

RULE IV
CITIZEN'S CHARTER

Section 1. Citizen’s Charter

A Citizen’s Charter is an official document that communicates, in simple terms,
the service standards or pledge of an agency/service office of the frontline services
being provided to its citizens. It describes the step-by-step procedure for availing a
particular service, the person responsible for each step, the documents needed to be
submitted and the fees to be paid, if any.

The Citizen's Charter of each agency has a dual purpose — it shall be the basis
for establishing accountability and for recognizing good performance io grant rewards
and incentives.

Administrative and criminal liability shall arise only upon failure, without due
cause, to render government service within the prescribed processing time of three
(3) days for simple transactions, seven. (7)}.days for complex transactions, and twenty
(20) working days for highly technical transactions or for applications or requests
involving activities which pose danger to public health, public safety, public morals,
public policy, as stated in Section 9 of this Act.

v

Page 16 of 48

Section 2. Form and Content of the Citizen’s Charter

The: Citizen's: Charter- shall-be in information billboards such. .as touchscreen
interactive information kiosks, electronic billboards, posters, tarpaulins, standees, or
any other readable materials that could be easily understood by the public, posted at
the main entrance of offices or at the most conspicuous place, in the respective
websites, and in the form of published materials written either in English, Filipino, or in
the local dialect, that detail:

a) A comprehensive and uniform checklist of requirements for each type of
application or request.

i) The checklist of requirements must be complete, exhaustive, and specific.

ii) In the case of local government units, the checklist for similar transactions
shall contain a uniform set of documentary requirements, based on
guidelines to be issued by the Department of the Interior and Local
Government (DILG) in coordination with the Authority.

b) The procedure to obtain a particular service. _
——__———}—-Fer-eachi-governmentsemice,—agancies. indi in the Citizen’s
Charter the steps necessary to complete the process. Agencies shail further

submit to the Authority a step-by-step process, including the duration of the
action per step.

c) The person/s responsible for each step.

i) The agency shail make available to the public the list of assigned personnel
who will be responsible for each step. If the Citizen’s Charter is in the form
of an interactive or an electronic billboard, the names of the personnel
andior their official designation shall be identified.

d) The maximum time to conclude the process.

i) The maximum time to conclude the process shall be expressed in working
days, hours, or minutes.

ge) The document/s to be presented by the applicant or requesting party.
i) Agencies shail indicate where each documentary requirement can be
requested. If the documentary requirement is not internal to the agency,

agencies shall indicate the type of copy (ie., certified true copy, original or
photocopy) and the number of copies needed; ~

f) The amount of fees and where the payment shall be SP
\

Page 17 of 48

g) The procedure for filing complaints in relation to the application or request.

i) The names and contact numbers of heads of offices involved in the
processing of the application or request and the contact information of the
Presidential Complaints Center, Complaints Action Center of the Authority,
Contact Center ng Bayan (CCB), and the feedback facility of the CSC,
where applicants or requesting parties can provide feedback on quality of
government service, shall be included.

Section 3. Responsibilities of Government Agencies
a) Set up the most current and updated service standards.

To promote efficiency and to streamline the delivery of government services,
agencies shall identify and indicate all government services offered by them.
Each agency shall adopt an improved processing time, which shall be posted
in their Citizen’s Charter.

_____Each agency shall classify their processes or services into” simple
complex, and highly technical transactions, and must submit the same to the ~
Authority based on the criteria provided. Those activities which pose a danger

___________fo public health, public safety, public morals, or public policy shalll in no case be

processed longer than twenty (20) working days, or as determined by the

government agency and instrumentality concerned, whichever is shorter.

Specific transactions, processes, services or activities that agencies fail
to include and classify shall be interpreted by the Authority as simple
transactions without prejudice on the part of the agency to ask for
reconsideration.

Should there be any update, the head of agency shall ensure that an
updated Citizen’s Charter is posted not later than March 31* of each year.

b) Develop and foster client feedback mechanism and client satisfaction
measurement.

All agencies shall embed feedback mechanisms and client satisfaction
measurement in their process improvement efforts. The agency shall report to
the Authority the results of the Client Satisfaction Survey for each service based
on the guidelines to be issued by the Authority.

¢) Monitor and periodically review the Citizen's Charter.

Each agency shall regularly review their Citizen’s Charter. In particular,

the agency shall review their procedure/steps, time, documentary
7 requirements, and fees. H ho

Page 18 of 48

d) Submission of a new Citizen's Charter by government agencies.

All agencies shall submit to the Authority within ninety (90) working days from
the-effectivity-of these Rules and Regulations or from.the issuance. of a new
Citizen’s Charter template by the Authority, a new Citizen's Charter based on
the requirements of the Act, whichever comes first.

Section 4. Accountability of the Head of Agency or Office

The head of office or agency shall ensure compliance in the preparation of their
respective Citizen’s Charter pursuant to the provisions of the Act and these Rules.

Section 5. Responsibilities of the Authority

The Authority shall have the following responsibilities in relation to the Citizen’s
Charter:

___a)_Upon_effectivity of these Rules, the Authority shall issue a template of the
- updated: -~ - ~~~ a foe etn cae ce ene ce we a ee sree ieee Seen emcees oe ey -

Citizen's Charter, taking into account the most effective way of informing the

public;

b) Within the same period, the Authority shall issue the criteria for simple, complex,
and highly technical transactions;

c) The Authority shall monitor and review the submitted Citizen’s Charter by each
agency and the implementation of the same.

RULE V
ZERO-CONTACT POLICY

Section 1. Zero-Contact Policy

All government agencies including local government units (LGUs) shall adopt a
zero-contact policy. Public officials and employees shall limit interactions with an
applicant or requesting party to the preliminary assessment and evaluation of
sufficiency of submitted requirements of an application or request, unless such
interaction is strictly necessary for the processing of the request or application.

Transparency shall be observed in general by public officials and employees to
| encourage the honest and efficient delivery of government services and discourage
wrong perceptions of graft and corruption.

For the effective implementation of the “zero-contact policy,” electronic
| submission of applications, requests and/or payments is preferred, where available.

The government official or employee shali communicate with thé applicant through e-

| Page 19 of 48

mail, any other electronic means of communication or the websites of the government
agencies concerned, whenever practicable. For this reason, the Department of
Information and Communications Technology (DICT) shall launch a web-based
software. enabled. business registration system, through which all government
transactions with the public shal! be coursed.

Section 2. Interactions that are Strictly Necessary

These interactions are considered strictly necessary and are exceptions to the
zero-contact policy:

a) Payment of application and other fees. In case the government agency or
office does not have an electronic/online payment facility or the applicant or
requesting party prefers over-the-counter payment, interactions between the
government official or employee and the applicant shall be allowed, provided
that payment shall be made in the Cashier's Office and that an Official Receipt
(OR) shall be issued immediately; and

--b)- For complex and/or highly technical-transactions-An interaction_shall be _
considered strictly necessary when an jnspection, training or meeting with the- ~-
applicant is an integral part of the application process for a complex or highly

ef ochnical transaction, or when such interaction was done upon the written
request of the applicant. Such inspection, training or mesting may be recorded:
with the prior consent of the applicant and shall be properly documented
through various means such as, but not limited to, recording the minutes of the

meeting and signing of an attendance sheet.

Section 3. Business Registration System

The DICT shall, within one (1) year from the effectivity of these Rules, create a
web-based software enabled business registration system that is acceptable to the
public. All transactions shall thereafter be coursed through such business registration
system.

RULE VI
ACCOUNTABILITY OF HEADS OF OFFICES AND AGENCIES

Section 1. Responsibility of Heads of Offices and Agencies

The head of the office or agency shall be primarily responsible for the

| implementation of the Act, including these and other Rules and Regulations, and shall

__be held accountable to the public in rendering fast, efficient, convenient, and reliable
service. All transactions and processes are deemed -to have been. made with the
permission or clearance from the highest authority having jurisdiction over the
government office or agency concerned.

c

|
Page 20 of 48 —

Any other violations by the head of office or agency of the Act and these Rules
shall subject them to administrative sanctions in accordance with the relevant
administrative and civil service rules and regulations, where applicable.

Failure by the heads of offices and agencies to comply with the provisions of the
Act and these Rules shall render them liable to being charged in accordance with
existing laws or rules before the appropriate forum.

In furtherance of their responsibility to render fast, efficient, convenient, and
reliable service and the declared policy of the Act, all heads of agencies shall
implement a zero back log program within twelve (12) months from the effectivity of
the IRR.

RULE Vil
ACCESSING GOVERNMENT SERVICES

Section 1. Accessing Government Services

th order to provide ari effective delivery-of government services-government———
officers and employees are expected to adopt and implement the provisions of these =~
Rules and other rules that may be issued in the future which aim to further improve

the systems and processes of government agencies. These include accepting,

processing, approving, or denying of applications/requests———~

Section 2. Acceptance of Applications and Requests

a) Allresponsible officers or employees shall accept written applications, requests,
and/or documents being submitted by applicants or requesting parties of the
offices or agencies, subject fo the succeeding provisions hereof.

b) The receiving officer or employee shall preliminarily assess the completeness
of the application or request and its supporting documents vis-a-vis the
checklist of requirements of the agency to ensure a more expeditious action on
the application or request. They shall immediately inform the applicant or
requesting party of any deficiency in the accompanying requirements, which
shall be limited to those enumerated in the Citizen's Charter. in informing the
applicant or requesting party of the deficiency, the receiving officer or employee
shall already identify or enumerate all the missing requirements to make it
easier for the requesting party to complete their application or request.

The government office or agency shall not process deficient or incomplete
applications or requests, and shall only process an application or request if it is
complete. In case the application or requestis deficient, the processing time as
provided under the Act and these Rules shall only commence once the
applicant or requesting party has rectified the deficieficy. :

Page 21 of 48

For processes that involve several stages with corresponding prescribed
requirements, the processing time for each stage commences on the date/time
that the applicant has satisfactorily completed the requirements for the previous
stage and has submitted all the requirements for the subsequent stage being
applied for.

The receiving officer or employee shall assign a unique identification number to
an application or request, which shail serve as the identifying number for all
subsequent transactions between the government and the applicant or
requesting party regarding the subject application or request.

b

=

c) The receiving officer or employee shall issue to the applicant an
acknowledgement receipt signifying acceptance of a complete application or
request, containing the unique identification number stamped therein as
reference for all subsequent transactions, the seal of the agency, the name of
the responsible officer or employee, his/her unit and designation, and the date
and time of receipt of such request or application.

containing the unique identification number as reference for all subsequent
transactions, the seal of the agency, the name of the responsible officer or

employee, his/her unit and designation, and the date and time of receipt of Such
request or application.

Section 3. Action of Offices

a) All applications or requests for government service submitted shall be acted
upon.by the assigned officer or employee within the prescribed processing time
stated in the Citizen's Charter which shall not be longer than three (3) working
days in the case of simple transactions and seven (7) working days in the case
of complex transactions from the date the request or complete application or
request was received.

For applications or requests involving activities which pose danger to
public health, public safety, public morals, public policy, and highly technical
transactions, the prescribed processing time shall in no case be longer than
twenty (20) working days or as determined by the government agency or
instrumentality concerned, whichever is shorter.

b) The maximum time prescribed in Section 9 (b) (1) of the Act may be extended
only once for the same number of days, which shall be indicated in the Citizen’s

Charter.

i. Prior to the lapse of the processing time, the office or agency
concerned shall notify the applicant or requesting party in writing
of the reason for the extension and final date of rel of the

c
Page 22 of 48

c)

government service/s requested. Such written notification shall
be signed by the applicant to serve as proof of notice. The
signature of the applicants or requesting parties may be in the
form of electronic signatures or scanned signatures.

i. In the event that securing a written notification and
acknowledgment from the applicant is not feasibie, the
government officer or employee must exhaust all means of
communication available including, but not limited to, electronic
mail and/or SMS (short message service) to ensure that the
applicant or the requesting party is properly notified. The
government officer or employee who used such means of
communication must be able to show proof of such action.

In case of highly technical transactions that involve activities such as, but not
limited to, research, field trials, scientific methodology, inter-government
actions, the government agency or office may apply the multi stage sysiem
subject to the approval of the Authority, provided that the total processing time

Government agencies and offices, with an approved multi-stage system

____by the Authority, that_receive_an_application or transaction requiring permits

——for all concerned agencies or offices shall not exceed forty (40)-days-——————————————

qd)

®)

from other government agencies or offices, shall process such application”
without awaiting the action of the latter agency. The agency or office shall act
on the presumption that the relevant permit from other government agencies
had already been issued.

The presumption of prior approval shall be disputable and subject to
postaudit confirmation. .In case of failure during post-audit, the issued
permit/license shall be revoked.

If the application or request for license, clearance, permit, certification or
authorization shall require the approval of the local Sangguniang Bayan,
Sangguniang Panlungsod, or the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, as the case may
be, the Sanggunian concerned shall be given a period of forty-five (45) working
days to act on the application or request, which can be extended for another
twenty (20) working days. If the local Sanggunian concerned has denied the
application or request, the reason for the denial, as well as the remedial
measures that may be taken by the applicant shall be cited by the concerned
Sanggunian.

In cases where the cause of delay is due to force majeure or natural or man-
made disasters, which result to damage or destruction of documents, and/or
system failure of the computerized or automatic precessing, the prescribed
processing times mandated in this Act shail be suspended and appropriate
adjustments shall be made. The responsible government official or employee
shall notify the applicant or requesting party in writing and-through other means

\
Page 23 of 48

of communication of the suspension of the processing time without any delay.
In addition, in case of system failure of computerized or automatic processing,
the head of agency shall certify to such fact, which shall be posted in a
conspicuous place and manner within the premises of the government agency
or office.

f) No application or request shall be returned to the applicant or requesting party
without appropriate action. The appropriate action is either to approve or
disapprove / deny the application or request for access to government service.

i. In case an application or request is disapproved, the officer or
employee who rendered the decision shall send such notice
under these rules to the applicant or requesting party within the
prescribed processing time, stating therein the reason for the
disapproval:

i A tinding by 4 competent authority ofa violation of any or other
laws by the applicant or requesting party shall constitute a valid
ground for its disapproval, without prejudice to other grounds

~ err rOvided in this Actor other pertinentiaws- ae

Section 4. Denial of Request for Access to Government Service

Any denial of request for access to government service shall be fully explained
in writing by the officer who denied the request, stating the name of the person making
the denial and the grounds upon which such denial is based. The grounds for the
denial must be fair, just, and reasonable. Any denial of the application or request must
have the approval of the immediate supervisor of the employee or officer who denied
the application or request.

Section 5. Limitation of Signatories

The number of signatories in any document shall be limited to a maximum of
three (3) signatures, which shall represent officers directly supervising the office or
agency concemed and are responsible for the issuance of the document (any
privilege, right, reward, license, clearance, permit or eR concession). The

J
Page 24 of 49

signatures refer to the “full signature’ of the officers whose approval is necessary for
the issuance or release of the document. initials of other officers or employees should
not be affixed to the document to be released or issued.

In case the authorized signatory is on official business or official leave, an
alternate shall be designated as signatory. Electronic signatures or pre-signed license,
clearance, permit, certification, or authorization with adequate security and control
mechanism may be used, provided that the relevant laws and the rules and regulations
to be issued by DICT regarding electronic signatures shall be observed.

Within ninety (90) working days from the effectivity of these Rules, the head of
government office or agency shall issue and submit an appropriate inter-office
memorandum to the Authority, enumerating the list of authorized or regular signatory
for each privilege, right, license, clearance, permit or authorization, concession or such
other document issued by the agency or office. Moreover, the appropriate inter-office
memorandum shall also stipulate the agency rules on proper delegation of the
authority to sign in the absence of the regular signatory, following such standards:

a) if there is only_one. official next_inrank,he/she”shall~automatically-be~the-—— ~~
signatory; - oe “a

— b)—f-there—are—two_or_more_officials_next in_rank, the appropriate _inter-office
memorandum shall prescribe the order of priority among the officials next in rank
within the same organizational unit; or

c) If there is no official next in rank present and available, the head of the
department, office or agency shall designate an officer-in-charge from among
those next lower in rank in the same organizational unit.

Section 6. Electronic Versions of Licenses, Permits, Certifications or
Authorizations

All agencies covered under Section 3 of the Act shall, when applicable, develop
electronic versions of licenses, clearances, permits, certifications or authorizations
with the same level of authority as that of the signed hard copy, which may be printed
by the applicants or requesting parties in the convenience of their offices.

The Authority and the DICT, in coordination with concerned agencies, shall
issue the operational policies and technical procedure on these electronic versions for
the guidance of concerned NGAs and LGUs.

Section 7. Adoption of Working Schedules to Serve Clients
Heads of offices and agencies which rendér government services shail adopt

appropriate working schedules to ensure that all applicants or requesting parties who
are within their premises prior to the end of official working < are attended to and

Page 25 of 48

served even during lunch break and after regular working hours. Heads of agencies
shall set these guidelines by issuing an appropriate order to this effect.

To-ensure-prompt and.efficient issuance of permits and licenses, offices and
agencies may consider providing frontline services beyond the core government
working hours. The offices must at alf times be complemented with adequate staff by
adopting mechanisms such as rotation system among office personnel, sliding flexi-
time, reliever system especially in peak times of the transaction, or providing skeletal
workforce during lunch and coffee breaks. The public must be informed of the work
schedule of the offices.

The heads of offices and agencies shall inform the CSC on the adoption of such
working schedules.

In the event of work suspension and/or changes in working schedules due to
official reasons, government office system downtime or other unexpected
circumstances which affect working schedules within the office or agency, the public
shall be duly informed.

“In the exigency of service in times of natural calamities, peak season, multitude ~
number of applications, and other analogous cases, government offices and agencies
________-May.be.allowed to extend working hours to attend to applicants.

To ensure the uninterrupted delivery of frontline services, the heads of offices
and agencies shall adopt the appropriate mechanisms upon the effectivity of these
Rules.

Section 8. Identification Card

All employees transacting with the public shall be provided with an official
identification card, which shall be visibly worn during office hours. The identification
cards must include the full name of the employee, the employee’s position title, name
of office, and the office seal or logo. The information on the identification card must be
readable, such that the officials and employees concerned can be easily identified by
the applicant or requesting party. For agencies where an identification card is not used
the officers and employees must wear name plates or other means of identification.

Section 9. Establishment of Public Assistance and Complaints Desk

Each agency shall establish a public assistance or complaints desk which shall
be set-up to, among others, effectively receive feedback and monitor customer
satisfaction, in a conspicuous area at their official place of business, where an officer
or employee knowledgeable in frontline services shall at all times be available for
consultation and advice: The desk shall be attended to even during break time: Special
lanes shall be provided for the personal transactions of a citizens, pregnant

women and persons with disabilities.

Page 26 of 48

The office or agency shall institute hotline numbers, short message service,
information communication technology, or other mechanisms by which the clients may
adequately express their complaints, comments, or suggestions.

RULE VIII
AUTOMATIC APPROVAL OR AUTOMATIC EXTENSION OF LICENSE, PERMIT,
CERTIFICATION AND AUTHORIZATION

Section 1. When shall Automatic Approval of an Original Application or
Request be Granted:

a) The existence of the following conditions shall warrant the automatic approval
of an original application or request:

i) Ifa government office or agency fails to approve or disapprove an original
application or request for the issuance of license, permit, certification, or
authorization within the prescribed processing time;

ii) When all the required documents have been submitted; and

ii) When-allthe.requiredfees and charges have been paid.

The acknowledgement receipt together with the official receipt for payment of
the fees shall constitute proof of approval, having the same force and effect of
a license clearance, permit, certification, or authorization subject to Section 4
hereof.

b) In cases of agencies performing quasi-judicial functions, automatic approval
shall only apply to issuance of a license, clearance, permit, certification, or
authorization.

Section 2. When shall Automatic Extension or Renewal of a License,
Clearance, Permit, Certification or Authorization shall be deemed extended:

If a government office or agency fails to act upon an application or request for
renewal of a license, clearance, permit, certification, or authorization subject for
renewal within the prescribed processing time, the application shall be deemed
extended subject to Section 4 hereof.

Section 3. When Automatic Extension or Renewal is Not Applicable

Automatic extension or renewal shall not apply to licenses, clearances, permits,
certifications, or authorizations that have already expired at thé time oLtke submission
of application or request.

'

Page 27 of 48 _ FR

Section 4, Issuance of Order for Automatic Approval, Extension, or Renewal of
License, Clearance, Permit, Certification, or Authorization

Upon complaint together with the presentation of the acknowledgement receipt
and/or the official receipt, upon due investigation and verification that the applicant has
indeed fully submitted all necessary documents and paid all the required fees, the
Authority shall issue a declaration of completeness and order the concerned office or
agency to issue the approval, extension, and/or renewal of the license, clearance,
permit, certification, or authorization which is deemed automatically approved as
provided by Sec. 10 of the Act.

RULE IX
STREAMLINED PROCEDURES FOR THE ISSUANCE OF LOCAL BUSINESS
LICENSES, CLEARANCES, PERMITS, CERTIFICATIONS OR AUTHORIZATIONS

Section 1. Issuance of a Joint Memorandum Circular
“yyithin three (3) months from the effectivity of these-Rules, the-Authority,-- vn
together with the DILG, DICT, and DTI shall issue a Joint Memorandum Circular (JMC)
to further implement Section 11 of the Act. Thereafter, the LGUs through their Local

Sanggunian shall issue fhe appropriate order or ordinance to adopt the voit
Memorandum Circular, for proper implementation of the streamlined procedures for
the issuance of business licenses, barangay clearances, permits, or authorizations.

Section 2. Single or Unified Business Application Form

a) A Single or Unified Business Application Form is a single common document
used by a business owner in applying for business permit in the
city/municipality, that contains the information and approvals needed to
complete the registration process and facilitates exchange of information
among city/municipality and NGAs.

b) This single or unified business application form shall be used in processing new
applications for business permits and business renewals which consolidates all
the information of the applicant or requesting party needed by various local
government departments, such as, but not limited to, the local taxes and
clearances, building clearance, sanitary permit, zoning clearance, and other
specific local government unit requirements, as the case may be, including the
fire safety inspection certificate from the Bureau of Fire Protection (BFP).

c) The Authority, in coordination with concerned agencies, shall develop the single
or unified- business application. form. and.this shall be.made available online
using technology-neutral platforms such as, but not limited to, the Central
Business Portal or the city/municipality’s website and various channels for

dissemination. The single or unified business application form shall be in
w if
Page 28 of 48 : i

d)

e)

“fillable format”, which can be filled up electronically and/or printed for
submission.

Hard copies of the unified forms shall be made available at all times in
designated areas of the concerned office and/or agency, in all Negosyo Centers
and in the offices of local government units.

The Authority, in coordination with the concerned agencies, shail be responsible
for regularly updating and maintaining the unified business application form.

The DICT shall issue the guidelines on the process flow of filing applications or
requests through the Ceniral Business Portal, and its acceptance, processing
and feedback mechanism by concerned agencies.

Section 3. Establishment of a Business One Stop Shop (BOSS) - Negosyo
Center

_?)

b)

c)

d)

A one-stop business facilitation service, hereinafter referred to as the business
~~ 6ne Stop ShOD, Shall be" established within-the-cities/municipalitiesNegosyo- een ee

Center as provided for under Republic Act No. 10644, otherwise Known as the
“Go Negosyo Act’.

Negosyo Centers are convergence points for the NGAs, LGUs, and the private
sector to promote ease of doing business, and ensure access to services for
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) within their jurisdiction.

in case there is no Negosyo Center in ‘the city/municipality, Section 3 of RA
10644 and its IRR (DTi Department Administrative Order No. 14-5, series of
2014) specifically Section 5, Rule 3 mandates that in applicable area, the
existing SME Centers and National Economic Research and Business
Assistance Center (NERBAC), administered by the DTI in provinces, cities and
municipalities, if any, may be converted to Negosyo Center. Existing Regional
NERBACs or SME Centers may be utilized as Negosyo Center for the
Provinces and Cities where they are physically located.

In the absence of Regional NERBACs or SME Centers, a business one stop
shop shall be established by the concerned LGU within a designated area in its
city/municipality hall.

The business one stop shop shall serve as the city/municipality’s business
permitting and licensing system to receive and process manual and/or
electronic submission of application for license, clearance, permit or
authorization.

There shall be a queuing mechanism in the business one stop shop to better
manage the flow of applications among the local er units-departments

‘

Page 29 of 48

receiving and processing applications. The Joint Memorandum Circular shall
also include a standard queuing system, which shall be applied by all LGUs.

f) LGUs shall implement colocation of the treasurer's office, assessor's office,
business permits and licensing office, zoning office, including the BFP, and
other relevant city/municipality offices/departments, among others, engaged in
starting a business, dealing with construction perrnits, and such other pertinent
services as may be offered to the public.

Section 4. Electronic BOSS

a) Within a period of three (3) years upon the effectivity of the Act, all cities and
municipalities are mandated to automate their business permitting and licensing
system or set up an electronic business one stop shop for more efficient
business registration processes.

b) Cities/Municipalities with electronic BOSS shall develop electronic versions of

ooo mone lenges, Clearances, permits, Certifications-or authorizations-with-the-same——.--

level of authority and containing the electronic signature of the authorized” ~~~
officer/s and seal of the agency or LGU, which may be printed by businesses in
a te-convenience. of their offices.

c) The DICT, DTI, and DILG shall issue a joint operational guideline on the
provision of technical assistance in the planning and implementation of the
eBusiness Permit Licensing System.

d) Provincial governments are encouraged to assist 5" and 64 class municipalities
in the implementation of this section.

Section 5. New Business Registration and Applications for Renewal

The requirements for the business registration and renewal, in addition to the
application form, shall be enumerated in the JMC and shall be uniform to all LGUs.

Section 6. Issuance of Other Permits/Clearances Together with the Business
Permit

To lessen the transaction requirements, other local clearances such as, but not
limited to, sanitary permits, environmental and agricultural clearances shall be issued
together with the business permit, subject to post-audit by the concerned LGU.
Section 7. Validity Period of Business Permits

Business permits shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. The city or
municipality may have the option to renew business ee the first month of

the year or on the anniversary date of the issuance of the busifiess permit. The city or
r
Page 30 of 48 C

municipality, through their local Sanggunian, shall enact an ordinance on what option
to be applied and this shall be posted at the most conspicuous place of the city or
municipality, in their websites, or other form of published materials.

Section 8. Expiration of Validity Period

Upon the expiration of the one (1) year validity period as stated in the preceding
section, applicants for renewal not included in the negative list provided by any
regulatory office or agency shall be allowed to renew their business permit upon
payment of applicabie fees as may be imposed by the City or Municipal government.
The regulatory offices or agencies shall submit their respective negative lists to the
LGUs on a regular basis as may be required, but no later than the first of December
every year, in order to give the LGUs reasonable time to evaluate the businesses

applying for renewal of their business permits during renewal period.

Section 9. Initial Post-Audit for New Registrants
—_____Initial post-audit for new registrants shall be conducted by the LGU within a
poe ence “period not exceeding three (3) months fromthe date of registration; unless othenwise- ce
provided by the regulatory agency. ee -

___-__-_~ Section-40.BarangayGlearances and Permits

Barangay clearances and permits related to doing business shall be applied,
issued, and collected at the city/municipality in accordance with the prescribed
processing time of the Act: Provided, that the share in the collections shail be remitted

to the respective barangays.

The remittance of the barangay’s share in the collections shall be made not
later than seven (7) working days following the end of the month when the collection
was made. Remittance of the above-mentioned share in the collections to the
Daranaay ahall ha akbliantar: anal withhaldina afths samc ahall pandas tha carving affinreal
Dalal Way Sila Vo UMIIYALUt y GIG VI IU OT INS Sai Sialic iS WIS Gail WW VIIa

or employee administratively liable under existing laws, rules, and regulations.

Section 11. LGU as Collecting Agent

a) For one-time assessment of business-related fees for Business Permit, LGUs
may be designaied to assess “he ordinary’ fire safety inspection fees (FSIF),
provided that the BFP is able to check the accuracy of the computation and to
certify the tax order of payment.

b) For one-time payment of business-related fees, the BFP may allow the
designation of city or municipality as collecting agents for the FSIF provided thai
the remittance of the said fee to the BFP shall be made not later than two (2)
days after the transaction is made. The BFP is not re from collecting

\
Page 31 of 48

additional fees required after their assessment, subject to existing laws and
regulations.

c) The LGU and the BFP, thru the local fire marshal, may enter into a
Memorandum of Agreement giving authority to local government officers for
collection and automatic remittance of applicable fees.

Section 12. Issuance of Clearances under the Fire Code of the Philippines

The issuance of Fire Safety Evaluation Clearance (FSEC) and Fire Safety
Inspection Certificate (FSIC) shall in no case be longer than seven (7) working days,
nonextendibie.

The Certification of Fire incident for Fire Insurance purposes shall in no case
be issued longer than twenty (20) working days, and may be extended only once for
another twenty (20) working days.

Section 13, Fire Safety Evaluation Clearance (FSEC)

specification of buildings, structures or facilities to be constructed/modified/renovated/
~~ afiered-are-in-accordance with the provisions of the Fire Code of the Philippines and
its IRR.

Section 14. Fire Safety Inspection Certificate (FSIC)

After construction’ renovation/ modification or alteration and prior to the
issuance of the occupancy permit by the Building Official, the City/Municipal Fire
Marshal, having jurisdiction, shall inspect the premises, which is usually part of the
Joint Inspection Team being promoted in the JMC on Construction Permits, and issue
the necessary FSIC upon determination that the required fire safety construction are
in place, and fire protective and/or warning system are properly installed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications.

Section 15. Certification of Fire Incidents for Fire Insurance

BEP may issue a certification to the fire victim in lieu of the Final Investigation Report
(FIR) for purposes of insurance claims and for other lawful applications.

Section 16. FSIC for New Business Permit Application
For new business permit application, the FSIC issued during the occupancy

permit stage shall be considered as sufficient basis for the issuan of FSI r
business permit.

Page 32 of 48

The clearance is issued ‘upon determination that the design, ‘plans and

Section 17. FSIC for Renewal of Business Permit

The BFP shall, within three (3) working days from application for renewal of business
permit, present the FSIC.to.the city/municipality, either thru the copy of the FSIC or
the negative list.

The BFP shall provide the city/municipality a negative list for purposes of
renewal of business permits which shall be made the basis for the automatic renewal
of business permit by the city/municipality. A business entity not included in the
negative list as provided by the BFP shall be deemed to have a valid FSIC, therefore,
registered without prejudice to temporary or permanent closure for non-compliance to
regulatory rules of the BFP.

The business entity shall inform the BFP and submit the necessary
documentary requirements if renovations, modifications or any form of alterations are
made to the original building structure at least thirty (30) working days before the
expiration of the business permit.

_..-.---.)p-case the. BFP fails fo furnish the City/municipality with-an-FSIG-or-to-inform-through —————--—
the negative list within the abovementioned time of three (3) working days, the"
business entity shall be deemed to have a temporary valid FSIC and, therefore, shal!

_——__serve-as.the basis forthe automatic renewal of the business permit,

Section 18. Violations and Penalty for BFP Officials or Employees
Any BFP official or employee who performs the following acts shall be liable:

a) Sell any brand of fire extinguishers and other fire safety equipment to any
applicant or requesting party or business entity;

b) Offer to sell any brand of fire extinguishers and other fire safety equipment to
any applicant or requesting party or business entity; or

c) Recommend specific brands of fire extinguishers and other fire safety
equipment to any applicant or requesting party or business entity.

“Recommend” shall mean anything that the BFP or its personnel might
or would do to indorse, suggest, and propose any brand or convincing another
to buy the product of a certain individual, person or corporation selling fire
extinguisher and other fire safety equipment. The recommendation shall be
viewed in the context of convincing another to buy the product. However, for
advice given by the BFP or any of its personnel in their professional capacity

without the purpose of convincing another to buy the product, that advice shall
not be considered as recommendation.

Page 33 of 48

The following acts can qualify as “recommend” but shall not be limited to
the following:

i. Endorsing, suggesting or proposing a particular merchant or
personisales agent ‘selling fire extinguisher or fire safety
equipment; ‘

i. Giving the contact number or business card of any merchant or
person/sales agent selling fire extinguisher,

iii. Accompanying any applicant or client to any merchant or person
selling fire extinguisher or fire safety equipment;

iv. Prohibiting or discouraging any applicant or client from buying a
fire extinguisher from a particular merchant.

Violation of any of the abovementioned acts shall be punishable by
___ imprisonment of one (1) year to six (6) years and a penalty of not less than Five

7 Hundred Thousand Pesos (Php 500;000-00), ‘but not-more-than- Two -Million-Pesos~—---—-—-—-
(Php 2,000,000.00) cnt nee stein senna

—_—__-_—_Section-19.-Co-Locati BEP with the BPLO

The BFP shall co-locate with the business one stop shop or in an appropriate area
designated by the city/municipality within its premises to assess and collect the fire
safety inspection fees.

The co-location system shall be year-round for all cities and/or during the
business permit renewal period for all municipalities. The BFP shall designate a Fire
Code Fees Assessor and Fire Code Fees Collecting Agent in the BPLO. The BFP
shall coordinate with the Local Chief Executive and BPLO for the accommodation of
their personnel.

Section 20. Online Electronic Mechanism

Within six (6) months from the effectivity of these Rules, the BFP shall have an online
or electronic mechanism in assessing fees, collecting/accepting payments, and
sharing/exchange of other relevant data on business permit processing th LGUs and
other agencies. ‘ ,

Page 34 of 48

RULE X
INTERCONNECTIVITY INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT

Section 1. Action of Offices

The maximum period for the processing, approval, renewal, and/or extension
of licenses, clearances, permits, certifications or authorizations for the installation and
operation of telecommunication, broadcast towers, facilities, equipment, and service
by the barangay, LGUs and NGAs shall be seven (7) working days each.

The maximum periods provided in this section may be extended only once for
the same period, provided, that appropriate notices referred to in Rule VII of these
Rules are given to the applicant or requestor prior to the lapse of the original period.

Section 2. Application Deemed Approved

If the granting authority or officer of an agency fails to approve or disapprove an

application for a license, clearance, permit, certifications or authorization within the
"prescribed processing time: stated in-the preceding -section;-said-application-shall-be_..___.__

deemed approved subject to Rule VIII hereof. -ti“‘sSOCO*;*;*;*;*™” ran aaa carne nna

___ When the approval of the appropriate local legislative body is necessary, a
nonextendible period of twenty (20) working days is prescribed instead of ihe peroas
mentioned in the preceding section.

Section 3. Review and Repeal of Outdated, Redundant, and Unnecessary
Licenses, Clearances, Permits, Certifications, or Authorizations

Within three (3) months from the effectivity of these Rules, the Authority, in
coordination with DICT, shall review and recommend the repeal of outdated,
redundant, and unnecessary licenses, clearances, permits, certifications or
authorizations being required by NGAs, LGUs, and private entities.

During this review, repeal, and streamlining of processes, the Authority shall
adopt the whole of government approach in order to have an integrated approach to
public service delivery characterized by seamless government transactions across
several agencies, inter-operability of government processes, horizontal coordination,
and strengthened linkages among government units.

The review shall also cover the rationalization of post-construction fees, including but
not limited to tower fees, pole construction fees, and excavation fees, which are being
made a pre-requisite for renewal of licenses.

Section 4. Technical Standards and Operating Guidelines

The DICT shall issue the technical standards and operating guidelines to

ensure that appropriate equipment, connectivity, and ICT platform4re established.
Page 35 of 48 Cc

RULE XI
ANTI-RED TAPE UNIT, AUTHORITY, AND COUNCIL

Section 1. CSC Anti-Red Tape Unit

The CSC shall maintain an anti-red tape unit, not lower than a division, in its
central and regional offices, which shall have the following functions:

a) Serve as the focal office for service delivery initiatives in the civil service;
b) Provide assistance on the conduct of the Report Card Survey (RCS);
c) Coordinate with the Authority relative to the implementation of the Act;

d) Receive, analyze, and utilize RCS results from the Authority, and recommend
enhancements on service delivery improvement in the civil service;

e) Receive and review service delivery-related feedback from CSC stakeholders

and interested parties re

f) Cascade information and updates on programs and activities related to the Act
to CSC stakeholders and interested parties;

g) Establish partnerships with key implementers/government agencies, national
and international institutions fo ensure effective implementation of CSC's roles
as stated in the Act; and

h) Perform other CSC-approved roles in relation to the implementation of the Act.

Section 2. Complaints before the CSC Anti-Red Tape Unit

The CSC shall receive, review, hear, and decide on complaints on erring
government employees and officials and non-compliance with the provisions of the
Act and subject to the existing civil service laws, rules and regulations.
Section 3. Mandate of the Anti-Red Tape Authority

The Anti-Red Tape Authority is mandated to administer and implement the Act

and its implementing rules and regulations, and to monitor and ensure compliance with
the national policy on anti-red tape and ease of doing business in the country.

Page 36 of 48

Section 4. Powers and Functions
The Authority shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Implement and oversee a national policy on anti-red tape and ease of doing
business;

(b) Implement various ease of doing business and anti-red tape reform
initiatives aimed at improving the ranking of the Philippines;

(c) Monitor and evaluate the compliance of agencies covered under Section 3
of this Act, and issue notice of warning to erring and/or noncomplying
government employees or officials;

(d) Initiate investigation, motu proprio or upon receipt of a complaint, refer the
same to the appropriate agency, or file cases for violations of this Act;
“Loo fe) Assist_complainiants in filing “necessary” cases” with the “CSC, "the

Ombudsman, and other appropriate courts, as the case may be;

—_-_-_»-__-_»-_-__(f) -Recommend_policies, processes, _and_systems to_improve regulatory
management to increase the productivity, efficiency, and effectiveness of
business permitting and licensing agencies;

(g) Review proposed major regulations of government agencies, using
submitted regulatory impact assessments, subject to proportionality rules to
be determined by the Authority;

(h) Conduct regulatory management training programs to capacitate NGAs and
LGUs to comply with sound regulatory management practices;

(i) Prepare, in consultation with the appropriate agencies, regulatory
management manuals for ali government agencies and/or instrumenialities
and LGUs;

(i) Provide technical assistance and advisory opinions in the review of
proposed national or local legislation, regulations or procedures;

(k) Ensure the dissemination of and public access to information on regulatory
management system and changes in laws and regulations relevant to the
public by establishing the Philippine Business Regulations Information
System;

(l) Enlist the assistance of the CSC, DTI, and other government agencies
{including law enforcement agencies) in the implementation of its powers
and functions provided for in this Act including ee of uments

\
Page 37 of 48

pertinent to an investigation, or to participate in or conduct the investigation,
subject to the submission of a verified written report to the Authority; and

(m) Perform such acts as may be necessary to attain the objectives of the Act.

Section 5. Organizational Structure of the Authority
a) The Authority shall be under the Office of the President as an attached agency.

b) The Authority shall be headed by a Director General, who shall be appointed by
the President of the Philippines and whose tenure shall be coterminous with the
latter. The Director General shail enjoy the benefits, privileges, and emoluments
equivalent to the rank of a Secretary.

c) The Director General shall be assisted by three (3) Deputy Directors General
(DDGs), who are career officials as defined in existing laws, rules, and
regulations. One shall be responsible for Legal matters, another for Operations,
while the third shall be responsible for Administration and Finance. The Deputy
Directors General shall likewise be appointed by the President of the

on etn tea _--Philippines-and.shall.enjoy.the benefits, privileges, and emoluments equivalent
He ee a

The Director General, in consultation with the CSC, DTI, and DBM shall

——_—§_—aetermine-the-erganizational_structures_including_regi al_or_field_offices,

qualification standards, staffing pattern, and compensation, which shall be
implemented within one (1) year upon the effectivity of this Act. The
organizational structure must be in accordance with the civil service law, rules,

and regulations.

d) In absence of regional or field offices, the Authority may deputize the regional
personnel of DTI to perform its powers and functions.

Section 6. Mandate of the Ease of Doing Business and Anti-Red Tape Advisory
Council

The Council shall be the policy and advisory body of the Authority. The Council shall
formulate policies and programs that will continuously enhance and improve the
country’s competitiveness and ease of doing business.

Section 7. Composition of the Council

The Ease of Doing Business and Anti-Red Tape Advisory Council shall be
composed of the following:

4. Secretary of the DTI as Chairperson;
2. Director General of the Authority as Vice-Chairperson;
3. Secretary of the DICT; : (

Page 38 of 48 0 SS

4. Secretary of the DILG;
5. Secretary of the Department of Finance (DOF); and
6. Two (2) representatives from the private sector.

The department secretaries may designate their representatives, who shall sit
in a permanent capacity, with no less than Undersecretary in rank, and their acts shall
be considered the acts of their principals. The official designation signed by the
department secretary concerned shall be submitted to the Authority within fifteen (15)
days after the effectivity of the IRR.

The private sector representatives shall be appointed by the President of the
Philippines for a term of three (3) years, and may be reappointed only once, from the
nominees submitted by reputable business groups or associations.

The Authority shall serve as Secretariat to the Council to be headed by its
Deputy Director General for Operations.

Section 8: Powers and Functions
The Council shall have the following powers and functions:

a) Plan, draft, and propose a national policy on ease of doing business and anti-
red tape.

b) Recommend policies, processes, and systems to improve regulatory
management and increase the productivity, efficiency, and effectiveness of
permitting and licensing agencies;

¢) Design and identify systems that will continuously enhance and improve the
delivery of services in government and ease of doing business in the country;

d) Authorize the creation or appointment of specific working groups or taskforces
in aid of the implementation of this Act;

e) Propose legislation, amendments or modifications to Philippine laws related to
anti-red tape and ease of doing business;

f) Periodically review and assess the country’s competitiveness performance,
challenges, and issues;

g) Provide technical assistance and advisory opinions in the review of proposed
national or local legislation, regulations, or procedu

ve 5=

Page 39 of 48

__beused to obtain feedback on the following:

h) Recommend to the Authority the issuance of the appropriate measures to
promote transparency and efficiency in business practices and delivery of
services in government; and

i) Perform such other functions as may be necessary or as may be directed by
the President of the Philippines for the successful implementation of the
objectives of thie Act.

RULE XII
REPORT CARD SURVEY

Section 1. Report Card Survey for Government Services

All offices and agencies providing government services shail be subjected to a
Report Card Survey to be initiated by the Authority, in coordination with the Civil
Service Commission (CSC), and the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), which shail

a) Compliance with the provisions in the Citizen's Charter, of the Act andits Rules,

and

b) Agency performance.

Section 2. Report Card Survey as a Tool

The Report Card Survey shall be a holistic tool that will measure effectiveness
of the Citizen’s Charter in reducing regulatory burdens and the impact of the human
resource systems and programs in delivering efficient government service. It shall be
used to obtain information and/or estimates of hidden costs incurred by applicants or
requesting parties to access government services which may include, but is not limited
to, bribes and payment to fixers.

Section 3. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan

The Report Card Survey shall be part of the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan of
all agencies. Results of the survey shall also be incorporated in their annual reports.

Section 4. Report Card Survey Results

The result of the survey shall also become the basis for the grant of agency,
tocal, national, and international awards, recognition and incentives for excellent

delivery of services in all government Or
a 3

Page 40 of 48

RULE XIll
VIOLATIONS, JURISDICTION, PENALTIES, AND IMMUNITY

Section 1. Violations under the Act

The following shall constitute violations of the Act and these Rules and
Regulations:

a) Refusal to accept application or request with complete requirements being
submitted by an applicant or requesting party without due cause;

b) Imposition of additional requirements other than those listed in the Citizen’s
Charter;

c) Imposition of additional costs not reflected in the Citizen’s Charter;

d) Failure to give the applicant or requesting party a written notice on the
disapproval_of an application or request,

e) Failure to render government services within the prescribed processing time on
any application and/or request without due cause;

f) Failure to attend to applicants or requesting parties who are within the premises
of the office or agency concerned prior to the end of official working hours and
during lunch break;

g) Failure or refusal to issue official receipts; and

h) Fixing and/or collusion with fixers in consideration of economic and/or other
gain or advantage.

Section 2. Penalty for the First Offense

Administrative liability with six (6) months suspension: Provided, however, that
in the case of fixing and/or collusion with fixers under Section 21 (h), the penalty and
liability under Section 22 (b) of the Act shall apply.
Section 3. Penalty for the Second Offense

Administrative liability and criminal liability of dismissal from the service,
perpetual disqualification from holding public office and forfeiture of retirement benefits

and imprisonment of one (1) year to six (6) years with a fine of not less than Five
Hundred Thousand Pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than Two Million Pesos

(P2,000,000.00). a
\
Page 41 of 48 CF

Dismissal from service shall include accessory penalties such as, but not limited
to, perpetual disqualification from holding public office and forfeiture of retirement
benefits, except terminal leave benefits and personal contributions to retirement
benefits systems such as the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS),
Retirement and Benefits Administration Service (RBAS), or other equivalent retirement
benefits system.

Criminal liability shall also be incurred through the commission of bribery,
extortion, or when the violation was done deliberately and maliciously to solicit favor
in cash or in kind. in such cases, the pertinent provisions of the Revised Penal Code
and other special laws shall apply.

Section 4. Cumulative Nature of Offenses

The cumulative reckoning of offenses shall be based on the nature of the prohibited
act or omission, such that:

’... .g)-Hfthe same prohibited act or omission is committed more than once, the first act’

or omission shall constitute the first offense, the second act or omission shall
be deemed the second offense, and so forth; and

b) If different prohibited acts and omissions are committed more than once, all
such acts and omissions shall be considered first offense.

Section 5. Penalty for Fixing

In case of fixing and/or collusion with fixers under Section 21 (h) of the Act, the
penalty provided for the Second Offense shail be imposed.

Section 6. Administrative Liability in Relation to Other Charges

The finding of administrative liability under the Act shall not be a bar to the filing
of criminal, civil, or other related charges under existing laws arising from the same
act or omission enumerated in Section 21 of the Act. Moreover, discharge from
administrative liability shall not be a bar to civil or criminal prosecution, and the
dismissal of the administrative complaint will not necessarily result in the dismissal of
the civil or criminal complaint filed.

In such cases, the pertinent provisions of the Revised Penal Code and other
pertinent laws, rules or regulations, shall apply.

Section 7. Immunity or Discharge of Co-Respondent/Accused to be a Witness

Any public official or employee or any person having been charged with another
offense under the Act and who voluntarily gives information pertaining to an
investigation or who willingly testifies therefore, shall be exempt ar in

\

Page 42 of 48

the case/s where his/her information and testimony are given. The discharge may be
granted and directed by the investigating body or court upon the application or petition
of any of the respondent/faccused-informant and before the’ termination of the
investigation when the following circumstances exist:

(a) There is absolute necessity for the testimony of the respondent/accused-
informant whose discharge is requested;

(b) There is no other direct evidence available for the proper prosecution of the
offense committed, except the testimony of said respondent/accused-
informant;

(c) The testimony of said respondent/accused-informant can be substantially
corroborated in its material points;

(d) The respondent/accused-informant has not been previously convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude; and

"7 (ey Said Féspondent/accused-informant does not appear to be the most guilty”

Evidence adduced in support of the discharge shall automatically form part of

__sthe records of the investigation, Should the investigating body or court deny the motion

or request for discharge as a witness, his/her sworn statement shall be inadmissible
as evidence.

RULE XIV
COMMENCEMENT OF ACTIONS, EVALUATION, AND
INVESTIGATION

Section 1. How Commenced

The Authority, motu proprio, or upon complaint received or obtained in any
form, including electronic means, shail take cognizance of and initiate the investigation
of cases.

Referral by other agencies shall, upon appropriate verification/investigation, be
treated as Authority-initiated action.

The Authority shall record the complaint and docket the same and conduct an
evaluation to determine whether the complaint falls within the scope of the Act and its
Rules.

Section 2. Complaint

The complainant may file with the Authority either an Initial Complaint or a Formal Complaint.
Page 43 of 48

A Formal Complaint is a written statement, subscribed, and sworn to by the
complainant, and is substantiated by sufficient evidence. All other complaints are
considered as initial complaints.

a) Initial Complaint

i) The Complaint, as far as practicable, shall indicate in a concise manner the
fotlowing:
(1) Full name, address, and contact details of the complainant,
(2) Details of the acts complained of,
(3) Person(s) charged,
(4) Name of agency of the person(s) charged, if applicable, and
(5) Evidence of such violation.

i) Complaints which do not disclose the identity of the complainant will be
acted upon and treated as an anonymous complaint to be given due course

Rule XIV, Section 2(a)()(2-5) of these Russ.

iii) The Complainant may exhaust all means of verbal, written, and electronic

com munication.available in filing the Initial Complaint to the Authority.
b) Formal Complaint

i) The Complaint shall be in writing, subscribed, and sworn to by the
complainant and shall set forth in a concise manner the following:

(1) Full name and address of the complainant,

(2) Full name(s) and address of the person complained of as weil as his/her
position and office,

(3) A narration of the relevant and material facts which shows the acts or
omissions allegedly committed,

(4) Certified true copies of documentary evidence and affidavits of his/her
witnesses, if any, and

(5) Certification or statement of non-forum shopping.

It must be signed by the party or his/her authorized representative, if any.
Section 3. Evaluation
If, upon evaluation, it is established that the Initial or Formal Complaint is valid

such that it falls within the scope of the Act or its Rules, the Authority shallcommence
the investigation of the said complaint. pr °



Page 44 of 48 IS

by the Authority. Provided, the complaint provides the details Fequired under

However, if the Initial or Formal Complaint does not fall within the scope of the
Act or its rules, the Authority shall refer or endorse the said complaint to the relevant
government agency or disciplining authority for appropriate action.
Section 4. Investigation

If, upon evaluation of the Initial Complaint, there is a finding by the Authority
that there exists a probable violation of this Act or these Rules, the complainant or the
Authority, in motu proprio or anonymous complaints cases, shall execute a Formal
Complaint.

Upon execution or the submission of a valid Formal Complaint by the
complainant, which shall be furnished to the person/s complained of, the Authority
shall conduct an investigation.

Investigation by the Authority may be conducted in any of the following manner:
a) requiring the submission of counter affidavit or comment and/or other documents
from the person complained of within seven (7) working days from receipt of the
Formal Complaint; b) ex-parte evaluation of the records; or c) clarificatory meeting with
the parties to discuss the merits of the case.

——~ When the complaint is initiated by the Authority motu proprio, itorits authorized" "~~~

representative shall issue a show-cause order directing the person/s complained of to
explain within the same period why no adminisirative or criminal case should be filed

id-person/s-The-failure-to-submit-a-comment/counter-affidavit/explanation
shall be considered a waiver thereof and the investigation may be completed without
the counter-affidavit/comment/explanation.

If a prima facie case is established after investigation, the Authority shall issue
a Final Complaint, directing the filing of the appropriate case/s against the person/s
complained of with the Office of the President (OP), CSC, the Ombudsman and other
appropriate courts, as the case may be.

The filing of the appropriate case(s) may be done by the Authority, motu proprio, or it may assist the complainant in doing so. The Authority may recommend the filing of a formal charge, and that, the person(s) complained of be placed under preventive suspension.

The appropriate disciplining authority may deputize the Authority to conduct the preliminary investigation and/or formal investigation of a case and may recommend the imposition of the appropriate penalty and/or preventive suspension, if warranted.

Section 5. Determination of Facts

The investigation includes, but is not limited to, examination of documents
submitted by the complainant, witnesses, and the person complained of, gathering of
documentary evidence including documents readily available from oy government

N
Page 45 of 48

offices and agencies, and interview of witnesses, for the purpose of determining the
facts to build an administrative or criminal case.

Section 6. Guidelines for Investigation and Handling of Complaints

The Authority shall issue further guidelines in the investigation, including the
procedure or process flow in handling complaints.

RULE XV
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

Section 1. Temporary Secretariat

The DTI-Competitiveness Bureau (DTI-CB) shall serve as temporary secretariat of
the Authority and Council until such time that the organizational structure and
personnel complement of the Authority have been determined and filled up.
__. Section 2. Organizational Structure and Personnel Complement ofthe
Authority

—_____The-DirectorGeneral.of.the-Authority,_in_consultation with the CSC, DTL_and DBM,
shall determine the organizational structure and complement of the Authority.

The staff of the DTl-Competitiveness Bureau whether in a permanent, temporary,
substitute, coterminous, contractual, or casual in employment status shall have the
option to be absorbed or to be laterally transferred to the Authority without diminution
of their rank, position, salaries, and other emoluments, subject to existing laws,
regulations, and procedures.

Section 3. Regulatory Management Programs and Anti-Red Tape Initiatives

All regulatory management programs and anti-red tape initiatives across
government agencies shail be gathered by the Authority.

The DTI, Cooperative Development Authority (CDA), Department of Finance
(DOF), Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP), and National Economic
Development Authority (NEDA) shall submit to the Authority a report on the status of
their respective projects related to regulatory management. Accordingly, the Authority
shall coordinate with the above-mentioned agencies or offices on the regulatory
management program and anti-red tape initiatives that shall be submitted.

Section 4. Information Dissemination Campaign

The Authority shall take the lead role in the conduct of an information
dissemination campaign in all NGAs and LGUs nationwide to inform them of the Act
and of these Rules and Regulations.



Page 46 of 48

The CSC and the Council shall support and ensure advocacy, communication,
and social mobilization programs to heighten awareness of the Act and these Rules,
particularly on the adoption of simplified requirements and procedures that will reduce
red tape and expedite business and non-business related transactions in government.

The Authority shall carry out the following functions in relation to information
dissemination:

a) Prepare and implement a comprehensive and strategic communication plan to
educate and engage on a continual basis all interested parties and
stakeholders;

b) Designate an official spokesperson who shall handle press briefings or
interviews; and

c) Coordinate with media in the dissemination of information regarding the
implementation of this Act and its IRRs.

~The CSC shall provide support in education and engagement of officers and
employees in the government for awareness of the Act and these Rules.

RULE XVI
FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Guidelines

The Authority may issue such guidelines to further clarify and effectively implement these Rules and Regulations.

Section 2. Separability Clause
If any of the provisions of these Rules and Regulations shall be declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void, or unconstitutional, such provision
shall be deemed deleted and shall not affect the validity of the rest of the provisions
which shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. Repealing Clause
All provisions of laws, presidential decrees, letters of instruction, existing

administrative orders, circulars, rules and regulations, and other presidential or
executive issuances incompatible or inconsistent with the provisions of the Acts are

hereby deemed amended or repealed accordingly. WA ke

Page 47 of 48

Section 4. Effectivity Clause

These Rules and Regulations shall take effect fifteen (15) days from publication
either in the Official Gazette or in two (2) national newspapers of general circulation
and from filing of three (3) certified copies in the University of the Philippines Law
Center. . _ :

Done, in the City of Pasay, this 17" day of July in the year 2019

aut fs DELA ROSA-BALA

Civil Service Commission
oC ginpersonc

( M. LOPEZ

Department of Trade and Industry
Secretary

Page 48 of 48