Page 1 of 11

Film Development Council of the Philippines 
Metro Manila

REVISED RULES AND REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC 
ACT NO. 9167 (AN ACT CREATING THE FILM DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL OF THE 
PHILIPPINES, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, APPROPRIATING FUNDS 
THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES)

Pursuant to the authority vested in it under Republic Act No. 9167 (R.A. No. 9167), the Film 
Development Council of the Philippines (FDCP) hereby issues, adopts, and promulgates the 
following revised rules and regulations to effectively carry out the provisions of the said Act.

RULE I – GENERAL PROVISION

Section 1. Title. – This shall be referred to as the “Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations 
(IRR) of R.A. No. 9167”. (Rules)

Sec. 2. Statement of Policy and Objectives. – The State guarantees freedom of expression. To 
achieve this end, the State shall promote and support the development and growth of the domestic 
film industry, recognizing its role as an effective medium to uplift aesthetic, historical, cultural and 
social values and better understand and appreciate the Filipino identity.

Further, the State shall formulate and implement policies and programs to upgrade the art and 
craft of film making and encourage the production of films for commercial purposes, intended for 
public entertainment, that seek to enhance the quality of life, examine the human and social 
conditions and contribute to the dignity and nobility of the human spirit.

Sec. 3. Scope. These Rules shall apply to all contracts, undertakings, transactions, 
arrangements, activities of whatever nature which are necessary or incidental to the Council’s 
functions and objectives, with any natural or juridical entity, local or foreign, government 
institutions, private corporation, association, partnership and individuals.

RULE II - DEFINITION OF TERMS

Sec. 4. Definition of Terms. – As used in these Rules, the following terms are defined as follows:

(a) THE ACT - An Act Creating the Film Development Council of the Philippines, Defining its 
Powers and Functions, Appropriating Funds Therefor, and for Other Purposes (R.A. No. 9167)

(b) COUNCIL - The Film Development Council of the Philippines created by R.A. No. 9167 
represented by its Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer

(c) BOARD OF TRUSTEES –   Composed of the three (3) regular members and seven (7) ex-
officio members of the Council as provided by RA No. 9167

(d) CINEMA EVALUATION BOARD - The Cinema Evaluation Board (CEB), which shall evaluate 
and grade films submitted to the Council.

(e) FEATURE FILM - The principal motion picture shown on a program with other pictures

(f) THEATER OR CINEMA – An establishment devoted exclusively to the exhibition of motion 
pictures and other audiovisual content

(g) PRODUCER – A business executive engaged in the production of motion pictures, usually 
exercising final authority over all activities entailed in the making thereof

Page 2 of 11

(h) DISTRIBUTOR – Any natural or juridical entity, local or foreign, government institution or 
private corporations, associations, partnership or individual engaged in the business of renting, 
selling or licensing films to exhibitors

(i) EXHIBITOR – The owners or operators of movie theaters

(j) CINEMA EVALUATION SYSTEM – A set of standards, criteria and procedures for film grading 
as provided under Sec. 11 and 12 of the Act, as formulated and established by the Board

(k) HIGHLY URBANIZED CITIES – Cities with a minimum population of two hundred thousand 
(200,000) inhabitants, as certified by the National Statistics Office, and with the latest annual 
income of at least Fifty Million Pesos (P50,000,000.00) based on 1991 constant prices, as certified 
by the city treasurer, and as defined in the Local Government Code of 1991

(l) INDEPENDENT COMPONENT CITIES – Those component cities whose charters prohibit their 
voters from voting for provincial elective officials, as defined in the Local Government Code of 
1991

RULE III – THE COUNCIL AND THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES

Sec. 5. Composition of the Council and the Board of Trustees

(a) Chairperson - The Chairperson, with the rank and salary of an Undersecretary, shall be the 
Chief Executive Officer of the Council. He/she shall exercise administrative supervision to ensure 
the implementation of the policies of the Council and execute the functions provided under Section 
9 of the Act. The Chairperson is appointed by the President for a term of three (3) years unless 
sooner removed by the President. He/she shall be eligible for reappointment but shall not serve 
for more than two (2) consecutive terms.

(b) Regular Members (3) - There shall be three (3) regular members each representing 
respectively (i) legally constituted filmmakers association; (ii) legally constituted theater owners 
association; and, (iii) academe. They shall be appointed by the President for a term of three (3) 
years unless sooner removed by the President. They shall be eligible for reappointment but shall 
not serve for more than two (2) consecutive terms.

(c) Ex - Officio Members (7) - There shall be seven (7) members sitting in an ex-officio capacity 
composed of the following: (i) Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry or his/her duly 
designated representative; (ii) Secretary of the Department of Education or his/her duly 
designated representative; (iii) Chairperson of the Film Academy of the Philippines; (iv) President 
of the Cultural Center of the Philippines; (v) Commissioner/Head of the Committee on Cinema of 
the National Commission on Culture and the Arts; (vi) President of the League of City Mayors or 
his/her duly designated representative; and, (vii) Chairperson of the Metro-Manila Development 
authority or his/her duly designated representative.

Sec. 6. Succession to Vacant Position. - any person who succeeds to a position left vacant by a 
member shall serve only for the unexpired portion of the vacated term. Service of the unexpired 
portion shall not be counted as a term.

Sec. 7. Meetings. - The Council shall meet regularly at least once a month or as often as 
necessary at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of the members. In the absence of the 
Chairperson, the members present constituting a quorum may choose a presiding officer from 
among themselves. A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum to do 
business and to carry out its functions.

Sec. 8. Voting. - The Council shall act as a collegial body. In the conduct of meetings, the 
Chairperson shall not vote except to break a tie. 
Sec. 9. Honoraria. - Each member of the Council or his / her duly designated representative shall 
receive an honorarium for each meeting actually attended, the amount of which will be determined 
by the Council based on government rules and regulations.

Page 3 of 11

Sec. 10. Specific Powers and Functions. The Council shall have the following power and functions 
over the enforcement and implementation of the provisions of the Act and these Rules:

(a) To establish and implement a Cinema Evaluation System applying the criteria under Section 
11 of the Act;

(b) To develop and implement an incentive and reward system for producers based on merit to 
encourage the production of quality film;

For this purpose, the Council shall:

i.) 
Establish and institute a location incentive scheme to encourage Filipino 
producers to promote the Philippines as a filming destination for domestic 
and foreign film production;

ii.) 
Create a streamlined process for the grant of incentivized services (i.e. 
issue permits, licenses and clearances) in support of such tasks in 
partnership with the various government agencies involved thereto; and

iii.) 
Create assistance funds to support film producers in the production of 
quality films, including but not limited to, film development, production, 
post-production, marketing, distribution, exhibition, and archiving practices 
in the country.

(c) To establish, organize, operate and maintain domestic and international film festivals, 
exhibitions and similar activities.

For this purpose, the Council shall:

i.) 
Develop and recommend general guidelines for the purpose of 
establishing, organizing, operating and maintaining national film festivals, 
exhibits and similar activities;

ii.) 
Collaborate in all government-led, initiated and partnered film festivals, 
exhibitions and events to ensure compliance with all the state policy to 
upgrade the art of Filipino film making and all existing laws; and

iii.) 
Partner with and support public and private institutions, organizations, 
associations, and entities for the conduct of domestic and international film 
festivals.

(d) To encourage and undertake activities that will promote the growth and development of the 
domestic film industry and promote its participation in both domestic and foreign markets;

For this purpose, the Council shall:

i.) 
Explore and expand the local and foreign markets for Filipino films to 
assure mutual benefits and protection of local filmmakers and companies, 
distributors, exhibitions and audiences;

ii.) 
Establish a National Booking Committee to facilitate the conduct of 
distribution and exhibition of films. Its composition shall be composed of 
representatives from relevant stakeholders;

iii.) 
Support the diverse and various forms and formats of cinema such as 
world, regional and experimental, documentary, short, animation, digital 
and other audiovisual formats;

Page 4 of 11

iv.) 
Support and empower regional cinema in the Philippines;

v.) 
Ensure an inclusive and holistic engagement of all stakeholders, especially 
local government units in the Philippines, to establish Councils and/or 
Commissions in charge of regional film development;

vi.) 
Establish a reliable, strong and transparent mechanism for the collection of 
timely, accurate and useful data and statistics on the local film industry to 
be secured from all relevant public and private stakeholders which will 
serve as the basis for the development of planning and informed decision-
making of the government for the sector, including but not limited to:

1) National Database for all members and entities of film 
production. Pertinent data of film workers may be coordinated 
with institutions such as but not limited to Film Academy of the 
Philippines through a Memorandum of Agreement.

2) Relevant data including but not limited to: 
a) Films in all stages of production; 
b) All local and foreign films released annually;  
c) Number of screens in the country; 
d) Price points for tickets; 
e) Real-time box office; and 
f) Film Festivals, events and similar activities.

vii.) 
Serve as a consultative and advisory body for all matters pertaining to film 
industry development, including but not limited to, current and future 
legislative measures, international treaties, and local agreements;

viii.) 
Pursuant to all existing laws, provide standards and guidelines, and 
collaborate with relevant government agencies for: 
1) working conditions of film industry workers; 
2) technical and safety standards for the production of films; 
3) distribution and exhibition of films in the country; and 
4) technical standards for all commercial film exhibition venues in 
the country.

(e) To develop and promote programs to enhance the skills and expertise of Filipino talents 
necessary for quality film production;

For this purpose, the Council shall:

i.) 
Converge with educational institutions and government agencies to 
promote the integration of film education in their respective programs 
and/or curricula;

ii.) 
Conduct regular activities, fora, workshops and conferences to enhance 
and upgrade the knowledge and skills of Filipino talents and workers;

iii.) 
Develop and propose standards and certification programs for upgrading 
of skills and expertise of Filipino talents and workers; and

iv.) 
Partner with local and foreign counterparts for the conduct of the above-
mentioned activities.

(f) To prescribe procedures for the exercise of its powers and functions as well as the performance 
of its duties and responsibilities;

For this purpose, the Council shall:

Page 5 of 11

i.) 
Enter into contracts and undertakings of whatever nature which are 
necessary or incidental to its functions and objectives with any natural or 
juridical persons and with any local or foreign government institutions, 
private corporations, partnership, or private individuals;

ii.) 
Recommend executive and legislative measures to enhance the 
development and efficiency of policies for the local film industry; and

iii.) 
Align all related functions of any natural or juridical entity, government 
institutions, local or foreign, private corporation, association, partnership 
and individuals, linked but not limited to film production, copyright and/or 
patent, review and evaluation, theatrical release, cultural exhibits, trade 
and tourism, and repository of illegally obtained film devices, to preclude 
all unnecessary overlaps and inconsistencies in the implementation of the 
Council’s mandate; Provided, however, that such alignment shall be 
subject to prior consultation.

(g) To determine the Council's organizational structure and staffing pattern and appoint officers 
and employees consistent with existing laws;

(h) To acquire, manage and hold such real and personal property as may be necessary to carry 
out the purposes and objectives of the Act;

For this purpose, the Council shall:

i.) 
Establish a permanent office for the Council;

ii.) 
Partner with local government units for the establishment of alternative 
exhibition venues/cinemas for screening of films, events and similar 
activities through a Memorandum of Agreement;

iii.) 
Establish a National Film Center that may include a film museum, reference 
library, and events space, screening and workshops venue;

iv.) 
Establish a Film Archive Structure and Facility; and

v.) 
Identify other structures and properties that will serve as innovation and 
creative hubs for development of audiovisual contents. Forge collaborative 
efforts with government agencies to align existing and future policy 
initiatives on creative industries.

(i) To invest funds and other assets in activities designed to promote the development of the film 
industry and the production of films;

For this purpose, the Council shall:

i.) 
Establish and manage a Film Fund to utilize as an investment for co-
production purposes with local and foreign producers;

ii.) 
Invest on capital outlay assets and ventures, services, equipment, 
technological or otherwise, that would further elevate the film industry; and

iii.) 
Encourage public-private partnership that would allow the council to 
optimize donations/grants for film industry development.

(j)  To ensure the establishment of a film archive in order to conserve and protect film negatives 
and/or prints as part of the nation’s historical, cultural, and artistic heritage;

Page 6 of 11

For this purpose, the Council shall:

i.) 
Establish a restoration laboratory;

ii.) 
Identify priority titles annually for restoration purposes based on standard 
archiving considerations; and

iii.) 
Undertake activities to locate and complete the repatriation of Filipino titles 
across the world.

(k) To perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.

RULE IV - SECRETARIAT

Sec. 11. Executive Director. - The Chairperson shall be assisted by an Executive Director to be 
appointed by the Council upon recommendation of the Chairperson. His/her term of office shall 
be co-terminus with the Chairperson unless sooner removed for cause. He/She shall receive a 
salary comparable to that of equivalent rank under the Revised Compensation and Position 
Classification System.

Sec. 12. Functions of the Executive Director. - The Executive Director shall head the Secretariat 
of the Council and exercise such duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the 
Chairperson.

Sec. 13. Support Staff. - The Secretariat shall have such operating units and personnel as the 
Council may find necessary for the proper performance of its functions.

Sec. 14. Functions of the Secretariat. - The functions of the Secretariat shall include the following:

(a) To manage and administer the day-to-day operations of the Council under the supervision of 
the chairperson;

(b) To facilitate communications and linkages with the Cinema Evaluation Board and the different 
government offices, non-governmental agencies and the public, as well as with domestic and 
international film festivals and markets;

(c) To provide secretariat and record-keeping services to the Council; and

(d) To perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Council.

RULE V - CINEMA EVALUATION BOARD (CEB)

Section 1. Composition. – The Cinema Evaluation Board (CEB) shall be composed of a Chairman and ten (10) members, who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines from a list of nominees submitted by the Film Development Council of the Philippines (FDCP). The FDCP shall ensure that the nominees possess the qualifications prescribed in Section 2 hereof.

Section 2. Qualifications. – The Chairman and members of the CEB shall possess the following qualifications:

(a) Filipino citizen;
(b) Of good moral character;
(c) With at least a Bachelor’s degree in film, communication, or any related field;
(d) With at least five (5) years experience in the film industry, or in film criticism, or in academic teaching of film;
(e) Sensitive to cultural values and aesthetics;
(f) Not an officer or employee of the government, or any entity with existing contractual obligations with the government;
(g) Not connected with any film production or distribution company.

Section 3. Powers and Functions. – The CEB shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) To review and evaluate all locally-produced and foreign films intended for public exhibition in the Philippines, and classify them according to their suitability for different audiences;
(b) To determine the artistic and technical merit of films, and to recommend them for participation in local and international film festivals;
(c) To provide guidance and technical assistance to film producers and filmmakers;
(d) To conduct research and studies on film and its impact on society;
(e) To promulgate rules and regulations necessary to carry out its functions, subject to the approval of the FDCP;
(f) To submit an annual report to the FDCP on its activities and accomplishments.

Section 4. Classification. – The CEB shall classify films into the following categories:

(a) General Patronage (GP) – Films suitable for all ages;
(b) Parental Guidance (PG) – Films suitable for all ages, but parental guidance is advised for children below thirteen (13) years old;
(c) Restricted to Adult Viewership (R-13) – Films suitable for viewers thirteen (13) years old and above;
(d) Restricted to Adult Viewership (R-16) – Films suitable for viewers sixteen (16) years old and above;
(e) Restricted to Adult Viewership (R-18) – Films suitable for viewers eighteen (18) years old and above.

Section 5. Appeals. – Any film producer or filmmaker who disagrees with the classification given by the CEB may file an appeal to the FDCP within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the CEB’s decision. The FDCP shall review the appeal and issue a final decision within thirty (30) days from receipt of the appeal. The decision of the FDCP shall be final and executory.

Section 6. Compensation. – The Chairman and members of the CEB shall be entitled to compensation as may be determined by the FDCP, subject to the availability of funds.

Sec. 15. Composition of the Cinema Evaluation Board.

(a) Chairperson - The Board shall have a Chairperson who shall serve for a term of two (2) years 
and shall be eligible for reappointment for a second term.

(b) Film Industry Members (20) - There shall be twenty (20) members of the Board who shall 
come from the film industry. These members shall serve for two (2) years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment for a second term.

(c) Arts, Academe, Business and other Sectors (10) - There shall be ten (10) members of the 
Board who shall come from the field of arts, the academe, business and such other sectors as 
the Council may choose or identify. These members shall serve for two (2) years and shall be 
eligible for reappointment for a second term.

Sec. 16. Initial Appointments to the Board. - In the initial appointments, the Board Chairperson 
and the first fifteen (15) members shall hold office for two (2) years and the next fifteen (15) for

Page 7 of 11

one (1) year. The President shall appoint the members of the Board from among forty (40) 
nominees submitted by the Council.

Sec. 17. Succession to Vacant Position. - Any person who succeeds to a position left vacant 
by a member shall serve only for the unexpired portion of the term, unless re-appointed. Service 
of the unexpired portion shall not be counted as a term. A successor shall be appointed from 
among the list of nominees recommended by the Council.

Sec. 18. Vice-Chairperson. - The Council, upon recommendation of the Board Chairperson, shall 
designate a Board Vice- Chairperson from among the members of the Board.

Sec. 19. Meetings. - The Board shall determine its own rules and procedures, including the 
regular date, time and venue of their meetings subject to the approval of the Council; provided, 
that the presence of the Chairperson or his/her duly designated representative who is also a 
Board member, and at least eleven (11) members, will suffice to constitute a quorum for the 
purpose of transacting business; Provided further, that the Board Chairperson will not vote unless 
to break a tie.

Sec. 20. Specific Powers and Functions. - The Board shall undertake the following tasks:

(a) Evaluate and grade films submitted to the Council subject to Section 12 of the Act;

(b) Formulate and establish a set of standards and criteria and procedures for the Cinema 
Evaluation System primarily based on the categories enumerated in Section 11(a)-(h) of the Act, 
subject to the approval of the Council; and,

(c) Such other functions which the Council may assign from time to time.

Sec. 21. Cinema Evaluation System. - The Cinema Evaluation System, subject to the approval 
of the Council, shall be based on but not limited to the following:

1. DIRECTION - effective, focused and insightful integration of the different cinematic arts and 
crafts involved in a production, utilizing the unique strengths of the medium to dynamically depict 
the film's meaning and intent.

2. SCREENPLAY - a detailed scenario containing dialogue, actions, and general atmosphere to 
be incorporated into the finished motion picture. A superior screenplay contains a blueprint in 
words of an intense and imaginative vision of the world.

3. CINEMATOGRAPHY - creative use of key elements of the film medium's visual language - 
lighting, composition, movement, camera techniques - to dynamically depict conflict, theme, story 
and character as they relate to the production's significant intent.

4. EDITING - the creative use of tempo, transitions, tonal changes and other editing techniques 
to provide the movie with the unique visual energy and style it needs to develop its plot and theme 
in cinematic terms.

5. PRODUCTION DESIGN - the effective, appropriate and imaginative representation of locale, 
period, atmosphere, costumes, make-up, hairstyles and props as they relate to character, story 
and style to actualize the film's significant objective.

6. MUSIC SCORE - the creative and appropriate use of music to enhance emotion, mood and 
atmosphere, help define character, and establish rhythm and pacing, in furtherance of the film's 
creative intent.

7. SOUND - the effective and creative interplay of dialogue, music, natural sound and recorded 
sound effects to give the film the aural values to generate audience empathy.

Page 8 of 11

8. PERFORMANCE - the clear, honest and stylistically consistent depiction of character, emotion, 
motivation, and personal and societal relationships, resulting in the creation onscreen of people 
whom viewers can understand and empathize with.

Sec. 22. Honoraria. - Each Board member shall receive an honorarium for each film actually 
evaluated, the amount of which shall be approved by the Council based on government rules and 
regulations.

Sec. 23. Prohibition and Disqualification. - Every member of the Board shall conduct 
himself/herself with utmost honesty and integrity at all times. No member of the Board shall 
participate in the grading of a film in which he/she or any member of his/her family or any relative 
within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity shall have financial or any other interest in the 
subject film. Such member has the duty to disclose fully in writing, at the time of his/her inhibition, 
the nature of his/her interest, including actual or potential conflict of interest and the reasons for 
his/her inhibition, the nature of his/her interest, including actual or potential conflict of interest and 
the reasons for his/her inhibition. Failure to do so shall be subject to formal investigation without 
prejudice to sanction.

RULE VI – APPLICATION FOR GRADING OF FILMS

Sec. 24. Pre-qualification Requirements for Feature Films. - Any feature film subject to 
grading must comply with the following:

Pre-qualification procedures and requirements.

1. The film must have its premiere screening in the Philippines intended for theatrical 
release in the Philippines.

However, the film is allowed to have:

i) 
previous screening via international and local film festivals 
ii) 
advanced private screenings free of charge and by invitation only 
iii) 
advanced screening for academic discussions or open fora free of 
charge

2. The film must not have had any previous theatrical release, free television broadcast, 
cable broadcast or video release in any commercial medium anywhere in the world.

3. The film must have a total running time of at least eighty (80) minutes;

4. The producer shall submit his/her film for grading at least seven (7) calendar days 
before its scheduled playdate.

Any application submitted less than seven (7) days before the first day of the scheduled 
playdate shall not be accepted.

5. Only Movie and Television Review and Classification Board (MTRCB) rated film shall 
be eligible to apply for grading.

Sec. 25. Procedures for Grading.

(a) The applicant producer or his/her duly authorized representative should fill-up an application 
form as provided by Cinema Evaluation and Coordination Division (CECD). Any application 
submitted less than seven (7) days before the first day of the scheduled playdate shall not be 
accepted.

(b) The properly filled-up application form together with the required screening fee determined by 
the Council should be submitted to the CECD;

Page 9 of 11

(c) The film will be reviewed, evaluated and graded by the Board within five (5) working days after 
submission of the application and shall transmit its decision to the Council within twenty-four (24) 
hours from the rendering of the decision. The grading submitted by the Board en banc to the 
Council shall be final;

(d) The film subject of review should be submitted in its entirety by 10:00 a.m. on the day of the 
scheduled viewing;

(e) In the event the producer or his/her duly authorized representative fails to deliver the film on 
time for the scheduled review, the producer shall be liable for the expenses incurred related to 
the scheduled review, including the costs of food, venue and honoraria of authorized viewers;

(f) No producer and/or his/her duly authorized representative nor any member of the cast, staff or 
crew shall be allowed to stay inside the preview room/venue(s) during the screening and 
deliberations;

(g) No gifts from any party involved in the production will be accommodated or received;

(h) If any applicant producer or his/her duly authorized representative fails to submit a scheduled 
film for review for three (3) consecutive times, the Board will not entertain his/her future application 
for that particular film;

(i) The Council shall inform the applicant producer of the Board's decision not later than twenty-
four (24) hours upon receipt thereof;

(j) The applicant producer will be furnished with the Board's decision and reviews, including a list 
of members present and the date, time and place of screening/grading;

(k) The Board and the Council shall not be allowed to cut, delete, shorten or modify in any manner 
films being graded by the Board, nor shall they be allowed to suggest cuts or deletions or any 
other form of modification to the film-makers and pre-requisites for earning the Board grading;

(l) The CEB-quality graded film, which is submitted to the Movie and Television Review and 
Classification Board (MTRCB) for audience classification after the film has been graded by the 
CEB, and for which changes are done on the film (i.e. re-editing to shorten scenes, re-mixing, 
etc.) may require a resubmission of said film to the Board to ensure that the film maintains its "A" 
or "B" grading; Provided, that the resubmission only seeks to maintain its first grading subject to 
a fee determined by the Council. Provided, further, that members of the Board who will review the 
resubmitted film will be composed of members who voted and graded the film in its first review. 
Tampering with graded film will result in cancellation of tax rebate; and,

(m) Any action taken by the Board on the film submitted for evaluation and grading may be 
reconsidered upon motion to the Board en banc within twenty-four (24) hours from receipt of 
notice of said action, and the Board en banc shall render its decision within forty-eight (48) hours 
from its receipt of the motion for reconsideration. The Board en banc must be composed of at 
least majority of the members of the Board; Provided, that an action for reconsideration shall be 
limited only to upgrading from "B" to "A", subject to a fee determined by the Council.

RULE VII – ENFORCEMENT MEASURES

Sec. 26. Plenary Powers of the Council. - For purposes of implementing the provisions of the 
Act and these Rules, the Council may:

(1) Impose administrative fines and penalties of not more than One Hundred Thousand 
(P100,000.00) Pesos for the violation of any provision of the Act and/or its IRR, committed by 
respective stakeholders;

(2) Effectively cause or initiate criminal and/or administrative prosecution of violators as stipulated. 
For this purpose, the Council is hereby empowered to issue subpoena duces tecum and enlist

Page 10 of 11

the assistance or services of the Department of Justice or the Office of the Solicitor General, 
especially inter alia, for the issuance of subpoena ad testificandum and conduct of proper 
investigation for violations of any provisions of the Act and the subsequent prosecution therefor;

(3) Call upon representatives of the different governmental agencies and other various 
associations in the movie industry to help ensure compliance with the Act and these Rules;

For this purpose, the Council may constitute Local Regulatory Council or Councils in the cities 
and municipalities throughout the country. The local council or councils shall be composed of 
representatives from the government and from the private sector, who shall all serve without 
compensation and only for such period as the Chairperson of the Council shall determine.

(4) Deputize any law enforcement agency and instrumentality of the government for assistance 
in the implementation and enforcement of its functions and orders.

RULE VIII – AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT DONATIONS

Sec. 27. Authority to Accept Donations. - The Council may accept donations, contributions, 
grants, bequests or gifts, in cash or in kind, from various sources, domestic or foreign, except 
from domestic movie producers and distributors, for purposes relevant to its functions.

Sec. 28. Use of Cash Donations. - Cash donations shall not be used to fund the personal 
services requirements of the Council. However, cash donations may be used for project hires, 
which include such expenses as honoraria and other fees.

RULE IX – ANNUAL REPORT

Sec. 29. Annual Report. - The Council shall, within ninety (90) days after the end of every fiscal 
year, submit to the President and to Congress an annual report on its compliance with, or 
accomplishments under the Act and these Rules, together with its plans and recommendations 
to improve and develop its capability to enforce the provisions of the Act and these Rules, and a 
complete accounting of transactions with respect to any funds received under these Rules.

RULE X - FINAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 30. Separability Clause. - If, for any reason, any provision of these Rules, or any part 
thereof, is declared invalid or unconstitutional, all other sections or provisions not affected thereby 
shall remain in force and effect.

Sec. 31. Amendment. – As the need arises, this IRR may be amended by the Council. Any 
amendment to this IRR shall be applicable only to all activities conducted after the date of 
effectivity of the said amendment.

Sec. 32. Repealing Clause. – All executive and administrative orders, rules and regulations, or 
part or parts thereof inconsistent with any provision of these Rules are hereby repealed, amended 
or modified accordingly.

Sec. 33. Effectivity. - These Rules shall take effect fifteen (15) days after their publication in two 
(2) national newspapers of general circulation and upon filing with the Office of the National 
Register, University of the Philippines Law Center of three (3) copies of this IRR except those, 
which pertain to self-executing provisions of these Rules.

Page 11 of 11

Approved by the Film Development Council of the Philippines ________________.

CERTIFIED BY:

RIA ANNE S. RUBIA 
   OIC, Executive Director

NOTED BY:

USEC. MARY LIZA B. DIÑO  
Chairperson/Chief Executive Officer

APPROVED during the Board of Trustees Meeting on 28 May 2020 held through 
web conference (via Zoom).

Rolando B. Tolentino  
Chairman  
National Committee on Cinema, National 
Commission on Culture and the Arts

Arsenio J. Lizaso 
President 
Cultural Center of the Philippines

Anna Karenina F. Buenafe 
Representative from  
Department of Trade and Industry

Fidel D. Pamintuan  
Representative from  
League of Cities of the Philippines

Vivian Velez 
Director General  
Film Academy of the Philippines 
(Not Present)

Danilo D. Lim 
Chairman 
Metro Manila Development Authority

Alain Del B. Pascua 
Representative from 
 Department of Education

Mary Liza B. Diño 
Chairperson and Chief Executive Director 
  Film Development Council of the Philippines