MEMORANDUM ORDER No.113

CREATING AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE TO COORDINATE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL TRAINING CENTER FOR OPERATIONAL STATISTICAL PERSONNEL.

To meet the pressing demand in government agencies for training government personnel engaged in statistical operations, especially at primary and intermediate levels, and for the purpose of coordinating plans and preparations for the eventual establishment of a National Training Center and for providing direction to the activities of the proposed Center when finally organized, an Executive Committee is hereby created which shall be composed of the following:

Chairman—The Secretary of Commerce and Industry

Vice Chairman—The Director of Statistical Coordination and Standards, National Economic Council

Members—The Director and/or Heads of the following major statistical agencies of the government:

(1) Bureau of the Census an Statistics

(2) Bureau of Agricultural Economics

(3) Department of Economic Research, Central Bank

(4) Disease Intelligence Center Department of Labor

(5) Labor Statistics Service Department of Labor

(6) The Statistical Center, University if the Philippines.

The proposed National Training Center shall have the following objectives and functions:

OBJECTIVES:

The general objective of the Center, which will function on a continuing basis, is to meet the growing needs for training of statistical personnel in all government agencies including government corporations.

More specifically, the objectives are:

1. To complement the teaching of statistics in school colleges and universities;

2. To give job-oriented courses of the in-service as well as the pro-service types to statistical personnel in the entire country in an integrated manner; and

3. To be responsible for the training of regular personnel employed on an ad-hoc basis for censuses, surveys, etc.

FUNCTIONS :

1. To standardize, organize, direct and co-ordinate the training of operational statistical personnel in the country;

2. To provide training for primary and intermediate statistical personnel on probation;

3. To organize, direct and coordinate research into statistical operations, functions and organizations;

4. To provide refresher courses for senior officers on statistical operations;

5. To provide advisory service on the planning and conduct of in-service on job-oriented training courses and on other training matters;

6. To train and/or provide regional centers within the country with trainers;

7. To participate in international statistical training activities and coordinate such activities with training within the nation; and

8. To provide for the possible expansion of such of the Center to enable it to serve as a sub-regional training center for the training of other statistical personnel from other countries in the region in accordance with arrangements to be made later with the U.N. Statistical Office, the ECAFE and other specialized agencies of the United Nations.

By authority of the President:

RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Manila, February 5, 1965

Source : Supreme Court Library