MEMORANDUM ORDER No. 47

GOVERNING THE ORGANIZATION OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND CERTAIN GENERAL MATTERS OF PROCEDURE THEREIN.

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 79 (B) of the Revised Administrative Code, this Memorandum Order is hereby promulgated for the guidance of all concerned.

I . ORGANIZATION OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

1. The Office of the President shall consist of the following administrative units:

Office of the Executive Secretary Office of the Assistant Executive Secretary Cabinet Secretariat Staff Secretariat Office of the Private Secretary Household Office of the Social Secretary Museum Office of the Legal Adviser Legal Office Administrative Division Records Division Malacañang Library Office of Economic Affairs Finance Division Accounting Division Businessman’s Day Staff Office of the Legislative Secretary Local Governments Division Common Man’s Day Staff Buildings and Grounds Division Malacañang Clinic Malacañang Garage Office of the Presidential Assistant on Foreign Affairs Protocol Division Office of the Presidential Assistant on Public Works Office of the Presidential Assistant on Military Affairs Office of the Presidential Assistant on Community Development Provost Office Aides Office Appointments Office Presidential Guards Battalion Presidential Security Service

2. It shall also exercise supervisory authority over the following executive agencies and others which may hereafter be created and not specifically assigned under any of the executive departments.

National Economic Council Program Implementation Agency National Science Development Board Civil Service Commission Budget Commission Press Office Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency Commission on National Integration Office of Economic Coordination Presidential Anti-Graft Committee Philippine Veterans Administration National Civil Defense Administration Philippine Heraldry Committee Civil Service Board of Appeals Board of Liquidators Lighthouse Board Emergency Employment Administration Philippine National FAO Committee National Planning Commission Board of Technical Surveys and Maps Rice and Corn Administration Board of Industries Reparations Commission Electrification Administration Philippine Virginia Tobacco Administration Social Security System Tariff Commission Central Bank of the Philippines Development Bank of the Philippines Mindanao Development Authority Home Financing Commission Agricultural Credit and Cooperative Financing Administration Land Tenure Administration Board of Censors for Motion Pictures Games and Amusements Board UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines Philippine Broadcasting Service National Intelligence Coordinating Agency Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office Philippine National Red Cross University of the Philippines University of Mindanao Mindanao Agricultural College Mindanao Institute of Technology Philippine School of Arts and Trades Philippine Normal College Philippine College of Commerce Central Luzon Agricultural College Samar Institute of Technology Committee on Schoolhouse Program

3. Subject to the supervision and control of the President, the Executive Secretary shall carry out the functions assigned by law to the Executive Office and shall perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the President. He shall have direct supervision over the administrative units in the Office of the President enumerated in paragraph No. 1, and supervisory administrative responsibility for matters coming from the executive agencies listed in paragraph No. 2, above. In the exercise of these duties, he shall be assisted by three Assistant Executive Secretaries, one of whom shall have charge over legal and administrative matters, one over economic and financial matters, and the third over social and political matters. They shall have direct, immediate supervision over specific administrative units as follows:

a. The Assistant Executive Secretary for legal and administrative matters shall have direct supervision over—

The Office of the Legal Adviser The Legal Office The Administrative Division The Records Division Malacañang Library

and shall also have immediate administrative responsibility for matters coming from the following executive agencies:

Civil Service Commission Board of Examiners PCAPE Presidential Anti-Graft Committee Philippine Veterans Administration National Civil Defense Administration Philippine Heraldry Committee Civil Service Board of Appeals Quezon Memorial Committee Board of Liquidators Lighthouse Board

b. The Assistant Executive Secretary for economic and financial matters shall have direct supervision over—

The Office of Economic Affairs The Finance Division The Accounting Division The Businessman’s Day Staff

and shall also have immediate administrative responsibility for matters coming from the following executive agencies:

National Economic Council Program Implementation Agency Budget Commission Office of Economic Coordination Emergency Employment Administration Philippine National FAO Committee National Planning Commission Board of Technical Surveys and Maps Rice and Corn Administration Board of Industries Reparations Commission Electrification Administration Philippine Virginia Tobacco Administration Social Security System Tariff Commission Central Bank of the Philippines Development Bank of the Philippines Mindanao Development Authority Home Financing Commission Agricultural Credit and Cooperative Financing Administration

c. The Assistant Executive Secretary for social and political matters shall have direct supervision over—

The Office of the Legislative Secretary The Local Governments Division The Common Man’s Day Staff The Buildings and Grounds Division The Malacañang Clinic The Malacañang Garage

and shall also have immediate administrative responsibility for matters coming from the following executive agencies:

National Science Development Board Social Welfare Administration Commission on National Integration Press Office Land Tenure Administration Board of Censors for Motion Pictures Games and Amusement Board UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines Philippine Broadcasting Service National Intelligence Coordinating Agency Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office Philippine National Red Cross University of the Philippines University of Mindanao Mindanao Agricultural College Mindanao Institute of Technology Philippine School of Arts and Trades Philippine Normal College Philippine College of Commerce Central Luzon Agricultural College Samar Institute of Technology Committee on Schoolhouse Program

4. This organizational arrangement is graphically depicted in the attached Organizational Chart marked Appendix No. 1.

5. In aid of the President’s power of supervision and control over the executive departments, the three Assistant Secretaries shall have immediate administrative coordinating responsibility for matters coming from the different departments and the General Auditing Office, as follows:

a. Assistant Executive Secretary for legal and administrative matters:

Department of Justice Department of National Defense Department of General Services General Auditing Office

b. Assistant Executive Secretary for economic and financial matters:

Department of Finance Department of Agriculture and National Resources Department of Public Works and Communications Department of Foreign Affairs Department of Commerce and Industry

c. Assistant Executive Secretary for social and political matters:

Department of Labor Department of Education Department of Health

6. The Executive Secretary shall, by memorandum order, specify which of the above organizational groups each of the incumbent executive Secretaries shall have direct supervision over, for the information and guidance of all concerned.

7. This Memorandum Order shall be effective as of July 1, 1963, and amends accordingly Memorandum Order No. 1 dated January 7, 1958, entitled “Governing the Organization and Functions of the Executive Office and General Matters of Procedure Therein.”

By authority of the President:

RUFINO G. HECHANOVA Executive Secretary

Manila, September 3, 1963.

Source : Supreme Court Library