MEMORANDUM ORDER No. 94

REQUIRING CERTAIN UNITS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT TO MAINTAIN “STAND-BY” PERSONNEL AFTER THE REGULAR OFFICE HOURS AND DURING SATURDAYS, SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS.

In line with the policy to reduced expenses in the Office of the President, payment of compensation adjustment for services rendered beyond the regular office hours under Memorandum Order No. 35 of this Office, series of 1963, is hereby discounted effective as of August 1, 1964.

The exigencies of the service, however, require that a sufficient number of personnel in certain divisions or units render service after the regular office hours and during Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The following administrative units in the Office of the President are, therefore, required to maintain such a “stand-by” force in number as indicated hereunder, effective as of August 1, 1964:

Number of Employees or Units per Day

Division/Primary Unit

In lieu of the compensation adjustment previously authorized, those rendering overtime service shall be entitled to the payment of meal allowance at P2.00 per unit in accordance with the following time schedule:

For Regular Working Days

For Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays

For the janitors, the time schedule shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and from 12:00 to 7:00 p.m.

In order to attain flexibility in the assignment essential to meet the needs of the service, the chief of division or unit concerned shall schedule the personnel under him for overtime service in such manner as the requirements of his unit may demand, provided the total unit quota allocated to his division or unit for any given period is not exceeded.

Officials and employees authorized to draw transportation and representation allowances, as well as those salary ranges of 48 and above, who may be required to render overtime service are not entitled to meal allowance for such service.

Each chief of division or primary unit concerned shall submit to the Executive Secretary, for approval, overtime service schedule for his division or unit. Said schedules shall be submitted through the Administrative Division which shall also have custody of the schedules.

By authority of the President:

CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, August 17, 1964

Source: Supreme Court Library