MEMORANDUM ORDER No. 82

REQUIRING THE SUBMISSION OF REPORTS OF OPERATING UNITS ENGAGED IN THE ANTI-SMUGGLING CAMPAIGN.

In order to coordinate with dispatch and efficiency the activities of all operating units engaged in the anti-smuggling campaign, it is desired that the following offices which have such operating units submit reports as indicated hereunder to the Chairman, Anti-Smuggling Committee (CASC) addressed at Malacañang, Manila:

Department of Foreign Affairs Department of Finance Department of Justice Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources Department of National Defense Department of Commerce & Industry Central Bank of the Philippines Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency (PCAPE) National Intelligence Coordinating Agency Presidential Anti-Graft Committee

1. Spot Information Report.— A type of report which merits the immediate attention of the CASC Chairman due to due to its sensitivity and importance or because it requires the prompt coordination with the operating units. It will be submitted as soon as the information is obtained and may be transmitted by wire, special courier or thru any approved means of transmission consistent with security. It consists of informative items (what, where, when, how, by whom and action taken, if any) covering pure and/or technical smuggling, specifically:

a. Information which has a direct bearing on national security.

b. Information which may affect our foreign relations.

c. Information which may cause undue embarrassment to the government.

d. Information of immediate interest to the other government agencies.

e. Information which involves government officials and important persons in the private sector.

2. Weekly anti-smuggling report.— This type of report consists of intelligence summary and/or summary of operations conducted during the period from Monday to Sunday and should be delivered to the CASC Chairman on the following Monday:

a. AFP and Bureau of Customs—See Annex “A”

b. Other Units—Applicable portions of Annex “A”

3. Special report.— This report covers a specific field of smuggling activities. It could be a follow-up of a spot information report, a report as called for by the CASC Chairman, or a report initiated by the operating units.

By authority of the President:

CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, May 19, 1964

Source : Supreme Court Library