MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 69

CREATING THE INTERNAL AUDIT DIVISION IN THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE

Pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 3456, there is hereby created the Internal Audit Division in the Executive Office under the direct administrative supervision and control of the Executive Secretary and the Assistant Executive Secretaries to administer the internal audit service established by the aforementioned Act. This Unit shall perform staff functions and be responsible for instituting and conducting a program of internal audit of the Office of the President and the agencies which are within its auditorial jurisdiction. More particularly, it shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Determine the degrees of the reliability of the accounts and statistics for the Office of the President:

b. Determine the extent to which money and property of the Office of the President are safeguarded from losses;

c. Determine the extent of compliance with the established policies, regulations, plans, and procedures for the Office;

d. Review and appraise fiscal policies, regulations,plans and procedures for the Office;

e . Review and appraise internal records in terms of their adequacy, efficiency and effectiveness as regards control of funds;

f . Review and appraise performance within the framework of the fiscal policies of the Office and regulations, plans, and procedures pertaining thereto;

g. Prescribe, with the approval of the Executive Secretary, proper keeping of records in aid of efficient internal auditing operations;

h. Submit directly to the Executive Secretary and/or the Assistant Executive Secretary concerned, any report which it may deem proper;

i. Act in an advisory capacity to the Office of the President and the agencies under its auditorial jurisdiction in so far as its functions are concerned.

The Internal Audit Division shall have for its personnel qualified officials and employees in theOffice of the President who may be designated or assigned thereto by the Executive Secretary uponrecommendation of the Financial Assistant.

This Memorandum Order shall be effective as of January 1, 1964 and further amends accordingly Memorandum Order No. 1, dated January 1, 1958,entitled ”GOVERNING THE ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE AND GENERAL MATTERS OF PROCEDURE THEREIN.

By authority of the President:

CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, March 3, 1964

Source: Supreme Court Library