MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 215

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF VICTORY DAY IN NEGROS ISLAND ON SEPTEMBER 9, 1995

WHEREAS, September 9, 1995 marks the 50th Anniversary of Victory Day in Negros Island during World Word II with the surrender of estimated 12,000 enemy soldiers under General Takaise Kono at Sta. Rosa, Murcia;

WHEREAS, it took the combined efforts of the American Forces, the 7MD Guerilla Forces, the Free Civil Government of Negros and the majority of the civilian population to successfully liberate the Island;

WHEREAS, the Battle of Patag, in Silay City, which preceded the surrender of General Kono’s outfit may be regarded as the last battle of Word War II in the Pacific, considering that the entire Japanese Imperial Forces surrendered formally to Gen. Douglas MacArthur aboard the USS Missouri on September 2, 1945 while the Battle at Patag was still raging;

WHEREAS, this event should be appropriately observed to promote, preserve and memorialize the principles, ideals and deeds of Filipino military veterans as a means of enhancing patriotism and love of country, especially among the youth of the land;

WHEREAS, the commemoration of this event should be focused on the values of freedom and lasting peace for which Filipino war veterans fought valiantly, many of whom paid the ultimate sacrifice;

WHEREAS, there is a need to coordinate all activities that are envisioned to foster nationalism among Filipinos, particularly with that of the National Centennial Commission, which was created pursuant to E.O. 128 dated October 4, 1993, to act as the principal coordinator for all activities related to the Centennial Celebrations of Philippine Independence;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a National Executive Committee. – There is hereby constituted a National Executive Committee on the Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of Victory Day in Negros Island,  hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to be composed of the following:

(1) The Secretary of National Defense, as Chairman; (2) The Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, as Vice-Chairman (3) The Secretary of Tourism (4) The Secretary of foreign Affairs; (5) The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports; (6) The Secretary of transportation and Communications; (7) The Secretary of Public Works and Highways; (8) The Secretary of Budget and Management; (9) The Press Secretary; (10) Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines; (11) Chief, Philippine National Police; (12) Administrator, Philippine Veterans Affairs Office; (13) Chairman, National Historical Institute; (14) Director, Philippine Information Agency; (15) Governor, Province of Negros Occidental; (16) Governor, Province of Negros Oriental; (17) Governor, Province of Siquijor; (18) Mayor, Bacolod City; (19) Mayor, Silay City; (20) Mayor, Murcia, Negros Occidental; (21) President, Veterans Federation of the Philippines; (22) National President, Boy Scouts, of the Philippines; (23) National President, Girl Scouts of the Philippines; (24) Chief, Military Shrines Service; (25) President, Sons and Daughters of Veterans, Inc., (26) Two (2) Representatives of Non-Government Organizations.

SEC. 2. Functions of the Committee – The Committee shall take charge of the preparations for the 50th Anniversary of Victory Day in Negros Island on 9 September 1995. For this purpose, it shall have the following functions:

(a) Formulate all the programs, projects and activities that shall be conducted in observance of the 50th Anniversary of Victory Day in Negros Island;

(b) Prepare the implementing guidelines for and orchestrate and coordinate the implementation of all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(c) Source funds and prepare the budget which shall be required by the Committee in the discharge of its functions; and

(d) Perform such other tasks as may be given by the President.

SEC. 3. Operational Relationships – In the conduct of all programs, projects and activities for all observance of the 50th Anniversary of Victory Day In Negros Island on 9 September 1995, the Committee shall coordinate with the National Centennial Commission.

The Committee is also authorized to call upon any department, bureau, agency, office and other instrumentality of the Government for assistance, as well as invite non-governmental organizations as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.

SEC. 4. Creations of Sub-Committees – The Committee may form sub-committees as it may deem necessary to effectively carry out its duties and responsibilities.

SEC. 5. Technical and Secretariat Support. – The Department of National Defense shall provide technical, secretariat and administrative support to the Committee.

SEC. 6. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4 th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 39]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.