MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 210

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 9 (S. 1992) ENTITLED “CREATING AN AD-HOC COMMITTEE ON THE DISPOSITION OF IDLE PROPERTIES OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT LOCATED IN THE PHILIPPINES”

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, through its various departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities, including government-own and controlled corporations, owns real properties nationwide which continue to be idle and/or are underutilized;

WHEREAS , considering the scene resources of government and so as not to depend solely on government appropriations, ,the most optical mode and best use of idle and/or underutilized properties should be determined and should be developed, at the least cost to government, for the construction of new government buildings and/or business establishments, among others; and,

WHEREAS , there is an Ad-Hoc Committee on the Disposition of Idle Properties of the Philippine Government located in the Philippines created by virtue of Administrative Order No. 9, dated 11 September 1992, to formulate action plans and advise the President on the disposition/conveyance of idle real properties;

WHEREAS , the Department of Environment and Natural Resources was created, by virtue of Executive Order No. 192 (s. 1987), to exercise, among others, exclusive jurisdiction on the management and disposition of all lands of the public domain.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Administrative Order No. 9 (s. 1992) as follows:

SECTION 1 . Section 2 of Administrative Order No.9 (s 1992) is hereby amended to read as follows:

“ Sec. 2. Composition . The Committee shall be composed of the secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) as Chairman, and the secretaries of Budget and Management (DBM), Justice (DOJ), Finance (DOF), National Economic Development Authority (NEDA), Chairmen of the Committee on Privatization (COP) and of the Presidential Commision on Good Government (PCGG), Head of the Presidential Management Staff (PMS), Commissioner of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), Administrator of the Land Registration Authority (LRA), and General Manager of the Public Estates Authority (PEA) as members.”

SEC. 2 . Section 3 of Administrative Order No. 9 (s. is hereby amended to read as follows:

“ Sec. 3. Powers and Functions . The Committee shall have, among others, the following powers and functions:

a) To review and complete the existing inventory for real properties located in the Philippines and owned by the Government, through its departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations;

b) To study the problems and recommend solutions regarding the development and disposition of government lands and assets in the country;

c) To formulate and action plan for the disposition/conveyance of properties, including the identification of, at least, ten (10) government lands which can be developed for government offices and/or business establishments;

d) To recommend actions plans for the disposition/conveyance of properties to the President; and,

e) To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for assistance that it may require in the performance of its mandate.

The Committee shall give priority to the Build-Operate/Transfer (BOT) and related schemes as the primary mode of disposition for idle properties.”

SEC. 3 . Section 4 of Administrative Order No. 9 (s. 1992) is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 4 Technical/Secretariat Support . The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), in coordination with the Presidential Management Staff (PMS), shall provide technical and secretariat support to the Committee.”

SEC. 4 . Two (2) new sections between Sections 4 and 5 of Administrative Order No. 9 are hereby inserted as follows:

“Sec. 6. Turn Over of Records . To ensure continuity and to avoid unnecessary duplication of efforts, all the records and outputs of the previous Committee shall be turned over to the reconstituted Committee, upon effectivity of this Order.

Sec. 7. Submission of Records . The Committee shall submit quarterly reports to the Office of the President, through the Executive Secretary, on the status of activities in pursuance of its mandate.”

SEC. 5. Section 5 of Administrative Order No. 9 is redenominated as Section 8

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11 th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.