MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 2

DIRECTING THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL TO REVITALIZE THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL AND THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY AND TO REORIENT THEIR ACTIVITIES TOWARDS ATTAINING BROADER NATIONAL GOALS

WHEREAS, national security and political stability continue to be our country’s gravest problem, impeding and imperilling our efforts at national development;

WHEREAS, our problems of national security and stability cannot be resolved by military action alone, but require the active integration and coordination of development and peace-oriented initiatives;

WHEREAS, the restoration of political stability and the enhancement of economic development are interdependent, requiring the vigorous participation and support of all the departments and agencies of government;

WHEREAS, political stability and economic development are essential to the success of the Government’s program to empower the people and raise the quality of their lives;

WHEREAS, many national intelligence communities worldwide are reassessing and realigning their priorities and capabilities in the light of reduced political and military tensions and heightened global trade, as well as commercial and technological competition;

WHEREAS, the formulation of integrated plans and policies on matters affecting national security and political stability is entrusted mainly to the National Security Council (NSC), supported by the Intelligence Community;

WHEREAS, the NSC and the Intelligence Community must be strengthened, to meet the altered and increasing requirements of the national leadership for information and advise to guide it in policy-making on matters affecting national security, political stability and economic progress;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct the Director General of the National Security Council to revitalize the National Security Council and the Intelligence Community and to reorient their activities towards attaining broader national goals consistent with the following directives and guidelines:

1. Reorientation of the Intelligence Community. The NSC Director General shall undertake measures to reorient the National Security Council and the Intelligence Community from its limited concerns with political and military threats to broader national goals including social and economic development. Said measures should include provisions for assistance to other departments and agencies of the government in its efforts towards improving the nation’s economic and trade prospects, its access to markets and technologies, and its transformation into a newly industrialized country by the end of this century.

2. Upgrading the NSC Secretariat. The NSC Director General shall upgrade the capability of the NSC Secretariat. Towards this end he may engage the services of specialists and experts in the field of national security, international affair and strategic studies.

3. Advisory Functions of the NSC Director General. Upon recommendation of the National Intelligence Board, the NSC Director General shall submit to the President proposed legislation and Presidential issuances pertaining to national security and political stability. He shall prioritize studies and proposals on the following:

(a) Professionalization of the national security and intelligence services; and

(b) Establishment of an autonomous and independent institution that will conduct strategic and international research and studies for use by both the private and public sector in its policy-making efforts.

4. Assistance to Other Agencies. The NSC Director General shall extend, upon request of the department and agency head concerned, whatever assistance the other departments and agencies of the government may require to develop their capabilities for gathering data vital to policy-making and to safeguard their facilities, personnel, property and records.

5. Supervision and Control Over the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency. The NSC Director General shall implement Administrative Order No. 149, issued on December 20, 1989, and ensure that the Intelligence Community judiciously use its limited funds and other resources to collect, evaluate and interpret information on the various obstacles to, and opportunities for, attaining national goals. Acting for and on behalf of the President, he shall assume supervision and control over the activities of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA) and preside over the meetings of the National Intelligence Board (NIB), whose members and operating procedures he shall prescribe.

6. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) PETER D. GARRUCHO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.