MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 357

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF THE CIVIL AVIATION CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL

WHEREAS, the local aviation industry has vital contributions to national development efforts, particularly in providing the needed infrastructure support to spur local trade and commerce, investments and tourism, thereby generating increased incomes for and job opportunities in the economy.

WHEREAS, there is a need to further enhance private sector participation in the national efforts towards the growth and development of the local aviation industry, specifically in achieving for the country a transport and tourism hub status;

WHEREAS, there is a need for an effective coordinating mechanism between and among the government and the private sector to further enhance the complementation of their efforts for the development of the local aviation industry;

WHEREAS, the National Development Summit on 10 July 1997 has recommended the creation of a government-private sector consultative forum where such collaboration and cooperation shall be enhanced and institutionalized;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order;

Section 1. Creation of the Civil Aviation Consultative Council. There is hereby created a Civil Aviation Consultative Council under the administrative supervision of the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC), hereinafter referred to as the Council, which shall serve as a consultative mechanism between the government and private sector on policies and programs on civil aviation.

Section 2. Composition. The Council shall be composed of the Heads of the following agencies or their duly designated representatives, with the rank of at least Undersecretary or Deputy Head:

The heads of the federations of civil aviation-related agencies and organizations in the private sector, namely: the Federation of Aviation Organizations; Air Safety Foundation of the Philippines; Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association of the Philippines; PAF Aviation Cadets Alumni Association; and Society of Aerospace Engineers of the Philippines; and of the major domestic commercial airlines in the country, shall also be members of the Council.

To enhance private sector participation in the Council, the Chairman may designate, from among the private sector members, the Council’s Co-Chairman, subject to the approval of the President.

Section 3. Duties and Functions. The Council shall have the following duties and functions:

1. Formulate policy recommendations to serve as inputs in the review and formulation of government policies and programs on the local aviation industry;

2. Identify and recommend legislative measures necessary in the furtherance of the growth and development of the industry;

3. Provide a forum for the resolution of issues and concerns affecting the industry, including those pertaining to its competitiveness;

4. Serve as a feedback mechanism between the government and the private sector on developments related to the industry; and

5. Pursue other functions which may be deemed necessary by the President.

Section 4. Initial Activities. As its initial outputs, the Council shall review and submit to the Office of the President, through the DOTC Secretary, not later than 30 September 1997, its comments and recommendations on the existing Civil Aviation Master Plan, the Philippine Transport Strategy, and the Master Plans for New International Airports, to serve as inputs in their finalization and/or updating.

Section 5. Technical and Administrative Support. The DOTC shall serve as the Secretariat to the Council. As such, it shall provide technical and administrative support to the Council to enable it to effectively discharge its duties and functions. In line with this, the DOTC may tap the support and assistance of the concerned government agencies and instrumentalities.

Section 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. The Council shall immediately formulate and adopt the necessary implementing rules and regulations for the effective and efficient implementation of the provisions of this Order.

Section 7. Funding. The DOTC, subject to applicable accounting and auditing regulations, shall provide the Council’s and the Secretariat’s budgetary outlay for their initial year of operation. The operational budget for their succeeding years shall be sourced from the contributions of the Council members in the amount as may be agreed upon by the Council.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.