MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 92

CREATING A TASK FORCE TO FORMULATE SHORT- AND LONG-TERM PLANS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF PAYATAS IN QUEZON CITY

WHEREAS, the Ramos Administration has adopted a vision of development called Philippines 2000.

WHEREAS, the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan, 1993-1998 (MTPDP) approved by the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Board, shall be the basis for all development activities of the government during said Plan Period;

WHEREAS, Payatas 2000 envisions to promote an accelerated development consistent with the concept of sustainable development, hence, the need to create a body that shall formulate short-term, medium-term and long-term plans for the area and address relevant issues such as the closure of the Payatas dumpsite and incorporating the new disposal system of the area into the overall Solid Waste Management Program for Metro Manila;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of a Task Force on Payatas . There is hereby created a Task Force on Payatas.

Section 2. Duties and Responsibilities . The Task Force shall undertake, among others, the following duties and responsibilities:

a. To formulate short-term, medium term and long-term plans, strategies, programs and projects for Payatas, in Quezon City, particularly for the Payatas dumpsite, in coordination with the Quezon City government, pertinent government agencies and legislators, if necessary, based on the existing priorities of the government.

b. To come up with the final development plan for Payatas and submit the same to the President for approval.

c. To coordinate with national line agencies on programs/projects implementation.

d. To recommend to the President matters necessary for the development of Payatas.

Section 3. Composition . The Task Force shall be composed of the Heads of the following agencies:

Members:

Quezon City Government Metro Manila Authority Department of Public Works and Highways Department of Environment and Natural Resources Presidential Commission on Urban Poor Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council Presidential Task Force on Waste Management Other concerned agencies, non-government agencies and the private sector

Section 4. Technical and Administrative Support . The Quezon City government shall provide technical and administrative support to the Task Force. Whenever it is deemed necessary, the Task Force, through the Chairman, may tap the assistance of other government agencies, private/civic organizations and concerned members of Congress, for the furtherance of its mandate.

Section 5. Submission of the Final Report . The Task Force is hereby given until December 1, 1993 to submit the final development plan for Payatas to the President.

Section 6. Budget . There is no additional budget outlay appropriated on account of the creation of this Task Force. The Chairman and its member-agencies shall perform their respective activities as part of their normal and relevant functions without additional compensation for their designated representatives.

Section 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 20th of October in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.