MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 192

CREATING A MULTI-SECTORAL/AGENCY TASK FORCE TO FORMULATE THE COMPREHENSIVE EMPLOYMENT STRATEGY PROGRAM

WHEREAS, it is the policy of government to vigorously promote employment and provide job opportunities so as to bring down unemployment from 8.8% to 6.5%;

WHEREAS, the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan 1993-1998 has adopted the strategies of global competitiveness, people empowerment and sustainable development as the path to economic growth, poverty alleviation and human development;

WHEREAS, recent developments like the formation of ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APC), and the World Trade Organization (WTO), among others, have given rise to opportunities for sustainable economic growth and full harnessing of its benefits for full employment generation; and,

WHEREAS, the reduction in the unemployment rate may be attained through the formulation of a Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program which shall, among others, rationalize employment policies, strategies and programs.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the formulation of the Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program.

SECTION 1. Creation of a Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force to Formulate the Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program. A Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force to Formulate the Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program, hereinafter referred to as the Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force, is hereby created.

SEC. 2. Composition. The Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force to be Chaired by the National Economic and Development Authority and Co-Chaired by the Department of Labor and Employment, shall have the representatives from the following agencies/sectors as members:

a) Department of Trade and Industry; b) Department of Agriculture; c) Department of Agrarian Reform; d) Department of Interior and Local Government; e) Department of Budget and Management; f) Department of Foreign Affairs; g) Department of Transportation and Communications; h) Department of Science and Technology; i) Technological Education and Skills Development Authority; j) Presidential Adviser for Youth Affairs; k) Presidential Management Staff; l) Labor Sector (2 representatives); m) Employers Sector (2 representatives); and, n) Academe (1 representative).

All government agencies herein represented shall have as their permanent representative to the Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force an official with a rank not lower than Assistant Secretary and a permanent alternate with a rank not lower than a Director. Other members shall be designated by their respective organizations.

In the performance of its duties and responsibilities, the Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force shall consult with appropriate Committees of both the Senate of the Philippines and House of Representatives and with all other government agencies.

SEC. 3. Functions. The Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a) Prepare the terms of reference (TOR) and methodology for the conduct of the study on the Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program, including timetables. The activities shall include consultation with concerned sectors and multi-sectoral groups;

b) Undertake or cause the conduct and ensure the completion of the study following the approved terms of reference and methodology;

c) Conduct initial multi-sectoral consultations on the results of the study, and institute appropriate amendments based on the results of the consultations;

d) Present the final Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program to the President and during the Employment Summit to be held in August 1995.

The Multi-Sectoral Task Force/Agency may call upon any department, agency and government instrumentality to assist it in the performance of its duties and responsibilities.

SEC. 4. Secretariat Support. The National Economic and Development Authority shall provide technical and administrative support to the Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force.

The Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force may create such working groups as may be necessary.

SEC. 5. Completion of the Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program. The Comprehensive Employment Strategy Program shall be completed by the end of July 1995 and presented for consultation and finalization in the Employment Summit to be held in August 1995.

SEC. 6. Funding. Funds necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Order shall be set aside by the Department of Budget and Management from the contributions of member agencies, as may be agreed upon by the Multi-Sectoral/Agency Task Force.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of May, in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.