MALACAÑANG MANILA

Administrative Order No. 286

RECONSTITUTING TASK FORCE MALMAR AS THE CENTRAL MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE

WHEREAS, it is government’s policy to ensure that the implementation of development programs and projects is undertaken in a coordinated and synchronized manner to provide maximum benefits to our people;

WHEREAS, certain areas of Central Mindanao, specifically within Cotabato and Maguindanao, were beset by peace and order problems arising out of the implementation of the Malitubog-Maridagao Irrigation Project in Carmen, North Cotabato and adjacent areas;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 155, dated 8 November 1994, created Task Force MALMAR to undertake an integrated development and security/law enforcement operations to facilitate normalization of the peace and order condition and the socio-economic development of Carmen, Aleosan, Pikit, and Kabakan, all in Cotabato, Pagalungan in Maguindanao, and other areas in the vicinity that may be subsequently included in the area of responsibility of the Task Force; and

WHEREAS, there is need to continue and pursue the development; work being undertaken by Task Force MALMAR in order to sustain improvements in the living conditions of the people in MALMAR area and the whole of Cotabato and Maguindanao.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. RECONSTITUTION OF TASK FORCE MALMAR AS CENTRAL MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . Task Force MALMAR (created though Administrative Order No. 155, dated 8 November 1994) is hereby reconstituted as the Central Mindanao Development Task Force for the integrated and synchronized implementation of special economic and social development projects in Central Mindanao, specifically the whole of Cotabato and Maguindanao.

SEC. 2. COMPOSITION OF THE CENTRAL MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . The Central Mindanao Development Task Force shall be headed by a representative /officer from the Department of Agriculture (DA) to be designated by the Secretary of Agriculture, or any individual designated/appointed by the President, with representatives/personnel from the following agencies as members to be designated by their respective Secretaries:

a. Department of Agriculture (DA);

b. Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH);

c. Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)

d. Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR)

e. Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR);

f. Department of Budget and Management (DBM);

g. Department of Energy (DOE);

h Department of Trade and Industry (DTI);

i. Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD);

j. Department of Health (DOH); and

k. Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC)

The Central Mindanao Development Task Force may invite representatives from the Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) and Regional Development Council-XII, local government units, non-government organizations and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups to act as consultants and/or advisers to the Task Force.

SEC. 3. FUNCTIONS OF THE CENTRAL MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . The Central Mindanao Development Task Force shall have the following functions:

a. Pursue the implementation of economic and social development programs and projects undertaken by the Task Force MALMAR created under Administrative Order No. 155 (dated 8 November 1994).

b. Implement a multi-agency development program to promote the sustained economic and social development of Central Mindanao, specifically the whole of Cotabato and Maguindanao, in consultation with concerned local government units, national government agencies, non-government organizations and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups;

c. Adopt a process of maximum consultation with local government units, other national government agencies, non-government organizations and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups in the preparation, updating, and implementation of economic and social development programs and projects for Central Mindanao, specifically the whole of Cotabato and Maguindanao;

e. Cause, oversee, and facilitate the formulation and implementation of special economic and social development projects for Central Mindanao, specifically the whole of Cotabato and Maguindanao;

f. Formulate innovative schemes to provide opportunities for the private sector to pursue development projects within Central Mindanao, specifically the whole of Cotabato and Maguindanao;

g. Pool, manage, and coordinate government resources and immediately implement identified priority economic and social development programs and projects in Central Mindanao, specifically the whole of Cotabato and Maguindanao;

h. Submit regular accomplishment reports to the President; and

i Perform such other tasks as may be assigned by the President.

SEC. 4. SECRETARIAT/PROJECT MANAGEMENT GROUP . The Central Mindanao Development Task Force shall have a Secretariat/Project Management Group composed of a representative/officer from the DA to be designated by the Secretary of Agriculture or any individual designated/appointed by the President (who will also act as Executive Director) and representatives/personnel from the member-agencies of the Task Force to be designated by their respective Secretaries. The Secretaries. The Secretariat/Project Management Group shall have the following functions:

a Manage and oversee the planning and implementation on the ground of development projects identified by the Task Force;

b. Liaise with various national government agencies, local government units, non-government organization and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups to ensure the timely and successful implementation of development projects identified by the Task Force;

c. Consolidate/integrated various Task Force projects and activities;

d. Provide over-all technical and secretariat support to the Task Force; and

e. Submit regular reports to the Task Force

SEC. 5. PERSONNEL AND RESOURCES . The member agencies of the Central Mindanao Development Task Force shall contribute equipment and personnel (on detail) to the Task Force and the Secretariat/Project Management Group. All member-agencies of the Central Mindanao Development Task Force shall contribute funds for the operation of the Task Force and the Secretariat/Project Management Group.

SEC. 6. LINKAGING WITH MILITARY AND POLICE . The concerned military and police units in the areas covered by the Central Mindanao Development Task Force shall provide assistance, as may be appropriate, to maintain peace and order in the area.

SEC. 7. REPEALING CLAUSE . All Administrative Orders, rules and regulations, and other similar issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. EFFECTIVITY This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of September in the Year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.