MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 9

CREATING AN AD-HOC COMMITTEE ON THE DISPOSITION OF IDLE PROPERTIES OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT LOCATED IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, through its departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, owns various real properties throughout the country;

WHEREAS, some of these properties are lying idle and/or are underutilized;

WHEREAS, considering the scarce resources of the Government, the proceeds for the disposition of these properties could be used to finance important government programs, such as the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program, low cost housing and other poverty-alleviation programs;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to create a group that shall formulate an action plan for the study and disposition of these properties;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Ad-Hoc Committee . — There is hereby created an Ad-Hoc Committee under the Office of the President to advise the President on the disposition of real properties located in the Philippines and owned by the Government, through its departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations.

SEC. 2. Composition . — The Committee shall be composed of the Executive Secretary as Chairman, and the Secretaries of Justice, Finance, Environment and Natural Resources, and the Chairman of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board as members.

SEC. 3. Powers and Functions. — The Committee shall have, among others, the following powers and functions:

a) To conduct an inventory of real properties located in the Philippines and owned by the Government, through its departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations;

b) To review the studies prepared by the Inter-Agency Task Force on Integrated Planning of Government Lands in Metro Manila created under Memorandum Order No. 370, series of 1991;

c) To study the problems regarding the development and disposition of government lands and assets in the country;

d) To recommend to the President, after studies, an action plan for the disposition of each of these properties;

e) To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for assistance that it may require in the performance of its mandate.

SEC. 4. Technical/Secretariat Support . — The Presidential Management Staff shall provide technical and secretariat support to the Committee.

SEC. 5. Effectivity . — This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.