MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 315

RECONSTITUTING AND EXPANDING THE FUNCTIONS OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE TO ASSIST THE NATIONAL MUSEUM AND RENAMING IT AS THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE TO ASSIST THE NATIONAL MUSEUM, NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND NATIONAL LIBRARY

WHEREAS, the Presidential Committee to Assist the National Museum was constituted pursuant to Administrative Order No. 246 dated 26 January 1996 to formulate a comprehensive strategy/plan and source funds for the rehabilitation and development of the National Museum, in coordination with the private sector;

WHEREAS, the National Centennial Commission which was created pursuant to Executive Order No. 128 dated 04 October 1993 has created a Committee on the National Museum, National Library and National Archives to formulate a comprehensive plan and source funds for a Complex to house the National Museum, National Library and National Archives; and,

WHEREAS, to ensure the completion and synchronization of the plans for the National Museum, National Library and National Archives and fasttrack the implementation of activities related thereto in time for the 1998 Centennial Celebrations of the Philippine Independence, there is need to integrate the two (2) aforementioned Committees.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Committee Composition . Section 1 of Administrative Order No. 246, as amended, is hereby amended, to read as follows:

“Section 1. Composition. There is hereby constituted under the Office of the President a Presidential Committee to Assist the National Museum, National Archives and Library, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, which shall be composed of the following:

The Committee may, in addition, invite prominent persons to serve as Honorary Chairperson, Advisers or Consultants, to advise or otherwise participate in the work of the Committee.

The Committee members from the public sector shall serve in their ex officio capacities. The Committee members from the private sector shall continue to serve until their successors, also from the private sector shall have been appointed by the President.

The Committee shall appoint a project manager who shall be a member of the Committee. The Project Manager shall oversee and monitor the implementation of the Masterplan for the National Museum Complex.”

Sec. 2. Committee Functions . Section 2 of Administrative Order No. 246, as amended, is hereby amended, to read as follows:

“Sec. 2. Functions . The Committee shall undertake the following:

a. Formulate a comprehensive strategy or plan for the rehabilitation, development and operation of the National Museum and include plans for the National Archives and the National Library consistent with their purposes, and which will harness the collective strength of the government and the private sector, and submit the same to the President, for approval;

b. Undertake, implement, coordinate and monitor fund-raising projects, programs and activities, pursuant to the said strategy or plan, to finance the rehabilitation and development of the National Museum, National Archives and the National Library;

c. Establish such working sub-committees as may be necessary, and invite the members thereof from the government and private sectors; and,

d. Perform such other functions as the President may direct.”

Sec. 3. Committee Secretariat . Section 3 of Administrative Order No. 246, as amended, is hereby amended, to read as follows:

“Sec. 3. Secretariat . The Committee shall organize its own technical and administrative support from agencies and employees of the member government departments or agencies as the Committee may deem fit.”

Sec. 4. Other Provisions . All the provisions of A.O. and E.O. Nos. 246 and 128 dated 26 January 1996 and 04 October 1993, respectively, which are not inconsistent herewith shall remain valid and effective.

Sec. 5. Effectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of Feb in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.