MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 26

CREATING A PHILIPPINE HOST COMMITTEE FOR ASEAN TOURISM FORUM 1993

WHEREAS, the six member nations of ASEAN, namely Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, have agreed on a cooperative effort to promote the ASEAN region as one tourist destination;

WHEREAS, a regional travel trade event provides an invaluable occasion for travel industry practitioners from both the public and private sectors of ASEAN to meet and discuss strategies aimed at the growth and enhancement of tourism in the region;

WHEREAS, a series of meetings of the ASEAN national tourism organizations (NTOs) and the sectoral associations of the private sector led to a region-wide agreement to hold annually the ASEAN Tourism Forum consisting of multi-sectoral meetings and dialogues, an industry-wide conference and a travel mart between ASEAN sellers and worldwide buyers;

WHEREAS, the annual hosting of the ASEAN Tourism Forum is alphabetically rotated among the member countries;

WHEREAS, 1993 marks the twelfth year of this event since its inauguration in Malaysia in 1981 and the third time the Philippines serve as the host country;

WHEREAS, the successful conduct of ATF ’93 will contribute positively to the projection of the Philippines as a competitive tourist destination for leisure, business, meetings and exhibitions and enable more substantial economic benefits to the Philippines;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. A Philippine Host Committee for ASEAN Tourism Forum 1993, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, is hereby created to undertake the preparations and implementation of the Philippines hosting of the forum.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Secretary of Tourism shall designate a Senior Officer of the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation as Secretary-General who shall also be a member of the Committee. The Secretary General shall head the Secretariat and supervise the day to day implementation of the work program of ATF ’93.

Sec. 2. The Committee shall have the following primary objectives:

* The projection of the Philippines as a competitive holiday and convention destination;

* The organization of the biggest attended and most efficiently conducted ATF in the event’s 12-year history;

* The promotion of increased tourist in-flow to each and/or to a combination of ASEAN member countries from various tourist generating countries;

* The promotion of intra-ASEAN travel; and

* The strengthening of the cooperative ties among the various sectors of the ASEAN tourism industry.

Sec. 3. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.