MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 362

CREATION OF A COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AWARDS

WHEREAS, it is befitting to give recognition to public servants, government retirees, distinguished citizens and organizations for their exemplary service and invaluable contribution to the achievement of the programs of the government through the conferment of Presidential Citations and Awards;

WHEREAS, appropriate procedures and criteria must be formulated for the processing of nominations for certain Presidential Awards promulgated by laws or presidential issuances;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a Committee which shall formulate the procedures and ensure that criteria are observed as well as process nominations for the conferment of these Presidential Citations and Awards;

NOW THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Committee On Presidential Awards . There is hereby created a Committee On Presidential Awards (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) which shall be tasked to process the nominations for the conferment of Presidential Citations and Awards.

SECTION 2. Composition of the Committee . The Committee shall be composed of the Executive Secretary as Chairman, Presidential Management Staff Head as Vice-Chairman, and the following as members: PA for Political Affairs, Appointments Secretary, and Chief of Presidential Protocol.

The Committee may create such sub-committees as may be necessary to assist it in the performance of its functions.

SECTION 3. Functions of the Committee . The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Formulate the procedures and ensure that the criteria for the conferment of Presidential Awards and Citations as promulgated by law and Presidential issuances, including the following, are observed:

1) Order of Sikatuna;

2) Order of Kalantiao;

3) Presidential Citation for Outstanding Humanitarian Services;

4) Rizal Pro Patria Award;

5) Golden Heart Presidential Award;

6) Order of Gabriela Silang;

7) Philippine Legion of Honor;

8) Rizal Collegiate Palm and the Mabini Teachers’ Award; and,

9) Presidential Merit Award.

b. Process the nominations from the various government agencies and private groups and individuals for the said award categories;

c. Convene quarterly or as often as deemed necessary to consider and process nominations for the Presidential Awards;

d. Invite representatives from other government Departments and agencies, including the DFA, DND and the DILG, when deliberating on nominations which emanate from or otherwise pertain to the functions and responsibilities of the said departments or agencies; and,

e. Submit recommendations to the President.

SECTION 4. Secretariat . The Presidential Protocol shall provide the technical and administrative support to the Committee.

SECTION 5. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 30th day of SEPTEMBER in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.