MALACAÑANG MANILA BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 227

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FEBRUARY 22 TO 25, 1986 EDSA REVOLUTION

WHEREAS , the February 22 to 25, 1986 EDSA Revolution restored democratic institutions, ushered meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country and is acclaimed to be the crowning glory and legacy to the world of the Filipino;

WHEREAS , the triumph of this Revolution was anchored upon people power, the ultimate demonstration of the citizens’ solidarity in seeking to transform Philippines society and chart a new course for the country’s history by linking arms and courageously asserting their democratic rights;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby constitute a National Committee for the Commemoration of the Tenth Anniversary of the February 22 to 25, 1986 Revolution.

SECTION 1. Composition. – The Committee shall be composed  of Mr. Jose Concepcion, Jr., as Chairman, Interior and Local Government Secretary Rafael Alunan III as Co-Chairman and the following as members:

Representatives of the NGOs/Business Community:

1. Ms. Victoria Garchitorena 2. Mr. Jose Alejandro 3. Mr. Octavio Espiritu 4. Mr. Manolo Lopez 5. Mr. Christopher Carreon 6. Ms. Denise Manosa 7. Mr. Jose Escaner 8. Mr. Lito Lorenzana 9. Monsignor Socrates Villegas 10. Mr. Vicente Jayme 11. Mr. Felipe F. Cruz, Jr. 12. Mr. David Consunji 13. Mr. Alberto Manlapid 14. Mr. Perfecto F. Quicho 15. Ms. Tina Monzon-Palma 16. Mr. Norberto Gonzales 17. Ms. Maria Montelibano 18. Ms. Patricia C. Sison

Representatives from the Government Sector:

19. Secretary Domingo Siazon, Department of Foreign Affairs; 20. Secretary Gregorio Vigilar, Department of Public Works and Highways; 21. Secretary Renato de Villa, Department of National Defense; 22. Secretary Salvador Enriquez, Department of Budget and Management; 23. Director-General Marietta Primicias-Goco, Kabisig People’s Movement; 24. Chairman Prospero Oreta, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority; 25. Mayor Ismael Mathay, Jr.; 26. Administrator Jose Rufino, Livelihood Corporation; 27. Undersecretary Honesto Isleta, Philippine Information Agency; 28. Chairman Alfredo Antonio, Development Bank of the Philippines; 29. Vice-Chairman Rogelio Singson, Bases Conversion Development Authority; and 30. Director Serafin Quiazon, National Historical Institute.

Mr. Jose de Jesus and Social Security System Administrator Renato Valencia, former Chairpersons of the National Committee for the commemoration of the 9th Anniversary of the EDSA Revolution, shall serve as Advisers to the Committee.

SEC. 2. Functions. – The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Formulate a comprehensive plan for the nationwide commemoration of the 10th Anniversary of the February 22 to 25, 1986 EDSA Revolution, and coordinate with all sectors concerned the implementation of the same, taking into consideration austerity measures and the spirit of volunteerism;

2. Create such working committees and designate the respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors as may be necessary to ensure the success of the celebration; and

3. Invite or enjoin and mobilize all sectors who would like to participate in the celebration and call upon any government instrumentality to render the necessary assistance therefor.

SEC. 3. Staff Support. The KABISIG People’s Movement National Operations Center (KPM-NOP) shall provide the technical and secretariat support to the Committee. The Heads of Departments, agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are directed to give full support to the Committee and its various working Committees and to actively participate in said celebrations.

SEC. 4. Funding. The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of THREE MILLION PESOS (P3,000,000.00) to support this activity. Concerned agencies may allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray the expenditures that may be incurred from participation in the EDSA anniversary, subject to the usual accounting and auditing regulations.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23 rd day of November in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.