MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 151

CREATING AN AD-HOC COMMITTEE TO FOCUS AND INTEGRATE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, research and development is a critical ingredient for competitiveness, growth and development;

WHEREAS, there exist numerous and diverse research and development activities being undertaken by government instrumentalities, especially by the various state colleges and universities nationwide;

WHEREAS, there is a need to integrate the various research and development to ensure complementation of activities, effect cost savings and achieve higher impact on targeted beneficiaries; and,

WHEREAS, there is a need to refocus the current thrusts on research and development towards achieving competitiveness, especially in agriculture.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of an Ad hoc Committee to Focus and Integrate Research and Development. There is hereby created an Ad hoc Committee to focus and integrate research and development activities of the government, hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”, which is mandated to rationalize and integrate the government’s research and development efforts, especially in the agricultural sector.

SEC. 2. Composition. The Committee shall be chaired by the Department of Agriculture and Vice-Chaired by the Department of Science and Technology. The Committee shall have the following as members:

a) Department of Trade and Industry;

b) Department of Budget and Management;

c) Commission on Higher Education; and

d) Two (2) private sector representatives to be appointed by the President, upon recommendation of the Committee.

The Committee may call upon any government agency and government owned and controlled corporation to assist in the performance of the Committee’s mandate and functions.

SEC. 3. Functions. The Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a Prepare an inventory of existing research and development activities in the government, focusing on the agricultural sector;

b) Rationalize the research and development activities towards the following parameters;

b.1) One-institution, one-crop concept;

b.2 More effective commercialization of research and development results/outputs; and,

b.3) More effective networking and marketing to ensure proper planting schedule and marketing of produce.

SEC. 4. Secretariat. The Department of Agriculture shall provide the technical and administrative support to the Committee.

SEC. 5. Term of Committee. The Committee shall be in existence for a period of one (1) year from the issuance of this Order, within which it should have completed the inventory of research and development and submitted their proposed rationalization.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 26 th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.