MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 8

CREATING A COMMITTEE ON THE DISPOSITION OF THE REAL PROPERTIES OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES LOCATED ABROAD

WHEREAS, the Republic of the Philippines owns various real properties located abroad;

WHEREAS, some of these properties are lying idle and/or under-utilized;

WHEREAS, considering the scarce resources of the Government, the proceeds of the disposition of these properties could be used to finance important government programs, such as the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program, low cost housing and other poverty alleviation programs;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to create a group that shall formulate an action plan for the study and disposition of these properties;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Properties Committee . — There is hereby created a Properties Committee under the Office of the President to advise the President on the disposition of real properties owned by the Republic of the Philippines located abroad.

SEC. 2. Composition . — The Committee shall be composed of the Executive Secretary as chairman, and the Secretaries of Foreign Affairs, Justice, Finance, Trade and Industry, and the Executive Trustee of the Assets Privatization Trust as members.

SEC. 3. Powers and Functions . — The Committee shall have, among others, the following powers and functions:

a) To conduct an inventory of government-owned real properties located abroad;

b) To review the studies prepared by the Japan Properties Committee, as well as its consultants, and other similar studies in connection with the planned disposition of these properties;

c) To review the local and foreign laws and regulations governing these properties;

d) To draft the necessary legislation to effect the disposition of any of these properties;

e) To recommend to the President, after studies, an action plan for the disposition of each of these properties;

f) To recommend the employment of local and foreign consultants to assist in carrying out its mandates, and

g) To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporation, for assistance that it may require in the performance of its mandate.

SEC. 4. Technical/Secretariat Support . — The Presidential Management Staff shall provide technical and secretariat support to the Committee.

The Philippine Ambassador or Chief of Mission and his staff shall likewise extend technical support to the Committee when the real property/ties located in their post of assignment shall be affected by the Committee’s study and planned disposition.

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause. — The Administrative Order repeals Administrative Order No. 3, dated August 11, 1986, as amended.

SEC. 6. Effectivity . — The Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.