MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 387

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF A TASK FORCE ON THE PROPOSED ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

WHEREAS, the proposed establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC) has received strong support from the global community owing to the rising incidence of international crimes that has undermined international peace and stability;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has signified its support for the establishment of the ICC as a legal mechanism that will enhance international criminal justice enforcement;

WHEREAS, the recent resolve of the global community to establish a new international legal order predicated on consensus and collective action has brought forth a number of complex issues requiring serious consideration by a group of experts from the legal field in order for the involvement of the Philippines in the Preparatory Committee of the ICC to become more meaningful;

NOW THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Task Force on the Proposed Establishment of the International Criminal Court. There is hereby created a Task Force on the Proposed Establishment of the International Criminal Court, hereinafter referred to as the ICC Task Force, under the joint administrative and technical supervision of the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) and the Department of Justice (DOJ);

SECTION 2. Composition. The ICC Task Force shall be composed of the following agencies, through their duly designated representatives, with the rank of at least Assistant Secretary or Deputy Head:

The heads of other academic institutions, law firms and other legal organizations may be invited or consulted as resource persons/agencies.

SECTION 3. Duties and Functions. The ICC Task Force shall have the following duties and functions:

1. Undertake studies and researches pertaining to the proposed establishment of the International Criminal Court;

2. Formulate policy recommendations to serve as inputs in the review and consolidation of the Philippine Government’s position in the Preparatory Committee meetings of the ICC and the United Nations General Assembly;

3. Identify and recommend legislative measures necessary in the furtherance of the foregoing;

4. Serve as a forum for the resolution of issues and concerns pertaining to the establishment of the ICC;

5. Pursue other related functions which may be deemed necessary by the President.

SECTION 4. Technical and Administrative Support. The DFA and the DOJ shall serve as the Secretariat to the ICC Task Force. As such, it shall provide technical and administrative support to the ICC Task Force to enable it to discharge its duties and functions.

SECTION 5. Funding. The DFA and the DOJ, subject to applicable accounting and auditing regulations, shall provide the ICC Task Force’s and the Secretariat’s budgetary outlay.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of March, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.