MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 400

ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE INAUGURAL CEREMONIES OF THE PRESIDENT-ELECT AND THE VICE PRESIDENT-ELECT

WHEREAS, it is the declared policy of the government to ensure a peaceful, orderly and smooth transfer of powers to the next duly-elected President and Vice-President;

WHEREAS, the Constitution mandates that the President-Elect and the Vice President-Elect shall assume their respective Offices at 12 noon of the 30 th of June 1998;

WHEREAS, the President-Elect has signified his preference to have his oath-taking ceremony (12:00 noon) at the Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan, and then to deliver his Inaugural Address at the Quirino Grandstand, Rizal Park, Manila at 4:00 P.M. on the same day; and

WHEREAS, there is need to undertake comprehensive preparations for the Inaugural Ceremonies to facilitate the assumption to Office of the President-Elect and Vice President-Elect and ensure the success of the activities in both venues;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, by the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a National Organizing Committee for the Inaugural Ceremonies for the President-Elect and the Vice President-Elect. A National Organizing Committee for the Inaugural Ceremonies hereinafter referred to as the NOC, is hereby established. The NOC shall oversee the preparations for the Inaugural Ceremonies and related activities on 30 June 1998. The members of the Committee shall include the following:

SECTION 2. Creation of Sub-Committee on Security, Traffic and Parking. There is hereby created a Sub-Committee on Security, Traffic and Parking. The Sub-Committee shall be primarily responsible for the formulation and implementation of security arrangements for the Incumbent President, the President-Elect, the Vice-President-Elect and other guests who are expected to attend and participate in the Inaugural Ceremonies, as well as a traffic and parking plan for the Barasoain Church and its environs to facilitate the smooth flow of activities and prevent vehicle congestion in the program areas. The Sub-Committee shall likewise be responsible for the formulation and implementation of security arrangements as well as a traffic and parking plan for the President and other guests for the Inaugural Address at the Quirino Grandstand. In addition, the Sub-Committee shall prepare a comprehensive plan for the motorcade of guests from Barasoain Church to the Quirino Grandstand to ensure their timely attendance and participation in both activities as well as the provision of Health and First Aid services that may be required for the guests and the general public.

The Sub-Committee on Security, Traffic and Parking shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 3. Creation of a Sub-Committee on Parades and Honor Ceremonies. There is hereby created a Sub-Committee on Parades and Honor Ceremonies. The Sub-Committee shall primarily be responsible for identifying the appropriate Honor Ceremonies at the Barasoain Church area and the Quirino Grandstand. The Sub-Committee shall also be responsible for identifying the sequence and program for the Parade at the Quirino Grandstand. The Sub-Committee shall also undertake coordination with other concerned agencies and the public sector for the said activities.

The Sub-Committee on Parades and Honor Ceremonies shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 4. Creation of a Sub-Committee on Protocol. There is hereby created a Sub-Committee on Protocol which shall primarily be responsible for formulating a comprehensive guest list and seating plan for participants and guests to the Inaugural Ceremonies (Bulacan and Quirino Grandstand, respectively), preparation and issuance of invitations to said participants and guests, and the provision of the required documents for the oath-taking (i.e. oath of office for the President-Elect and Vice-President-Elect, Holy Bible, etc.).

The Sub-Committee on Protocol shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 5. Sub-Committee on Media Affairs. There is hereby created a Sub-Committee on Media Affairs which shall primarily be responsible for formulating and implementing a plan of action to maximize and ensure tri-media coverage of the Inaugural Ceremonies in Malolos, Bulacan and at the Quirino Grandstand, and to conduct an information dissemination campaign to instill public awareness on the significance of the events.

The Sub-Committee on Media Affairs shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 6. Creation of a Sub-Committee on Transportation. There is hereby created a Sub-Committee on Transportation which shall primarily be responsible for planning and coordination of the vehicle requirements for the Inaugural Ceremonies (in Malolos, Bulacan and at the Quirino Grandstand) and ensure the provision of adequate transportation for all participants and guests to the said events.

The Sub-Committee on Transportation shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 7. Creation of a Sub-Committee on Programme. A Sub-Committee on Programme is hereby created. The Sub-Committee on Programme shall primarily be responsible for the formulation of the program of activities for the Inaugural Ceremonies in Malolos, Bulacan and the program for the Inaugural Address at the Quirino Grandstand, and the preparation and packaging of the souvenir program and other documents/materials needed for the event.

The Sub-Committee shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 8. Creation of a Sub-Committee on Finance. A Sub-Committee on Finance is hereby created to identify the appropriate funding source and ensure the provision of funds necessary for the preparations and actual conduct of the Inaugural Ceremonies.

The Sub-Committee shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 9. Creation of a Sub-Committee on Physical Arrangements. A Sub-Committee on Physical Arrangements is hereby created to ensure the provision of the necessary resources and materials for the preparation of the program area and other areas to be used in relation to the Inaugural Ceremonies on 30 June 1998.

The Sub-Committee on Physical Arrangements shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 10. Creation of a Sub-Committee on Food and Refreshments. There is hereby created a Sub-Committee on Food and Refreshments which shall be responsible for the provision of appropriate food and refreshments for all the guests and participants to the Inaugural Ceremonies and other related activities at the Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan and at the Quirino Grandstand at the Rizal Park in Manila.

The Sub-Committee on Food and Refreshments shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 11. Assistance from Agencies. All departments and agencies of government are hereby directed to provide support and assistance to the NOC on request or as may be required.

SEC. 12. Submission of Regular Reports. The different Sub-Committees shall submit regular reports (at least 1 report per week until 30 June 1998) to the NOC.

SEC. 13. Submission of an Implementation Plan for the Inaugural Ceremonies and Regular Reports on the Status of Preparations Therefor. The NOC shall submit an integrated implementation plan for the Inaugural Ceremonies not later than 15 June 1998. The NOC shall also submit regular reports on the status of preparations for the said event.

SEC. 14. Provision of Secretariat Support. The Presidential Management Staff shall provide secretariat support to the NOC. The Sub-Committees shall identify and designate their respective Secretariat.

SEC. 15. Funding Support. The DBM and OP Finance shall be responsible for identifying the appropriate funding source for the expenses relative to the preparations and actual conduct of the Inaugural Ceremonies and related activities.

SEC. 16. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of June in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.