MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 221

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE POLICY AND LEGAL TASK FORCE ON THE ISSUE OF THE LEGALITY OF THE THREAT OR USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS BEFORE THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE

WHEREAS, the Philippine Constitution enshrines the policy of freedom from nuclear weapons in its territory;

WHEREAS, the Philippines believes that the elimination of weapons of mass destruction will be of immense value towards the achievement of true, meaningful, just and lasting global peace and security; and

WHEREAS, the Philippines has been an active participant in international efforts at addressing the issue of disarmament, particularly concerning weapons of mass destruction;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of a Policy and Legal Task Force . – The Philippine Policy and Legal Task Force on the Issue of the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons before the International Court of Justice is hereby created, to be known as the ICJ Task Force or ITF.

Section 2. Composition . – The ITF shall be composed of the following:

Section 3. Duties and Responsibilities . – The ITF shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a. To take primary responsibility in connection with Philippine participation in the hearings before the International Court of Justice on the request for advisory opinion on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons;

b. To identify and formulate Philippine interests on the issue;

c. To study, research, prepare and draft all briefs and pleadings based on the appropriate norms of international law;

d. To assist in preparing for the presentation of oral arguments before the International Court of Justice;

e. To coordinate and consult with appropriate sectors of Philippine society on this issue, particularly non-governmental organizations; and

f. To recommend to the President the Philippine representative who will present arguments before the International Court of Justice.

Section 4. Secretariat . – The ITF Secretariat is hereby established in the Department of Foreign Affairs to be headed by the Undersecretary for Policy.

Section 5. Funding . – The initial funding of Two Million Pesos (P2,000,000.00) shall be taken from the President’s Contingent Fund. The Department of Budget and Management is directed to coordinate and assist the ITF in identifying and determining other appropriate sources and amounts of the funds to cover deficiencies in the ITF’s requirements. Thereafter, and if necessary, funding requirements of the ITF shall be incorporated in the General Appropriations Act.

Section 6. Report . – This ITF shall submit a report on the progress of its work two weeks from the date of this Administrative Order.

Section 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of October in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.