MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 74

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON PASIG RIVER REHABILITATION

WHEREAS, the rehabilitation of the Pasig River involves various agencies and government instrumentalities and necessitates coordinated and sustained efforts; and

WHEREAS, there is a need for a body to coordinate and oversee the rehabilitation efforts towards ensuring their effectiveness and efficiency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of the Presidential Task Force on Pasig River Rehabilitation. There is hereby created under the Office of the President the Presidential Task Force on Pasig River Rehabilitation, herein referred to as the Task Force.

Section 2. Duties and Responsibilities . The Task Force shall undertake, among others, the following duties and responsibilities:

a. Oversee the implementation of the government’s Master Plan on the rehabilitation of the Pasig River;

b. Coordinate the efficient enforcement of laws and regulations affecting the Pasig River;

c. Ensure the effective and timely implementation of programs and projects on the Pasig River as well as their complementarity with the Master Plan on its rehabilitation;

d. Conduct periodic review of the government efforts to protect and develop the Pasig River with the end in view of the ensuring their responsiveness; and

e. Submit regular report to the Office of the President on the status of the government’s efforts on the rehabilitation and development of the Pasig River.

Section 3. Composition. The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

Section 4. Technical and Administrative Support. The River Rehabilitation Secretariat of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources shall provide technical and administrative support to the Task Force. Whenever it is deemed necessary, the Task Force, through the Chairman, may tap the assistance of the other government agencies, including the academe and research public institutions, for the furtherance of its mandate.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 29th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.