MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 211

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE SURRENDER OF GENERAL TOMOYUKI YAMASHITA ON SEPTEMBER 2, 1995, IN KIANGAN, IFUGAO, AND HIS OFFICIAL SURRENDER ON SEPTEMBER 3, 1995, IN BAGUIO CITY

WHEREAS , September 2, 1995 marks the 50th Anniversary of the Surrender of General Tomoyuki Yamashita of the Japanese Imperial Army in Kiangan, Ifugao, and September 3, 1995, the 50th Anniversary of his Official Surrender in Baguio City which signalled the end of Japanese resistance in the Philippines during World War II;

WHEREAS , these events should be appropriately observed to promote, preserve and memorialize the principles, ideals and deeds of Filipino military veterans as a means of enhancing patriotism and love of country, especially among the youth of the land;

WHEREAS , the commemoration of these events should be focused on the values of freedom and lasting peace for which Filipino war veterans fought valiantly, many of whom paid the ultimate sacrifice;

WHEREAS , there is a need to coordinate all activities that are envisioned to foster nationalism among Filipinos, particularly with that of the National Centennial Commission, which was created pursuant to EO 128, dated October 4, 1993, to act as the principal coordinator for all activities related to the Centennial Celebrations of Philippine Independence.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a National Executive Committee . There is hereby constituted a National Executive Committee on the Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Official Surrender of General Tomoyuki Yamashita hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to be composed of the following:

(1) The Secretary of National Defense, as Chairman (2) The Secretary of Tourism, as Vice-Chairman (3) The Secretary of Foreign Affairs; (4) The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports; (5) The Secretary of the Interior and local Government; (6) The Secretary of Transportation and Communications; (7) The Secretary of Public Works and Highways; (8) The Secretary of Budget and Management; (9) The Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources; (10) The Secretary of Finance; (11) Press Secretary; (12) Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines; (13) Chief, Philippine National Police; (14) Administrator, Philippine Veterans Affairs Office; (15) Chairman, National Historical Institute; (16) Governor, Province of Ifugao; (17) Governor, Province of Benguet; (18) Governor, Province of Mt. Province; (19) Mayor, City of Baguio; (20) Mayor, Kiangan, Ifugao; (21) Mayor, Lagawe, Ifugao; (22) Mayor, Banawe, Ifugao; (23) Mayor, Lamut, Ifugao; (24) Mayor, Bagabag, Nueva Vizcaya; (25) Chairman, Ifugao Terraces Commission (26) Chairman, Cordillera Regional Assembly (27) Executive Director, Office of the Northern Cultural Communities (28) President, Veterans Federation of the Philippines; (29) National Commander, United States Armed Forces in the Philippines, Northern Luzon (USAFIP-NL); (30) National President, Boy Scouts of the Philippines; (31) National President, Girl Scouts of the Philippines; (32) Chief, Military Shrines Service; (33) Representative of Non-Governmental Organizations

SEC. 2. Functions of the Committee . The Committee shall take charge of the preparations for the 50th Anniversary the Surrender if General Tomoyuki Yamashita on September 2, 1995, in Kiangan, Ifugao , and his official surrender on September 3, 1995, in Baguio City. For this purpose, it shall have the following functions:

(a) Formulate all the programs, projects and activities that shall be conducted in observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Surrender of General Tomoyuki Yamashita in Kiangan, Ifugao and Baguio City;

(b) Prepare the implementing guidelines for all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(c) Orchestrate and coordinates the implementation of all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(d) Source funds and prepare the budget which shall be required by the Committee in the discharge of its functions; and

(e) Perform other asks as may be given by the President.

SEC. 3. Operational Relationships . In the conduct of all programs, projects and activities on the observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Official Surrender of general Tomoyuki Yamashita on September 2-3, 1995 in Kiangan, Ifugao, and Baguio City, respectively, the Committee shall coordinate with the National Centennial Commission.

The Committee is also authorized to call upon the assistance of any department, bureau, agency, office and other instrumentality of the Government, as well as invite non-government organizations as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.

SEC. 4. Creation of Sub-Committees . The Committee may form sub-committees as it may deem necessary to effectively carry out its duties and responsibilities.

SEC. 5. Technical and Secretariat Support . The Department of National Defense shall provide technical, secretariat and administrative support to the Committee.

SEC. 6. Funding . Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order shall be taken from the respective appropriations of the concerned agencies.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15 th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.