MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 109

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON FLAGSHIP PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS

Whereas, the year 1994 offers considerable opportunities for an economic surge for the country.

Whereas, financial constraints continue to exist which may dampen the attainment of an economic surge.

Whereas, there is a critical need for a more focussed and highly selective intervention along very strategic areas to catalyze the economic surge and optimize available resources.

Whereas, the flagship concept has been adopted by the government and several flagship programs and projects have already been identified.

Whereas, there is a need to ensure the efficient and timely implementation of the flagship programs and projects.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Presidential Committee on Flagship Programs and Projects. — There is hereby created an ad hoc intra-departmental body to be known as the Presidential Committee on Flagship Programs and Projects.

SECTION 2. Composition. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

SECTION 3. Mandate. The Committee is hereby mandated to orchestrate the identification, prioritization and implementation of flagship shall refer to highly strategic infrastructure programs and projects. For this purpose, flagship shall refer to highly strategic infrastructure programs and projects approved by the President and the cabinet.

SECTION 4. Functions. The Committee shall perform the following functions.

a) Act as the coordinating body for flagship programs and projects.

b) Undertake the identification and prioritization of flagship programs and projects, whenever necessary, for approval of the President and Cabinet.

c) Facilitate the mobilization of resources for the flagship programs and projects and ensure the timely release of funds.

d) Effect the participation and cooperation of all government agencies and instrumentalities (national agencies, Government Owned and Controlled corporations, Local Government Units, etc.) in the implementation of the flagship programs and projects.

e) Monitor and evaluate the implementation of flagship programs and projects and ensure the timely and orderly conduct of bidding and awarding of contracts as well as the implementation of projects until completion. For this purpose, the committee may ask for technical support from any of its members as often as necessary.

f) Initiate and undertake issue resolution of problems and bottlenecks affecting the implementation of flagship programs and projects.

g) Perform other functions which may be assigned by the president.

SECTION 5. Technical and Secretariat Support. The National Economic and Development Authority Secretariat shall provide the technical and secretariat support to the Committee, in coordination with the Presidential Management Staff.

SECTION 6. Operational Relationship. The Committee shall undertake close coordination and collaboration with the Office of the Executive Secretary in the performance of its function. The committee is also authorized to call on any Department, agency or instrumentality of the government for assistance.

SECTION 7. Reporting. The Committee shall submit a quarterly report to the President and the Cabinet on the status of implementing of flagship programs and projects.

SECTION 8. Funding. Funding for the Operation of the Committee shall be sourced from the President’s Contingent Fund and from the budget of member and concerned agencies, as may be needed.

SECTION 9. Support Facilities. The Office of the Executive Secretary shall facilitate the provision of support facilities (such as office space, transportation, communications equipment and personnel), which may be sourced from the Office of the President and the Member Agencies for the use of the Committee.

SECTION 10. Effectivity. This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20 th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.