MALACAÑANG MANILA

Administrative Order No. 22

PROMULGATING A COMMUNICATION AND ADVOCACY PROGRAM ON THE MEDIUM-TERM PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 1993-1998 (MTPDP-CAP), AND CREATING A CABINET-LEVEL PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE TO COORDINATE AND OVERSEE ITS IMPLEMENTATION

WHEREAS, with the approval of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, 1993-1998, there is now the need to generate wide support and cooperation to ensure its effective and successful implementation;

WHEREAS, such support and cooperation coming from all sectors of society and the international community can only be secured with their clear understanding of the Plan and their full appreciation of the benefits and opportunities available to them with its successful implementation;

WHEREAS, there is therefore the need of a massive and sustained information effort to communicate to the people and the world community the country’s vision and goals of development during the next six years as contained in the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, 1993-1998, as well as the specific policy thrusts, programs, and activities which can only be successfully carried out with their full support and cooperation;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered that:

SECTION 1. The Communication and Advocacy Program on the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, 1993-1998, as approved and endorsed by the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Board, and which shall henceforth become an integral part of this Administrative Order, is hereby approved for implementation and guidance of all executive departments and agencies of government and all local government units, including the Metro Manila Authority, the Cordillera Administrative Region, and the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

SECTION 2. A Presidential Task Force to coordinate and oversee the implementation of this Communication and Advocacy Program on the MTPDP, 1993-1998, is hereby created to be composed of the following:

SECTION 3. The Presidential Task Force to implement the MTPDP-CAP shall exercise the following specific functions and responsibilities:

a. Approve, coordinate, oversee, and monitor the action programs implementing the specific components of the MTPDP-CAP based on the assigned roles and responsibilities of the departments, agencies, and local governments concerned as specified herein;

b. Submit quarterly reports to the President and the NEDA Board on the status of assigned tasks and responsibilities of the various departments, agencies, and local governments concerned;

c. Issue such additional guidelines as may be necessary for the effective implementation of the MTPDP-CAP.

SECTION 4. Secretariat support to the Task Force shall be provided jointly by the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) and the Office of the Press Secretary-Philippine Information Agency (PIA).

SECTION 5. All departments, agencies, and local governments are hereby directed to set aside from their funds such amounts as may be necessary to carry out their specific roles and responsibilities in pursuance of this order. All other expenditure programs as may be determined and approved by the President, upon recommendation of the Presidential Task Force as created herein, shall be allocated and made available by the Department of Budget and Management from such existing appropriated funds not otherwise allocated for any specific purpose for the use of the various executive departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including the local governments, in carrying out the activities in pursuance of the objectives of this Administrative Order.

SECTION 6. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.