MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 258

ENJOINING ALL INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE GOVERNMENT TO JOIN THE GLOBAL OBSERVANCE OF WORLD WATER DAY ON MARCH 22, 1996 TO START THE 1996 WATER CONSERVATION YEAR, AND CREATING AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE TO PLAN AND PREPARE FOR THE OCCASION

WHEREAS , the United Nations General Assembly has declared the date March 22 of each year as the World Day for Water in conformity with the recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development and has adopted the theme “Water for Thirsty Cities” for the World Day celebration in 1996;

WHEREAS , the government, as signatory to the Agenda 21 of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), has formulated and is vigorously advocating the Philippine Strategy for Sustainable Development (PSSD) which includes emphasis on water as a limited resource;

WHEREAS , pursuant to these commitments and in response to the alarming degradation of the status of the country’s water resources, the government has initiated a series of intensive nationwide multi-sectoral consultations culminating in the Water Summit in December 1994 which was immediately followed by the enactment of R.A. 8041, also known as the Water Crisis Act, in June 1995;

WHEREAS , corollary to the present effort of attaining a sustainable development of our water resources, the government must demonstrate its solidarity with the international community in advocating water conservation and sustainable utilization;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order;

SECTION 1. The nationwide observance of Water Conservation Year starting 22 March 1996. March 22 this year and in every year thereafter, is hereby declared World Water Day to coincide with such celebration by the international community of nations with the objective of instilling awareness in all concerned on the importance of water conservation.

SEC. 2. Holding of commemorative activities and simple rites by all government instrumentalities at the national and local levels focusing on this year’s theme of “Water for Thirsty Cities” but without compromising the current concern of the government for a nationwide advocacy on the importance of protecting and conserving our water resources. These activities should, in all cases, also incorporate with significant degree the present thrusts and multi-faceted provisions of the Water Crisis Act. The overall result or any planned outputs from these should be aimed at facilitating the attainment of the purposes for which R.A. 8041 was enacted.

SEC. 3. Designation of working committees from among the national instrumentalities of the government to prepare and implement World Water Day related activities and to coordinate with the appropriate level of the local government units and other non-governmental organizations. The working committees shall also see to it that their plans and programs and properly coordinated with the ad-hoc Water Crisis Commission and the existing Cabinet Clusters which could be affected by the holding of these activities.

For the purpose of this year’s celebration, the following Executive Committee for the Celebration of World Water Day which shall serve to kick-off the 1996 Water Conservation Year is hereby organized:

SEC. 4. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of March in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.