MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 90

CREATING A PROJECT MANAGEMENT OFFICE ON SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT UNDER THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON WASTE MANAGEMENT

WHEREAS , the Presidential Task Force on Waste Management (PTFWM) created by virtue of Memorandum Circular No. 39 has formulated the Solid Waste Management Framework;

WHEREAS , there is a need to regularly and comprehensively update the Framework/Plan to address the increasing garbage problem of Metropolitan Manila and other local government units;

WHEREAS , the Presidential Task Force on Waste Management is an inter-agency body and there is therefore a need for a more permanent body or group composed of experts to assist the Task Force in the formulation of necessary standards/guidelines/criteria for waste management;

WHEREAS , the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) is the primary government agency responsible for the conservation, management, development and proper use of the country’s environment and natural resources.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. There is hereby created a Project Management Office on Solid Waste Management under the Presidential Task Force on Waste Management, with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources as the lead executing agency.

Sec. 2. The Project Management Office shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Formulate an integrated national systems framework on solid waste management as well as the criteria/guidelines in the preparation of local waste management plans;

b. Formulate specific strategies and plans for the efficient, effective and economic implementation of the Solid Waste Management Framework;

c. Formulate standards, systems and procedures for the management and operation of transfer stations and sanitary landfills;

d. Provide technical assistance in the construction and site development of transfer stations and sanitary landfills;

e. Collect, manage and maintain relevant technical information and database pertaining to all aspects of solid waste generation, collection, reuse and disposal;

f. Formulate and implement an information, education and communication plan to increase public awareness, understanding, appreciation and acceptance of new solid waste disposal facilities thereby improving the solid waste management system;

g. Formulate and conduct appropriate community relation programs in the vicinity of the sites of the sanitary landfills and transfer stations to inform and educate the communities on the benefits and the environmental safety features of the facilities and to allay fears of the perceived hazards and negative effects of the facilities;

h. Identify community needs which may be addressed as part of the development of sites such as infrastructure, utilities and other services which can improve the communities and foster support for the solid waste disposal facilities;

i. Facilitate site acquisition process by encouraging community consultations and participation;

j. Formulate an appropriate cost recovery system for disposal facilities to ensure that these facilities shall be financially viable;

k. Hire and develop qualified staff for the various aspects of solid waste management;

l. Accept foreign grants and donations;

m. Draft a bill creating the Waste Management Authority which shall handle all matters on waste management;

n. Prepare a capability building program for local government units in relation to their solid waste management programs/projects;

o. Develop and prescribe procedures for the issuance of the appropriate permits and clearances on the operation and maintenance of solid waste facilities;

p. Establish a mechanism to ensure compliance with environmental rules and regulations, including the imposition of sanctions for violations;

q. Evaluate program/project proposals on waste management; and,

r. Monitor the implementation of programs/projects to ensure compliance with established standards/criteria.

Sec. 3. The Project Management Office shall be based in the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and with the Director of the Environmental Management Bureau of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources serving as concurrent Project Director.

Sec. 4. The Presidential Task Force on Waste Management shall serve as the Policy and Management Board for the Project Management Office on Solid Waste Management.

Sec. 5. The Project Management Office shall exist until such time that the Waste Management Authority has been created.

Sec. 6. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 19th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.