MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 275

CONSTITUTING A COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE CONDUCT OF A PHILIPPINE PARTNER COUNTRY PRESENTATION AT THE 1998 HANNOVER FAIR

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, in its desire to scout for partners in the European Community will organize a Philippine Partner Country Presentation in the 1998 Hannover Industry Fair by presenting the Philippine Economic Plan coinciding with the Centennial Celebration as a venue to showcase the country’s growth, achievements and potentials;

WHEREAS, the Partner Country Presentation at the Hannover Fair provides a major opportunity for attracting prospective investors, businessmen, tourists from Germany and other European countries and shall further heighten world awareness of the business potentials, history, and culture of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, there is a need to constitute an organizing committee to organize and supervise the conduct of the Presentation during the Hannover Fair.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Constitution of Coordinating Committee for the Philippine Partner Presentation in the 1998 Hannover Fair. A Coordinating Committee (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) is hereby constituted to oversee and undertake the necessary presentations for the Philippine Country Partner Presentation in the 1998 Hannover Fair.

SEC. 2. Composition. The Committee shall be Chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry and Vice-Chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Tourism. The Committee shall have the following members:

a. Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs

b. Secretary of the Department of Agriculture

c. Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources

d. Secretary of the Department of Transportation and Communications

e. Secretary of the Department of Science and Technology

f. Director-General of the National Economic Development Authority

g. Executive Director of Center for International Expositions and Missions (CITEM)

h. President of the Philippine Centennial Commission

i .President of the Philippine Exporters Confederation

j. One representative from the Office of the President

k. One representative from the Department of Finance

l. One representative from the Department of Budget and Management.

m. One representative from the Philippine Economic Zone Authority

n. One representative from the Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority

o. One representative from the Clark Development Corporation

p. One representative from the Duty Free Philippines

q. One representative from the Philippine amusement and Gaming Corporation

SEC. 3. Functions. The Committee shall exercise the following function and responsibilities:

a. Act as the coordinating body between the private sector and various government agencies for the smooth implementation for the Partner Country Presentation.

b. Ensure that the economic advantages of the Partner Country Presentation are maximized through a concerted and cost-effective country approach.

c. Select the theme, concept and message of the Partner Country Presentation as may be acceptable to both the Governments of Philippines and Germany.

d. Ensure the safety and protection of government and personal properties, exhibit materials and special effects need to complete the Partner Country Presentation.

e. Seek the assistance of and coordinate with private entities, associations, foundations, cooperative, and other non-governmental organizations, in implementing the Partner Country Presentation and meeting the necessary requirements for the Presentation.

f. Call on any department, bureau of office of the Government, including Government-Owned and Controlled-Corporations to render such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

SEC. 4. Secretariat. The Committee, through the Chairman, shall organize a Secretariat to service its administrative and technical requirements. The Secretariat will be based within the premises of CITEM. The Secretariat shall be composed of personnel detailed to the Committee from member-agencies, with the Chairman determining the number desired and the duration of their assignment.

SEC. 5. Funding. An amount of TWO MILLION PESOS (P2,000,000) shall serve as the initial Philippine Government contribution to the Partner Country Presentation. Souring for the fund shall be determined jointly by the Chairman and the Department of Budget and Management. The government agencies or instrumentalities represented in the Committee are hereby authorized to draw from their respective budget for Fiscal Year 1997, additional funds need to finance the Presentation.

The Committee may also solicit donations, grants, contribution, sponsorships, and any form of assistance from private or government entities.

SEC. 6. Term of Committee. The Committee shall cease to exist upon termination of the Project in April 1998.

SEC. 7. Submission of Quarterly Reports. The Committee shall submit a report on the status of preparations for the Partner Country Presentation to the President in September 1996, and every quarter thereafter.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.