MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 122

CONSTITUTING A PHILIPPINE HOST COMMITTEE FOR THE 1994 MISS UNIVERSE PAGEANT, AND DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES AND OFFICES INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE AND SUPPORT THEREFOR

WHEREAS, the Philippines has successfully played host to major world conferences and other international events;

WHEREAS, in 1974, the country hosted the 1974 Miss Universe Pageant, which has been considered as one of the more successful and colorful gatherings of beauty title holders;

WHEREAS, this year, 1994, the country will again have a chance of hosting the Miss Universe Pageant;

WHEREAS, this world event will provide an excellent learning opportunity for the delegates, guests and hosts, and will serve as an entertainment forum; and

WHEREAS, the holding of the said pageant will bring international prestige, publicity, goodwill, and economic benefit to the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. A Philippine Host Committee (PHC) composed of representatives from the Department of Tourism, the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation (PCVC), and a coalition of other government agencies, non-governmental organizations and the private sector that comprise the tourism industry, as indicated herein (ANNEX A), is hereby constituted to oversee and undertake all the necessary preparations for 1994 Miss Universe Pageant.

The Secretary of Tourism shall be the PHC Overall Chairman while the PCVC Executive Director shall be the Director-General (Refer to ANNEX B)

Section 2. All government departments, agencies and offices, including government-owned and controlled corporations, are directed to extend their assistance and support to the Miss Universe Pageant to ensure its success.

Section 3. The following specific government entities are directed to actively participate and support the PHC in the manner provided for below and in such manner, though not specified herein, as may be for the best interest of the pageant:

3.01 Department of Justice/Commission on Immigration and Deportation

To provide special entry/exit arrangements and services for all delegates to the pageant, pageant officials and guests of the Miss Universe, Inc.

3.02 Department of Foreign Affairs

To issue visas for all foreign delegates to the pageant, pageant officers and staff;

To assist in all protocol requirements of the pageant; and

To assist in disseminating information about the pageant through the country’s Embassies and Consulates abroad.

3.03 Department of Trade and Industry

To assist in promoting attendance to the pageant through its network of foreign field offices.

3.04 Department of Finance/Bureau of Customs

To facilitate the entry and passage of foreign materials and equipment, including printed matters, giveaways and other paraphernalia, to be used during the different events of the pageant.

3.05 Department of Budget and Management

To facilitate processing of all documents relative to the administrative and budgetary requirements of the pageant.

3.06 Department of Transportation and Communications

To issue special commemorative car plates for the pageant, and to provide telecommunication equipment required during the pageant.

3.07 Department of Public Works and Highways

To assure that all public roads and highways within the airport area and along major thoroughfares in Metro Manila leading to and from the pageant venue are well paved and in good condition; and

To construct and install arches, billboards, and other signages announcing the holding of the pageant in strategic areas in Metro Manila, and to dismantle same after the pageant.

3.08 Department of the Interior and Local Government/League of City Mayors

To issue permits for the use of public venues during location filming of the delegates to the pageant in various parts of the country.

To maintain cleanliness in the major tourist districts and thoroughfares.

3.09 Metropolitan Manila Authority

To issue permits for the use of public venues, signage/decor installations, and traffic rerouting; and

To maintain cleanliness in the major tourist districts and thoroughfares.

3.10 Philippine National Police

To formulate and implement a security plan specifically designed for the pageant, and to provide security arrangements for the delegates, judges, guests, and dignitaries throughout the duration of the pageant;

To assist in the maintenance of local security and crowd control in the areas where the pageant activities are to be held; and

To provide manpower support for traffic rerouting and to maintain peace and order as may be required.

3.11 Manila International Airport Authority

To assist the PHC in the facilitation of the pageant delegates, staff, guests, judges, VIPs, the provision of entry passes to authorized PHC representatives, and installation, after the pageant period, dismantling of welcome streamers, pageant signages and decor at the Ninoy Aquino International Airport premises.

3.12 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas/Philippine International Convention Center

To extend preferential rates for the use of the PICC facilities for the pageant.

3. 13 Cultural Center of the Philippines

To provide artists, talents, and when necessary, the CCP facilities, for selected pageant events as may be requested.

3.14 Duty Free Philippines/Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation/Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office

To provide financial assistance to the PHC to augment the budget and to finance selected pageant activities.

3. 15 Philippine Airlines (PAL)

Aside from its commitment as official carrier, to extend preferential airfare package rates and to assist the PHC in any other matters regarding airtickets, cargo and joint advertising support.

Sec. 4. The amount necessary for the 1994 Miss Universe Pageant, including the operations of the Committee, its Secretariat, working groups and advisory board shall come from the following:

4.01 Contribution from the income of the Duty Free Philippines, as may be allocated pursuant to Section 3 of Executive Order No. 46 dated September 4, 1986;

4.02 Donations, grants and contributions or any form of assistance from any government or private entities;

4.03 Proceeds from sales of promotional and advertising materials, collaterals, souvenir items, display paraphernalia, and gift items;

4.04 Income/Proceeds accumulated from the ASEAN Tourism Forum hosted by the Philippines.

The above funds shall be deposited with the government bank under the trust liability account and disbursed in accordance with accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Sec. 5. The Committee shall be authorized to pay honorarium to those who will be involved with the Miss Universe Pageant project subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Sec. 6. PHC, through the DOT and PCVC, shall coordinate the effective implementation of this Order.

Sec. 7. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11 th day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Reference: Annex A

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.