MALACAÑAN MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 182

ESTABLISHING AN ASSISTANCE-TO-NATIONALS TASK FORCE AND PROVIDING FUNCTIONAL GUIDELINES THEREFOR

WHEREAS, recent Philippine migration realities require a more comprehensive program of action to address attendant issues and concerns;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government is firmly committed to promoting the well-being and protecting the interests of overseas Filipinos;

WHEREAS, existing problems and difficulties confronting Filipino migrants require more pronounced and integrated assistance from various agencies of government as embodied in the “country-team” approach per Executive Order No. 74;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. CREATION OF AN ASSISTANCE-TO-NATIONALS TASK FORCE. An Assistance-To-Nationals Task Force is hereby created and shall consist of representatives from the following:

The government agencies enumerated herein shall designate permanent representatives to the Committee, with a rank not lower than that of an Assistant Secretary.

The Task Force may call upon other agencies of the government to provide necessary support and assistance in its work.

SECTION 2. FUNCTIONS OF THE TASK FORCE. The Assistance-to-Nationals Task Force shall have the following functions:

1. Develop and implement an integrated program of government that will address the various concerns and problems resulting from migration;

2. Develop a mechanism to ensure effective coordination among various agencies of government to provide solutions to illegal recruitment and the exploitation of highly vulnerable groups of migrants;

3. Develop and implement a continuing information and community education program to ensure the effective dissemination of information related to migration;

4. Establish policies for the effective data base management on migration statistics and assistance-to-nationals cases;

5. Review and develop policies to promote the welfare and interests of Filipino migrants;

6. Coordinate with the private sector and international organizations, through the appropriate agencies of the government, with the view of establishing a support network for Filipino nationals.

SECTION 3. FREQUENCY OF MEETINGS. The Assistance-To-Nationals Committee shall meet at least twice a month or as often as necessary to discuss various concerns affecting Filipino natives and to develop and implement interventions to address them.

SECTION 4. SUPPORT STRUCTURES AND FUNDING. The various heads of agencies represented in the Assistance-To-Nationals Task Force shall ensure the establishment or designation of focal units within their respective agencies to ensure a continuing support mechanism for the Assistance-To-Nationals Task Force. The designated focal units shall ensure that internal resources are available within their respective agencies to effectively carry out the tasks provided for in this order. The Commission on Filipinos Overseas shall provide Secretariat support to this Committee. The initial amount of Five Million Pesos (P5,000,000) from the President’s Contingent Fund is hereby released and authorized to be expended to carry out the functions of the Task Force.

SECTION 5. EFFECTIVITY. The Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of April, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.