MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 176

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE BOULEVARD 2000

WHEREAS , the environmental quality of Manila Bay is rapidly deteriorating due to pollution from domestic, industrial and agriculture run-off and soil erosion and other factors such as inadequate treatment facilities, dumping of solid wastes in waterways, oil spillage, dynamite fishing, among others;

WHEREAS , the Presidential Task Force on Manila Bay Rehabilitation (PTFMBR) created through Administrative Order (A.O.) No. 87, series of 1993, has prepared a Comprehensive Plan for the Rehabilitation and Development of Manila Bay which recommends the integration of short- and long-term rehabilitation, development and reclamation programs and projects to address certain policy, planning and implementation issues;

WHEREAS , there is need for a more focused and detailed plan for the development of the Boulevard Reclamation Area with its environs and the acceleration of an integrated socio-economic development in keeping with the concept of sustainable development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. Creation of the Presidential Task Force Boulevard 2000. There is hereby created the Presidential Task Force Boulevard 2000 which shall be responsible for the preparation, integration and coordination of all development plans, projects and programs in the Boulevard Reclamation Area. This project shall be considered a priority infrastructure project.

Section 2. Composition. The Presidential Task Force Boulevard 2000 shall be chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and co-chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) with the General Manager of the Public Estate Authority (PEA) as Vice-Chairman. The Task Force shall be composed of the following as members:

National Economic and Development Authority Department of Tourism Department of Interior and Local Government Department of Transportation and Communications Department of Trade and Industry Presidential Management Staff Flagship Projects and Programs Committee Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council Philippine National Bank Government Service and Insurance System Social Security System Cabinet Officer for Regional Development for the National Capital Region (CORD-NCR) Cultural Center of the Philippines National Parks and Development Committee Philippine Gaming and Amusement Corporation Philippine Ports Authority Philippine National Police/Philippine Coast Guard Office of Government Corporate Counsel Chairman, Metro Manila Authority Mayors of Manila, Pasay City, Parañaque and Las Piñas Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System Five (5) Private Sector Representatives to be recommended by the Task Force Chairman and appointed by the President

In addition, the Task Force shall regularly invite to its activities concerned public utilities, including PLDT and MERALCO.

Section 3. Powers, Functions and Responsibilities. The Task Force shall:

a. Prepare, coordinate and integrate all reclamation and development programs and projects in the Boulevard Reclamation Area, for purposes of formulating an Integrated Master Development Plan (IMDP) based on the following guidelines:

○ Protection of its ecological balance, enhancement of its environment and restoration of the area’s natural beauty;

○ Rational land-use and zonation scheme considering that the Boulevard Reclamation Area is a national treasure and an environmentally critical area;

○ Provision for improved and adequate service infrastructure such as power, water, communications and waste treatment facilities especially in the coastal area;

○ Provision of short-term and long-term strategies for tourism development, attracting business investment, social development and institutional building within the framework of local, regional and national development framework plans.

b. Serve as a monitoring and information clearing-house/advisory body to the President on all existing and proposed reclamation and development programs and projects in the Boulevard Reclamation Area;

c. Serve as the collaborative and coordinative mechanism for government and private sector activities to rehabilitate, develop and reclaim the Boulevard Area and resolve issues and concerns pertaining thereto;

d. Conduct regular assessments of the status of reclamation and development efforts in the Boulevard Reclamation Area in coordination with the PTFMBR to ensure conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for the Rehabilitation and Development of the Manila Bay Area; and

e. Perform such other functions and responsibilities as the President may direct.

In the discharge of its functions and responsibilities, the Task Force may call upon any government agency or instrumentality including local government units for assistance.

Section 4. Territorial Coverage. For the purpose of defining the territorial coverage of the Task Force, the Boulevard Reclamation Area covers the stretch of Roxas Boulevard-Cultural Center of the Philippines up to the Coastal Road-Las Piñas area, including its shorelines.

Section 5. Technical and Secretariat Support . The PEA shall provide technical and secretariat support and shall also serve as the Program Management Office of the Task Force.

Section 6. Funding . The funds necessary for the implementation of this Administrative Order shall be sourced by the Department of Budget and Management in coordination with the Task Force.

Section 7. Repealing Clause . All Presidential issuances or part/s thereof inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately. The IMDP for the Boulevard 2000 shall be submitted to the President within 180 days upon the signing of this Administrative Order. The Task Force shall recommend its dissolution subject to the approval of the President.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of February in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.