MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 172

CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE NINTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FEBRUARY 22-25, 1986 EDSA REVOLUTION

WHEREAS, the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution restored democratic institutions, ushered meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country and is acclaimed to be the crowning glory and legacy of the Filipino to the world;

WHEREAS, the triumph of this Revolution was anchored upon people’s power, the ultimate demonstration of the citizen’s solidarity in seeking to transform Philippine society and chart a new course for the country’s history by linking arms and courageously asserting their democratic rights.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Committee for the Commemoration of the Ninth Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 Revolution.

Section 1. Composition. The Committee shall be composed of Mr. Jose de Jesus as Chairman, Social Security System Administrator Renato Valencia as Co-Chairman and the following as members:

Representatives of the NGOs/Business Community:

1. Ms. Victoria Garchitorena 2. Mr. Jose Concepcion, Jr. 3. Mr. Jose Alejandro 4. Mr. Octavio Espiritu 5. Mr. Manolo Lopez 6. Mr. Christopher Carreon 7. Ms. Denise Manosa 8. Mr. Jose Escaner 9. Mr. Lito Lorenzana 10. Monsignor Socrates Villegas 11. Mr. Vicente Jayme 12. Mr. Felipe F. Cruz, Jr. 13. Mr. David Consunji 14. Mr. Alberto Manlapid 15. Mr. Perfecto F. Quicho 16. Ms. Tina Monzon-Palma 17. Mr. Norberto Gonzales 18. Ms. Maria Montelibano 19. Ms. Patricia C. Sison

Representatives from the Government Sector:

20. Secretary Rafael Alunan III, Department of Interior and Local Government; 21. Secretary Gregorio Vigilar, Department of Public Works and Highways; 22. Secretary Salvador Enriquez, Department of Budget and Management; 23. Secretary Roberto Romulo, Department of Foreign Affairs; 24. Director-General Bren Z. Guiao, Kabisig People’s Movement; 25. Chairman Prospero Oreta, Metro Manila Authority; 26. Mayor Ismael Mathay, Jr., Quezon City; 27. Administrator Jose Rufino, Livelihood Corporation; 28. Usec. Honesto Isleta, Philippine Information Agency; 29. Chairman Alfredo Antonio, Development Bank of the Philippines; 30. Vice-Chairman Rogelio Singson, Bases Conversion Development Authority; and, 31. Director Serafin Quiazon, National Historical Institute.

Ms. Patricia Sison and Secretary Renato de Villa, former Chairpersons of the National Committee for the commemoration of the 8th Anniversary of the EDSA Revolution, shall serve as Advisers to the Committee.

SEC. 2. Function. The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Formulate a comprehensive plan for the nationwide commemoration of the 9th Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution, and coordinate with all sectors concerned the implementation of the same, taking into consideration austerity measures and the spirit of volunteerism;

2. Create such working committees and designate the respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors as may be necessary to ensure the success of the celebration; and,

3. Invite or enjoin and mobilize all sectors who would like to participate in the celebration and call upon any government instrumentality to render the necessary assistance therefor.

SEC. 3. Staff Support. The KABISIG People’s Movement National Operations Center (KPM-NOC) shall provide the technical and secretariat support to the Committee. The Heads of Departments, agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are enjoined to give full support to the Committee and its various working Committee and to actively participate in said celebrations.

SEC. 4. Funding. The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of THREE MILLION PESOS (P3,000,000.00) to support this activity. Concerned agencies may allocate such amount as may be necessary to defray the expenditures that maybe incurred from participation in the EDSA anniversary, subject to the usual accounting and auditing regulations.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of December, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.