MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 204

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE PHILIPPINE-AMERICAN FRIENDSHIP DAY ON 04 JULY 1996

WHEREAS, July 4, 1996 marks the 50th Anniversary of the Philippine-American Friendship Day which ushered the beginning of Philippine political independence from the American colonial rule;

WHEREAS, this milestone in Philippine history must be appropriately observed to promote and preserve the spirit of freedom, independence, nationalism and love of country and appreciate the contribution and sacrifice of war veterans in our pursuit of sovereignty;

WHEREAS, the event can serve as an occasion to rekindle Philippine-American friendship and chart a new course of relationship with the United States; and,

WHEREAS, to give meaning and direction to the celebration, there is a need to coordinate all activities during the observance of the event.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a National Executive Committee . There is hereby constituted a National Executive Committee on the Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Philippine-American Friendship Day, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to be composed of the following:

The private sector representatives shall be selected and designated by the Chairman of the Executive Committee.

SEC. 2. Functions of the Committee . The Committee shall take charge of the nationwide preparations for the 50th Anniversary of the Philippine-American Friendship Day on 04 July 1996. For this purpose, it shall have the following functions:

(a) Formulate all programs, projects and activities that shall be conducted in observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Philippine-American Friendship Day;

(b) Prepare the implementing guidelines for all programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(c) Orchestrate and coordinate the implementation of all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(d) Source funds and prepare the budget which shall be required by the Committee in the discharge of its functions; and

(e) Perform other tasks as may be assigned by the President.

SEC. 3. Operational Relationships . In the preparation and conduct of all programs, projects and activities in the observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Philippine-American Friendship Day, the Committee is authorized to call upon the assistance of any department, bureau, agency, office and other instrumentality of the Government, as well as invite any non-governmental organization as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.

SEC. 4. Creation of Sub-committees . The Committee may form sub-committees as it may deem necessary to effectively carry out its duties and responsibilities.

SEC. 5. Technical and Secretariat Support . The Department of Foreign Affairs shall provide technical, secretariat and administrative support to the Committee.

SEC. 6. Funding . Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order shall be taken from the respective appropriations of the concerned agencies. To fund its activities and operations for 1995, an initial amount of FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (P500,000.00) from the President’s Contingency Fund shall be released for the purpose.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.