MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 269

CONFIRMING THE ADOPTION OF THE FORT BONIFACIO MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN

WHEREAS, Section 4(a) of Republic Act No. 7227 provides that the Bases Conversion Development Authority (BaseCon) shall own, hold and/or administer portions of Metro Manila military camps which may be transferred to it by the President;

WHEREAS, Section 8(d) of Republic Act No. 7227 provides that a development plan embodying projects for conversion shall be approved by the President;

WHEREAS, the Master Development Plan of Fort Bonifacio, which was presented to the President and the Cabinet, was approved in principle last 07 June 1994;

WHEREAS, an updated version of the Master Development Plan has been undertaken and completed by BaseCon and the Fort Bonifacio Development Corporation (FBDC);

WHEREAS, this updated Master Development Plan was unanimously approved by the Municipality of Taguig under Municipal Resolution No. 46 s. of 1996;

WHEREAS, Fort Bonifacio is envisioned to be the “Nucleus of Philippine Progress in the 21st Century”, spearheading the Nation’s path towards global competitiveness;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to prioritize the implementation of the Master Development Plan for Fort Bonifacio to ensure that BaseCon will generate the needed funds for its conversion projects;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Confirmation of the Adoption of the Fort Bonifacio Master Development Plan . – The adoption of the Master Development Plan for Fort Bonifacio undertaken by BaseCon and the FBDC is hereby confirmed. This Master Development Plan shall serve as the framework for the development of Fort Bonifacio.

SEC. 2. Assistance from other Agencies. – All government offices, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, including but not limited to the following Departments, are ordered to support and assist BCDA for the speedy implementation of the Fort Bonifacio Master Plan:

a. The Department of National Defense (DND), for the relocation of the various military and civilian occupants within the project area within the agreed timetable between BaseCon and the Bonifacio Land Corporation (BLC);

b. The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), for the integration of their various infrastructure projects with the planned developments within Fort Bonifacio;

c. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), for the immediate processing of all survey applications, special patents and various environmental permits, submitted to them by BaseCon and/or by the FBDC; and

d. The Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), for the immediate processing of the various documents required for the development.

SEC. 3. Repealing Clause. All executive, department and other agency issuances inconsistent herewith are hereby deemed repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

SEC. 4. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of April in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.