MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 243

CREATING THE MANILA PORT DEVELOPMENT COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS , Presidential Decree No. 857 mandates the Philippine Ports Authority with the administration, planning, development, financing and operation of the port zones designated under its control;

WHEREAS , there is a need to relocate some activities within the port zone, particularly along the Pasig River, to more appropriate areas for safety and other purposes;

WHEREAS , the City of Manila desires to integrate certain development proposals located in the Manila Port Zone and anchorage areas;

WHEREAS , there is a need to synchronize and integrate the development plans of the Philippine Ports Authority and City of Manila to accelerate the improvement of the Manila Port Zone;

NOW, THEREFORE, I FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Manila Port Development Coordinating Committee . There is hereby created a Manila Port Coordinating Committee which shall be responsible for the preparation, integration and program development for the Manila Port Zone. This project shall be considered a priority development project for the City of Manila and the Philippine Ports Authority.

SEC. 2. Composition . The Manila Port Development Coordinating Committee shall be composed of representatives of the following:

SEC. 3. Powers, Functions and Responsibilities . The committee shall:

a. Formulate and coordinate proposed plans of the City of Manila for the purpose of harmonizing or integrating the same into the Master Plan for the Port of Manila;

b. Consider the relocation and establishment of the Manila Financial District along Bonifacio Drive;

c. Rationalize the utilization and allocation of the area for commercial, tourism and port-related establishment;

d. Determine, coordinate and plan for the transfer of all government agencies and offices occupying areas in the port zone to an appropriate Government Center within or, as appropriate, outside the port zone;

e. Recognize the rights of existing lease holders provided that they shall conform with the development plan for the area;

f. Coordinate with all government agencies concerned for the removal and relocation of all illegal occupants in the area; and

g. Determine what properties may be made available for the sale to the private sector in accordance with the Development Plan.

SEC. 4. The Committee is hereby authorized to avail of the services of other government agencies, as may be necessary, in the performance of their tasks. The Authority is further authorized to hire Consultants in the preparation of plans and documents for the bidding and in the evaluation of bids for the development of the South Harbor Expanded Port Zone. Funding for the consultancy services shall be charged against the corporate funds of the Authority.

SEC. 5. All Heads of government offices shall cooperate and provide assistance to the Committee as needed.

SEC. 6. The Committee shall submit its report to the President for information and/or action within ninety (90) days hereof, including a timetable for the execution for the plan, which shall be incorporated in the Philippine Ports Authority’s 25-Year Master Plan.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.