MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 156

DIRECTING THE CONDUCT OF A CONFERENCE ON POPULATION, ENVIRONMENT AND PEACE IN 1995 AND CREATING A NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE TO PLAN AND PREPARE FOR THE CONFERENCE

WHEREAS , Sec. 5, Article II of the Philippine Constitution provides that “the maintenance of peace and order, the protection of life, liberty and property, and the promotion of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings of democracy”;

WHEREAS , Section 9, Article II, of the Constitution provides that “the State shall promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies that provide adequate social services, promote full employment, a rising standard of living, and an improved quality of life for all”;

WHEREAS , Sec. 12, Article II, of the Constitution provides that “the State recognizes the sanctity of family life and shall protect and strengthen the family as a basic autonomous social institution [and] shall equally protect the life of the mother and the life of the unborn from conception”;

WHEREAS , Sec. 16, Article II, of the Constitution provides that “the State shall protect and advance the right of the people to a balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature”;

WHEREAS , Sec. 3 of RA 7160 provides that “xxx Local government units shall share with the National Government the responsibility in the management and maintenance of ecological balance within their territorial jurisdiction xxx” and that “xxx The participation of the private sector in local governance, particularly in the delivery of basic services shall be encouraged to ensure the viability of local autonomy as an alternative strategy for sustainable development xxx”;

WHEREAS , pursuant to these mandates, the State has responded with the formulation and implementation of the Philippine Strategy for Sustainable Development, the Social Reform Agenda, and the Philippine Population Management Program as primary program pillars;

WHEREAS , there is a need for the local and national government to get together with non-governmental, community-based and sectoral organizations to formulate a national policy agenda and framework of action for human and ecological security aligned with the primary program pillars, in the context of the recently concluded International Conference on Population and Development, the forthcoming World Summit for Social Development, the Second International Forum on the Culture of Peace, and the 1997 Global Earth Charter;

WHEREAS , corollary to this effort for national policy formulation is its operationalization through local strategic plans;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Sec. 1. Holding of a Conference on Population, Environment and Peace . There shall be a Conference on Population, Environment and Peace, to be known as the “Gathering for Human and Ecological Security”, on June 15-17, 1995. The Conference shall aim to generate consensus among national and local government officials and  legislators; non-governmental, community-based and sectoral organizations; and spiritual and indigenous leaders for an ethic of human and ecological security and for the formulation of a national policy agenda and framework of action, which shall included local strategic plans and the People’s Earth Charter.

Sec. 2. Holding of Regional Workshops. A series of regional conference workshops including interactive consultations shall be conducted in preparation for the conference to raise public awareness and stimulate broad discussion on population, environment and peace issues vital to human and ecological security.

Sec. 3.Creation of a National Executive Committee for the Conference . To plan and  prepare for the conduct of the Conference, a National Executive committee is hereby organized.

a) Composition. The National Executive Committee shall be composed of the following:

–

b) Functions . The National Executive Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

b.1 Refine and finalize the Conference design and mechanics for approval of the President;

b.2 Review and approve the project design of the regional conferences;

b.3 Formulate and monitor compliance to a timetable of activities from the regional conferences to the “Gathering on Human and Ecological Security” to post conference activities;

b.4 Coordinate with national and foreign funding institutions regarding resource generation and mobilization;

b.5 Oversee and ensure the successful conduct of the regional workshops and the Conference; and

b.6 Ensure submission to the President, within fifteen (15) days from the holding of the Conference, the national policy agenda and program framework of action.

b.7 Submit regular reports on the status and results of the regional workshops and preparations for the Conference to the President, through the Executive Secretary.

Sec. 4. Secretariat Support. The Department of Interior and Local Government and the Commission on Population shall jointly provide secretariat support to the National Executive Committee and its activities, the regional workshops and the Conference. The Secretary of the National Executive Committee shall be the Head of the Secretariat.

Sec. 5. Assistance from Government Offices. The Chairman of the National Executive Committee is authorized to call on all departments and agencies of government including government owned and controlled corporations to actively assist on the effective and efficient implementation of the regional workshops and conference.

Sec. 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the regional workshops and the Conference, at such amounts as may be necessary, to be determined jointly by the National Executive Committee and the Department of Budget and Management, shall be charged against the President’s Contingent Fund.

Sec. 7. Initial Funding Support. Two million pesos shall be made available to the Secretary of Interior and Local Government, as Chairman of the National Executive Committee, to cover initial costs, from the President’s Contingent Fund.

Sec. 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.