MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 171

CONSTITUTING A PHILIPPINE HOST COMMITTEE FOR THE 1995 JOHNNIE WALKER GOLF CLASSIC

WHEREAS, the Philippines has successfully played host to major world conferences and international sporting events;

WHEREAS, the Philippines won the bid to host the 1995 Johnnie Walker Golf Classic to be held at the Orchard Golf and Country Club in Dasmariñas, Cavite, on January 26-29, 1995;

WHEREAS, the 1994 Johnnie Walker Golf Classic was held earlier this year in Phuket, Thailand, where the tournament consolidated its position as the premier golfing event throughout Asia;

WHEREAS, the increasing success of the Johnnie Walker Classic in the Asian Region, boasting of a field that incorporates the leading players from all continents, has ensured that the event is now recognized as one of the top tournaments in the world, attracting not only top caliber players from various regions but also golf enthusiasts and tourists who visit the host country to watch the tournament;

WHEREAS, the Philippines was chosen as the host for the 1995 event based on the fact that the country is one of the most exotic destinations in Asia with a rich culture, and warm and friendly people, and that the Philippines has experienced a golf boom over the last few years;

WHEREAS, the staging of the Johnnie Walker Classic directly supports the efforts of the tourism industry in projecting and promoting the Philippines as an ideal golf destination for international and local golf enthusiasts and tourists;

WHEREAS, the holding of the said golfing event will bring international prestige, publicity, goodwill, and economic benefits to the country.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. A Philippine Host Committee (PHC) headed by the Department of Tourism together with its attached agencies, and the Republic of the Philippines Golf Association (RPGA), is hereby constituted to oversee and undertake all the necessary preparations for the 1995 Johnnie Walker Golf Classic.

The Secretary of Tourism shall be the PHC Overall Chairman with the President of the RPGA as Co-Chairman.

SEC. 2. The PHC, through the DOT, is directed to coordinate with and assist the tournament organizers with respect to hosting requirements, particularly in the areas of but not limited to security, publicity and promotions, land and air arrangements, airport reception and facilitation, and accommodations.

SEC. 3. All concerned government departments, agencies, and offices, including government-owned and controlled corporations, whose assistance will be sought by the PHC, are directed to extend their support and resources to the Johnnie Walker Classic to ensure its success.

SEC. 4. The amount necessary for the Johnnie Walker Classic, including the operations of the PHC and its secretariat, working groups and advisory boards, shall come from sponsorships, donations, grants, contributions, proceeds from tournament-related activities, or any form of assistance from any private or government entities.

SEC. 5. The DOT is authorized to source funds from its trust liability account, pursuant to Section 3 of E.O. No. 46 (September 4, 1986) to cover the hosting fee to be incurred by the PHC.

SEC. 6. The PHC is authorized to open an account with a government bank in which income/proceeds from Sections 3 & 4 above shall be deposited and disbursed in accordance with its accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 7. The PHC shall be authorized to pay honorarium to those who will be involved with the Johnnie Walker Classic subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 8. The PHC through the DOT, PTA and PCVC, shall coordinate the effective implementation of this Order.

SEC. 9. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.