MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 303

ESTABLISHING THE PHILIPPINE APEC STUDY CENTER NETWORK

WHEREAS, APEC Economic Leaders in Seattle agreed to undertake the Leader’s Education Initiative;

WHEREAS, the Philippines as an active participate to this initiative has established APEC Study Centers in various universities and research institutions in the country;

WHEREAS, APEC Study Centers offer an independent perspective in APEC issues and concerns, especially those of particular interest to the country;

WHEREAS, Philippine Study Centers have provided technical assistance to government agencies, conducted researches, and organized and sponsored conference, meetings and seminars related to APEC activities;

WHEREAS, Philippine Study Centers in the country have seen the need to organize a network of Philippine APEC Study Centers with the view of effectively servicing the research requirements of Philippine participation in APEC activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Philippine APEC Study Center Network (PASCN) . There is hereby established a Philippine APEC Study Center Network which shall promote, coordinate and be the focal point of APEC-related research and studies to be conducted by the PASCN member institutions in accordance with a research program framework to be formulated by PASCN. The PASCN shall be composed initially of the following universities and research institutions, namely:

1. Asian Institute of Management (AIM) 2. Ateneo de Manila University 3. De La Salle University 4. Mindanao State University (MSU) 5. Philippine Institute for Development Studies (PIDS) 6. University of Asia and the Pacific 7. University of San Carlos 8. University of the Philippines 9. Xavier University 10. Foreign Service Institute

Membership to the PASCN shall be extended to other universities and research institutions who can meet the criteria to be established by the PASCN.

1.a Policy Advisory Board. There shall be a policy Advisory Board which shall give advise to the PASCN Steering Committee in the formulation of the policy and research program, and make recommendations on the studies and research program to be undertaken. The Board shall be composed of a Chairman and senior representatives, with a rank no lower than an Undersecretary, from the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Commission on Higher Education (CHED), National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), The Chairman of the APEC Foundation of the Philippines and three representatives from the business sector, labor and media to be selected by the Board for a term of two years. The interim Chairman of the Board shall be the Senior Representative of the Department of Foreign Affairs who shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, his successor shall be selected from among the other members of the Board based on the criteria and Terms of Reference to be established by the Board.

1.b PASCN Steering Committee. To set the broad policy direction and approved the work program and budget of the PASCN, there is hereby constituted a PASCN Steering Committee composed of representatives of the Philippine Institute for Development Studies (PIDS) as Chairman, four PASCN members to be selected by the Network member representatives among themselves.

1.c PASCN Lead Agency. The Philippine Institute for Development Studies (PIDS is hereby designated as the Lead Agency which shall have the responsibility of managing and coordinating the implementation of the programs and activities of PASCN. PIDS shall administer the Network’s funds in accordance with the budget as approved by the Steering Committee. For this purpose, appropriations for the operations of the PASCN shall be released directly to the PIDS which shall constitute a separate account from regular PIDS funds.

1.d Committee Secretariat. To provide staffing support to the PASCN Steering Committee, there is hereby constituted a PASCN Secretariat to be composed of a Project Director and a support staff. The PASCN Steering Committee shall have the authority to add to the staff personnel of the Secretariat as and when needed. The Secretariat shall render assistance to the PASCN Steering Committee in the drafting and formulation of the research program that shall be the framework for the research and studies to be undertaken by the PASCN members and in monitoring the implementation thereof. The Secretariat shall be under the operational control and supervision of the PIDS and shall be housed at PIDS.

SEC. 2. PASCN Objectives. The PASCN shall work towards the fulfillment of the following objectives.

a. To promote opportunities for collaborative research on APEC-related issues;

b. To establish data and information base on APEC and the Asia-Pacific economics;

c. To encourage faculty and students of higher education to undertake studies, theses and dissertations on APEC issues;

d To facilitate the exchange of information between or among government, non-government organizations, academic and research institutions, business sector and the public in general on APEC-related issues;

e. To provide technical assistance to government agencies and private organizations on APEC-related initiatives;

f. To undertake capability building programs for government agencies on matters related to APEC; and

g. To establish linkages with other PAEC Study Centers in the region.

SEC. 3. Functional Areas and Responsibilities.

3.a Research and Fellowship Program. The PASCN shall formulate a research program focused on studies that will be utilized in promoting a better understanding of PAEC and the Asia-Pacific economies and in guiding the country’s position vis-a-vis specific concerns on trade, investment liberalization and facilitation and development cooperation. The studies will be interdisciplinary and policy-oriented with emphasis on the interests of the Philippines. As part of the research program, research grants and fellowships will be awarded to students who will be working on APEC-related issues for their theses and dissertations; and a faculty, student and researcher exchange program will be organized among the members of the network and with other APEC Study Centers.

Information Dissemination and Publication Program. The PASCN shall hold conferences, organize seminars, workshops and roundtable discussions, and issue publications for the purpose of disseminating and making available to the government, NGO’s educational and research institutions, business community and the public in general the results of APEC-related studies and information. PASCN shall also set up an electronic network linked to other APEC Study Centers in the region to facilitate the exchange and dissemination of information on a wider scale.

Technical Assistance to Government Agencies and Private Organizations. The PASCN shall provide government agencies and private organizations with technical assistance in preparation for APEC-related meetings and conferences and on matters related to APEC.

SEC. 4. Funding. The amount of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10,000,000.00) is hereby set aside from the appropriation of the President’s Contingency Fund in the General Appropriations Act for FY 1997 as initial funding assistance to defray the maintenance and operational requirements of PASCN. Subsequent funding requirements for the PASCN operations shall be included and considered as a separate item in the budget proposal of the PIDS and provided for as a distinct allocation in the Annual General Appropriations Act of Congress: Provided that the PASCN may augment its funds by undertaking special projects and research activities funded by foreign or locally-sourced grants and donations from government, non-government, and unilateral and multilateral organizations.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23 day of November in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.