MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 26

DECLARING OCTOBER 1998 AS OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH MONTH

WHEREAS, the country’s rapidly growing industry plays a vital role in achieving a balanced economic and social development;

WHEREAS, during the past years, the industry as a whole has experienced alarming incidents of workplace or worksite accidents and work-related diseases which caused not only heavy economic losses but also immeasurable human sufferings;

WHEREAS, the promotion of safety and health of all workers, including children, women, homeworkers and those in the informal sector, has been a continuing commitment of government, labor, management, safety professionals and other concerned sectors;

WHEREAS, an effective and occupational illness prevention program needs the support of all segments of society whose maximum participation and initiatives can ensure a truly meaningful, productive and safe year for every worker;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare October 1998, as “OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH MONTH.”

The Department of Labor and Employment, the agency responsible for occupational safety and health laws, rules and regulations, shall organize and coordinate all activities and programs of the public and private sectors to ensure the meaningful and successful implementation of this proclamation.

All city and municipal government units are enjoined to establish or designate in its premises a “one-stop shop”, or similar mechanism, through which all concerned government agencies can effectively implement their respective occupational safety and health programs as mandated by law, and where the workers and other constituents can readily avail of government OSH services on a regular basis.

All employers, whether government or private, are encouraged to conduct at least one OSH program in the month of October to promote OSH consciousness in all workplaces.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8 th day of OCTOBER, 1998 in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia