MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 394

FOCUSING ON AND ADOPTING THE THEME OF “PEACE, RECONCILIATION AND DEVELOPMENT” DURING THE FLAG-RAISING CEREMONY ON 2 SEPTEMBER 1996 (MONDAY)

WHEREAS , the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Moro National Liberation Front are set to sign a peace agreement on Monday, 2 September 1996 to formally end more than two decades of secessionist war in Mindanao;

WHEREAS , such an auspicious and historic event should be accorded great importance and be witnessed by the entire nation to celebrate the advent of peace, harmony and development in Southern Philippines; and

WHEREAS , the observance of such an event during the flag ceremony reflects our reverence not only to the Philippine flag but to the more important milestone in the history of our people.

NOW, THEREFORE, I FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. All Department heads and heads of national government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations and their subsidiaries, are directed to adopt the theme, “Peace, Reconciliation and Development” during the regular flag-raising ceremonies in their respective offices this coming Monday, 2 September 1996, which coincides with the signing the GRP-MNLF Final Peace Agreement.

SEC. 2. During the ceremonies, departments and agencies shall inform their respective employees of the importance and/or significance of the peace and development efforts of the government in Mindanao, including, but not limited to the chronological summary of the peace process, points of agreement between both parties, and creation of a Special Zone of Peace and Development (ZOPAD) in Mindanao.

SEC. 3. All heads of offices and public school teachers shall enjoin the maximum participation of all government employees and students, such as the wearing of any clothing apparel with blue and yellow colors, symbols of peace and development.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS) and the Chairman on Higher Education (CHED), in coordination with all departments/agencies, local government officials, and private sector organizations, are directed to likewise enjoin public and private learning institutions to set aside a significant portion of their school hours to tune in to any radio or TV broadcast of the signing of the Peace Agreement, and to encourage discussions thereon by the teachers, students, and other school personnel.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) LUIS C. LIWANAG II Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia