Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 429

AUTHORIZING THE CONDUCT IN THIS OFFICE OF A TWO-SERIES COURSE ON ATTITUDE AND COURTESY REINFORCEMENT THROUGH PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT

The newly renovated Administration Building (now Mabini Hall) will be ready for occupancy by the middle of this year. While the Building’s facade has not entirely changed except for the new paints and window styling, the interiors have been completely restructured to approximate the facilities and amenities of modern structures and office spaces rearranged to conform to the requirements of offices based on their respective objectives and functions.

The Mabini Hall will be closer to being an intelligent building with both modern fixtures and furnitures and state of the art communications and management information systems. It will be eventually attuned to the future status of Malacañang as the nerve center of information for decision and policy making in our bureaucracy.

In line with this, there is a need to re-orient our office personnel on the proper office behavior and attitudes befitting the new working environment. Through the process of self-examination and re-orientation, our employees may be able to internalize in themselves correct and functional values through personality development. Accordingly, a two-series course on Attitude and Courtesy Reinforcement through Personality Development is hereby authorized to be conducted by the Career and Personnel Development Division Personnel Office from May 26-30, 1997 for the rank-and-file and on June 16-20, 1997 for division chiefs and up, at the Old GSIS Building, Arroceros, Manila.

The amount of Sixty Seven Thousand Pesos (P67,000.00) is hereby authorized to be disbursed from the allocation for training of this office, for the expenses incidental with the conduct of the said course.

All Chiefs of Primary Offices/Units are hereby enjoined to support the said course. Please submit the name/s of your representatives/nominees to the CPDD, Personnel Office, not later than May 16, 1997, for the rank and file, and on June 5, 1997 for the division chiefs and up.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) LUIS C. LIWANAG II Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, April 30, 1997

Source : CDAsia