MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 86

CONSTITUTING THE COUNCIL OF ELDERS AND ADVISERS FOR THE PROVINCE OF MAGUINDANAO

WHEREAS , it is imperative to the government’s reconciliation effort and peace initiative in the Province of Maguindanao that reliable information and competent advise regarding the peace and order situation and reconciliation program in the province be made available to the President and to those directly involved in the peace process initiated by the government;

WHEREAS , there is a need to provide the people of Maguindanao Province a more united leadership for a peaceful community and for attainment of economic prosperity;

WHEREAS , a Council of Elders composed of political, social and religious leaders in the province may be constituted for this purpose;

NOW, THEREFORE , I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. There is hereby constituted a Council of Elders and Advisers for the Province of Maguindanao which shall be an advisory body to the President. It shall be composed of the following:

The Council shall be attached to the Office of the Presidential Assistant for Mindanao.

Section 2. The Chairman and Members of the Council shall serve at the pleasure of the President. They shall moreover serve without compensation.

Section 3. As an advisory body, the Council shall have the following functions:

a. Give information, recommendation and advise to the President thru the Office of the Presidential Assistant for Mindanao, the National Unification Commission, and the Regional Peace and Order Council regarding the peace and order situation in the province;

b. To act as peace advocates and unifying force, as well as to assist in the reconciliation efforts of the government and the private sector in the Province of Maguindanao;

c. Cooperate and coordinate with the above named Offices for the attainment of lasting and permanent peace in the region; and

d. Exercise such other functions as may be required by the President.

Section 4. The Office of the Presidential Assistant for Mindanao shall provide the Council with technical and administrative support.

Section 5. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of February in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and NinetyThree.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source: CDAsia