MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 271

DESIGNATING THE CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF THE PRESIDENTIAL FACT-FINDING AND POLICY ADVISORY COMMISSION ON THE PROTECTION OF OVERSEAS FILIPINOS

Pursuant to Executive Order No. 231 dated March 20, 1995, the following are hereby designated to constitute the Presidential Fact-Finding and Policy Advisory Commission on the Protection of Overseas Filipinos:

The Commission is enjoined to immediately convene and perform its tasks as defined under the above-cited Executive Order.

As far as practicable, the Commission shall be guided by the following timetable:

1.) Within fifteen (15) days from its assumption of office, submit a report on the Flor Contemplacion-Delia Maga Case;

2.) Within thirty (30) days, submit recommendations on safety nets and other protective measures to prevent or remedy abuses against overseas workers, and other Filipino nationals abroad.

3) Within sixty (60) days, submit a comprehensive progress report, including policy recommendations, as well as identification of factual instances that may require filing of administrative and other charges against government officials or private individuals and/or recommendations for the filing of administrative or criminal cases as the case may be.

4.) Within sixty (60) days and after appropriate public hearings, submit proposed legislative and other measures including proposed bilateral and multilateral agreements to enhance job opportunities, selectivity of employment and protection of overseas workers consistent with international standards;

5.) Within ninety (90) days, submit a final report on the work of the Commission.

6.) From time to time during the Commission’s term, submit such other recommendations, suggestions, studies and proposals that may properly serve as guidelines for the Executive Department, particularly the Departments of Foreign Affairs, Labor and Employment, and Social Welfare and Development to improve their performance, effectivity and responsiveness on the matter of deployment, support to and protection of all Filipino nationals abroad, particularly overseas workers.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of March, in th year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and ninety-five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia