MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 73

DESIGNATING THE OFFICIALS AUTHORIZED TO ACT ON CERTAIN MATTERS AND SIGN DOCUMENTS “BY AUTHORITY OF THE PRESIDENT”

During the leave of absence of Executive Secretary Edelmiro A. Amante, Sr., the following officials are authorized to act on the following matters and sign the corresponding documents “By authority of the President”:

I. Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

1. Appointments of OP personnel below the rank of Assistant Secretary;

2. Decisions on appealed cases from departments, agencies or offices; decisions on administrative investigations of employees or officials below the rank of bureau director; suspension, cancellation or modification of licenses, permits or other privileges;

3. All matters forming part of the duties and functions of the Executive Secretary and not otherwise assigned to other officials under this Memorandum Order.

II. Deputy Executive Secretary

1. Budgetary and corporate matters as processed by the Office for Budget and Corporate Affairs, upon prior approval of the President;

2. Directive for the release of contingency and calamity funds, upon prior approval of the President;

3. Travel tax exemptions;

4. Transmittal of foreign travel authority of department secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank.

III. Head, Presidential Management Staff

1. Economic matters coming from departments, agencies or offices;

2. Implementation of Cabinet decisions;

3. Tax exemption of foreign donations.

IV. Presidential Assistant for Political Affairs

1. Referrals or endorsements to departments, agencies or offices involving requests for assistance;

2. Administrative and technical matters coming from the Presidential Action Center and the Political Affairs Office.

V. Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs

1. Decisions on appealed cases affirming orders or actions of departments, agencies or offices; decisions on administrative investigations of employees or officials below the rank of bureau director where the penalty imposed does not involve suspension or dismissal;

2. Administrative, personnel and finance (OP payroll, vouchers, RIVs, etc.) matters in the Executive Office;

3. Retirement papers of military personnel.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of January, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia