Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 127

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES ON OFFICE UNIFORMS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 116 and Special Order No. 150, both dated 06 April 1993, the following guidelines on office uniforms in the Office of the President (Proper), are hereby prescribed:

1. Concerned officials and employees shall wear the uniforms four times a week as specified in the following schedules, with Fridays as wash days:

a. For Ladies

b. For Gentlemen

1. PSO VI up to the rank of Director shall wear white or blue coat barong (long sleeves) or long sleeves with tie alternately every other Monday and any other color of barong or polo shirt on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday;

2. White collar employees (rank and file) shall wear white or blue polo barong (short sleeves) alternately every other Monday and any other color of barong or polo shirt on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday;

3. Blue collar employees (janitors, carpenters, parking attendants, gardeners, electricians, and other civilian ground/building employees) shall wear white or blue polo shirt or T-shirt with collar alternately every other Monday and any other color of T-shirt, preferably blue on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. In addition, blue collar workers working in conspicuous public areas should wear shoes (at least rubber). Slippers are not allowed in said areas; and

4. Employees assigned as official drivers of OP official vehicles shall wear white or blue polo barong from Monday to Friday or as the need arises.

2. Wearing of the prescribed uniforms shall start on 05 July 1993.

3. Doctors, dentists, nurses and other medical attendants of the Malacañang Clinic shall wear the new outfit worn by the general staffs on Mondays. On Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, they have the option to wear the prescribed uniforms for the general staff or wear their professional gown/white medical uniform.

4. Women in mourning or on the family way may wear the customary or appropriate outfit in lieu of the required uniforms.

5. Personnel of the Internal House Affairs Office and the Social Secretary’s Office, shall have their own appropriate dress code.

6. Sanctions for non-compliance:

a. First offense – written warning b. One (1) day salary deduction for every subsequent infraction

7. The Dress Code, pursuant to Civil Service Commission Memorandum Circular No. 14, series of 1991, shall be strictly observed. Any violation of the above-stated CSC Circular and of this Order as specified under OP Order No. 116, dated 06 April 1993, shall be considered as a ground for disciplinary action.

The heads of offices and major units shall inform the Personnel Office weekly on any violation of the herein guidelines.

Strict observance of the guidelines prescribed herein is hereby enjoined.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Manila, May 3, 1993

References: Illustrations A and B

Source : CDAsia