Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 122

FURTHER AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 29, DATED 14 AUGUST 1992 AS AMENDED, AUTHORIZING THE CONDUCT OF AN IN-HOUSE GRADUATE PROGRAM IN MASTER IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (MPA) AND MASTER IN PUBLIC AND BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION (MPBA) IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Memorandum Order No. 29, dated 14 August 1992 as amended, is hereby further amended as follows:

Section 1. The second paragraph appearing on page one thereof shall read as follows:

“The expenses for tuition and miscellaneous charges per participant which shall be embodied in a Memorandum of Agreement to be entered into between this Office and the PUP Graduate School, shall be advanced by this Office, chargeable against savings pursuant to the aforecited CSC Memorandum Circular No. 13, or the authentication fees set aside as a trust fund by the provisions of LOI No. 1446, dated 23 January 1985, for the exclusive use of the Office of the President. These expenses shall be subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules, and shall be reimbursed by the participants in the following manner:

At least fifty percent (50%) of these expenses shall be deducted from the salaries of the participants spread out during the period of their study under the In-House Graduate Program (Program);

The balance shall be paid after completion by the participants of their course, out of salary deductions spread over a period not to exceed three (3) years;

Provided that, no employee of this Office who shall be enrolled under the Program or has availed of the benefits of the same, and has not yet fully paid his obligations to this Office may resign from the government service or be transferred to other governmental agencies until full payment thereof.”

Section 2. The third paragraph appearing on page one thereof shall read as follows:

“However, participants whose grade average for a particular semester is not lower than 1.5, shall no longer be required to reimburse the expenses advanced by this Office for that particular semester in recognition of their exemplary academic performance. Provided, that they shall complete or finish the course. Any participant who fails to complete or finish the course shall reimburse this Office the full amount advanced for his or her enrollment, regardless of scholastic standing.

Section 3. The second subparagraph appearing on page two thereof shall read as follows:

2. To qualify, participants must

a. have served the Office of the President for at least two (2) consecutive years;

b. be a holder of an appropriate Bachelor’s Degree with an average grade of not lower than 2.0, or its equivalent (official transcript of records must be submitted);

c. qualify in the admission test given by the PUP Graduate School;

d. have a performance rating of at least “Very Satisfactory” for two (2) consecutive rating periods;

e. must be in good physical and mental condition (as evidenced by a medical certificate); and

f. must have at least twenty (20) days leave credits upon enrollment the same to be maintained for the duration of the course.

The above requirements under (b) and (c) may be waived by this Office in accordance with PUP’s Regulations and Standards for Masteral Degrees, attached hereto as Annex “A”.

Section 4. The following paragraphs shall be inserted before the last paragraph appearing on page two (2) thereof:

“Those without permanent appointment and with less than ten (10) years of service in the Office of the President may avail of the Program; Provided that, full reimbursement to this Office of the expenses advanced shall be made during the period of their study under the Program, subject to the rule on discount per semester for exemplary academic performance:

“All participants are required to maintain a “Very Satisfactory” performance rating in their work during the whole duration of their study under the Program, otherwise, they shall be asked to discontinue availing of the same.

“The OP Personnel Development Committee shall ensure the full implementation of the Program in accordance with the foregoing guidelines and the provisions of Memorandum Order No. 29, dated 14 August 1992, as amended.”

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-three.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Reference: Regulations and Standards

Source: CDAsia