Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 260

ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES IMPLEMENTING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 221, SERIES OF 1994

Pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 221 dated July 25, 1994: “ REQUIRING STRICT OBSERVANCE OF ALL EXISTING SECURITY MEASURES AND INSTITUTING ADDITIONAL SECURITY REGULATIONS ”, the Nationwide Security and Allied Services (NSAS) Inc. which is providing security services to the Office of the President in six (6) different Areas of Responsibility (AOR) specified in the OP-NSAS Contract effective February 1 to December 31, 1995, shall implement and enforced the following security measures upon the recommendation of the Director, Engineer’s Office and Group Commander, Presidential Security Group (PSG):

1. All OP/PSG personnel and visitors with hand carried items shall pass through inspection and/or thru metal detectors. Any deadly weapons like firearms, knife, etc., detected must be deposited by personnel concerned to duty security personnel prior access to any office inside the Administration Building. The detailed guard, in turn, must issue deposit/luggage control tag for easy identification of items deposited and for claims purposes.

2. All incoming/outgoing bags, parcels and bulky items shall be subject to inspection. For that matter, the guard on detail must maintain log book(s) for government properties brought out accompanied by a tally-out certification from the possessor’s head of office.

3. No office equipment, furnitures, machines, supplies, etc. shall be brought out of the premises without the necessary release document.

4. Food vendors are strictly prohibited inside the Admin. Building and its premises.

5. Strictly no loitering/stand-bys in the Lobby area and hallways.

6. Only authorized personnel shall be allowed within the premises as “stay-in”. To ensure implementation, the detailed guards must maintain list of authorized “stay-in” personnel and must conduct random check of offices having “stay-in” to determine compliance, any violation or abuse of authority. Any violation must be immediately reported in writing to office concerned.

7. Bringing bicycles inside the building is strictly prohibited.

8. Parking of vehicles within the yellow lane infront of the Admin. Building is strictly prohibited.

9. Implementation of “No PSG Security Control Tag, No Entry” Policy by thedetailed security guard(s) whenever OP/PSG personnel enters the Administration Building;

10. Maintain Log Book(s) to record the time in and out of visitors, purpose of visit and person(s) to be visited;

11. Any unusual incident within their Area of Responsibility (AOR), must be reported immediately to the office of MAJOR SANTIAGO BALUYOT PA, Commanding Officer, Presidential Guards and/or his representative thru telephone # 521-23-01 local 3200, 3202 or 3203.

12. In base of fire at their Area of Responsibility (AOR), the security guards on duty must immediately activate the fire alarm system, call the nearest fire station and inform Director Reynaldo A. San Gabriel, MAJOR SANTIAGO BALUYOT PA and/or their authorized representatives;

13. Erasure that all windows, doors and other means of entry are properly closed/locked particularly after office hours/during nightime and holidays. Ally unusual thing noticed must be immediately reported to the concerned head of office and MAJOR SANTIAGO BALUYOT PA for proper investigation;

14. Visitors must be guided to the place/office to be visited, for easy monitoring of the movement.

For strict implementation and compliance.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) LEONARDO A. QUISUMBING Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, 07 February 1995

Source: Malacañang Records Office