RE-ESTABLISHING AND RE-ACTIVATING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT COORDINATING CENTER (OPCC) FOR THE STATE VISIT TO JAPAN

WHEREAS, the OPCC was established as an ad-hoc body in the Office of the President to provide timely information to the President on evolving critical issues and developments during the period of the President’s conduct of foreign visits;

WHEREAS, the OPCC was initially activated on 24-hour operation during the state visit to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia on 26-30 January1993, and was last reactivated during the President’s Visit to the Americas on 16 to 29 October 1995;

WHEREAS, there is need to establish a high level monitoring and reporting system that will cover all sectors and issues nationwide during the state visit of the President to Japan;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby re-establish and re-activate the operation of the Office of the President Coordinating Center during the state visit to Japan (16 to 19 November 1995).

SECTION 1. COMPOSITION. The OPCC will be under the overall supervision and responsibility of the Executive Secretary as OPCC Chairman. The Secretaries of National Defence and Interior and Local Government will serve as OPCC Vice-Chairmen. There will be an executive Committee composed of the following: National Security Adviser, Chief Presidential Legal Counsel, Senior Deputy Executive Secretary, Head, Presidential Management Staff, and the Press Secretary.

The OPCC Chairman will coordinate with the Vice-President, Senate President, and the Speaker of the House whenever necessary. ——

SECTION 2. FUNCTION. The functions of the OPCC will primarily include:

SECTION 3. OPERATING STRUCTURE. The OPCC will be operational for the period 2000H November 15 1995 to 1800H November 19 1995 and will involve the participation and cooperation of departments and agencies under the Executive Branch to be grouped into the following operating units:

The OPCC may call upon any government agency or instrumentality to participate and cooperate in the monitoring activities as may be necessary. For this purpose, all Cabinet Members and Heads of Agencies will provide the OPCC Secretariat with the telephone number(s) where they can be accessed on a 24-hour basis.

SECTION 4. EXPANDED TASK FORCE LILY. The Expanded Task Force Lily will operate on a 24-hour basis at the 4 th Floor of the New Executive Building (NEB), Malacañang, Manila. The member agencies will designate senior officials of their respective departments / agencies who will undertake 12-hour shifts at the NEB. Said senior officials should have ranks of at least Undersecretary or Asst. Secretary (for departments) or should be the head of agency, deputy head of agency, or senior manager/director (for other agencies).

The Expanded Task Force Lily will focus their monitoring and coordinating activities on security, peace and order, and other critical issues and services (e.g. rice, oil situation, calamity, power situation, etc.). In line with this, they will submit reports to the OPCC, through its Secretariat at 4-hour intervals.

Departments/agencies under the Expanded Task Force Lily will share computer and communication equipment for their NEB operations for the duration of the President’s visit to Japan.

SECTION 5. COUNTERPART COORDINATING CENTERS. The Counterpart Coordinating Centers (CCCs) in all Departments and Agencies including GOCCs will be re-established in their respective offices primarily to monitor and coordinate their respective sectors. Said Centers will operate on a 24-hour basis under the supervision of the duly-designated action officers with ranks of at least Undersecretary or Asst. Secretary (for departments) or should be the head of agency, or senior manager/director (for other agencies). Said action officers should have aces to their department/agency heads on a 24-hour basis.

The CCCs will submit monitoring reports on their respective sectors at 6-hour intervals to the OPCC Secretariat.

SECTION 6. REGIONAL COORDINATING CENTERS. The Regional Director of the Department of Interior and Local Government will ensure the establishment of Regional Coordinating Centers (RCCs) in their respective regions by 2000H 15 November 1995.

The RCCs will operate on a 24-hour basis and will be based at the PNP Regional Headquarters. The member agencies will designate senior officials of their respective offices who will undertake 12-hour shifts at the PNP RECOM. Said senior officials should have ranks of at least Director III / II or should be the head / deputy of the regional office.

The RCCs will focus their monitoring and coordinating activities on regional developments and activities. In line with this, they will submit reports directly to the OPCC, through its Secretariat, at 6-hour intervals.

Departments/agencies under the RCCs will share computer and communication equipment and office supplies for their operations for the duration of the President’s Visit to Japan.

SECTION 7. OPCC SUPPORT GROUPS. The following will serve as support units to the OPCC:

It will be supervised by a senior official of the OPS with the rank of at least an Assistant Secretary. Its personnel and duty officers will undertake 12-hour shift at the OPS, Kalayaan Hall, Malacañang Palace.

SECTION 8. OPCC SUPERVISION. The operation of the OPCC will be supervised on a 24-hour rotation basis by the Chairman, OPCC Vice-Chairmen, or a member of the Executive Committee. OPCC reports to the President will be signed by the OPCC Chairman or the OPCC Duty Officer (Vice Chairmen or Executive Committee member).

SECTION 9. FUNDING SUPPORT. The OPCC-Japan will be allocated the amount of P140, 000.00 to be sourced from the Office of the President. Said funds will be released to and administered by the OPCC Secretariat.

SECTION 10. TERMINAL REPORT. The OPCC Chairman will submit a terminal report to the President upon closure of OPCC operations which will include an overall assessment of the operation and participation and support of all involved agencies.

SECTION 11. EFFECTIVITY. This memorandum shall take effect at 200H on 15 November 1995 and shall remaining effect until 1800H on 19 November 1995.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14 th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President:

Executive Secretary