MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 185

PRESCRIBING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MT. PINATUBO INFRASTRUCTURE REHABILITATION PROJECTS

To effectively implement infrastructure rehabilitation projects in lahar-striken areas consistent with available resources, the following policies and procedures shall be observed and pursued by all concerned.

POLICIES:

1. Priority shall be given to projects that will protect national roads and bridges.

2. All projects shall be implemented only in accordance with proper design standards.

3. The masterlist of projects to be undertaken shall be prepared, in consultation with concerned sectors, by the Joint Body composed of the Chairperson, Mt. Pinatubo Commission (MPC), the Chairman, National Disaster Coordinating Council (NDCC), and the Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH).

4. The prioritization of projects to be undertaken shall be made by a committee to be headed by the MPC Chairman, with concerned Provincial Governors and Congressmen/Congresswomen as members.

PROCEDURES:

1. All projects shall be submitted to the MPC for evaluation;

2. All projects proposed to be included in the masterlist shall be reviewed as to their technical viability by the DPWH Bureau of Design and in coordination with the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology and other consultants. In case of disagreement, the final decision shall be made by the Joint Body.

3. The projects shall be costed out by the DPWH, MPR-PMO.

4. The impact on the number of families to be benefited, roads and bridges to be saved, lands to be saved, and other similar considerations shall be determined by the Department of Social Welfare and Development and the NDCC, in coordination with the concerned local government units.

5. Fund allocation priority shall be given to or be based on:

i. Projects that shall protect national roads and bridges;

ii A certain amount to be set aside for quick response to emergencies; and

iii. Peso counterpart funding for foreign loans.

6. The MPC shall draw up a point system for allocating the remaining budget among the various river basins, with due regard to the following:

Probability of disaster occurring;

ii. Impact on affected population, land and infrastructure; and

iii. Cost of the needed intervention.

7. The DWPH MPR-PMO shall implement the approved projects.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of NOVEMBER in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia