MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 304

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON ALTERNATIVE LIVELIHOOD FOR BARTER TRADERS IN MINDANAO

WHEREAS, the current thrust of the national government in line with the goals of “Philippines 2000” provides for the promotion of global competitiveness and people empowerment to ensure attainment of economic development;

WHEREAS, there is a need to phase-out barter trade to allow the people in Mindanao, especially those in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, to actively participate in the socio-economic programs initiated by the Government in the areas such as the Zamboanga Special Economic Zone and the Brunei-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East Asean Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA);

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 207, otherwise known as the 1994 Investment Priority Plan, provides for the phase-out of barter trade over a three-year period;

WHEREAS, there is need to institute effective support mechanisms to cushion the impact of the phase-out of barter trade as well as to formulate an integrated alternative livelihood program for families that will be displaced by the phase-out of barter trade;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Presidential Task Force on Alternative Livelihood for Barter Traders. The Presidential Task Force on Alternative Livelihood for Barter Traders is hereby created to serve as the policy and program coordinating body to effect the phase-out of barter trade in Mindanao and formulate the necessary support mechanisms to provide an integrated alternative livelihood program for those to be affected by the phase-out of barter trade activities in the area.

SEC. 2. Composition . The Presidential Task Force on Alternative Livelihood for Barter Traders shall have the Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry and the Presidential Assistant for Mindanao as its Chairman and Co-Chairman, respectively, with the heads or duly designated representatives of the following as members:

National Economic and Development Authority

Department of Agriculture

Department of Budget and Management

Department of Health

Department of Justice

Cabinet Officers for Regional Development (CORDs) of Regions 9, 12 and ARMM

Presidential Legislative Liaison Office

Presidential Council for Countryside Development

Land Bank of the Philippines

Development Bank of the Philippines

Board of Investments

ARMM Governor

Governors of Sulu and Tawi-tawi

Mayors of Zamboanga City and Cotabato City

Two (2) representatives from the Barter Traders Association

SEC. 3. Functions and Responsibilities. The Task Force shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a. Formulate an integrated development plan to effect the gradual phase-out of barter trade in Mindanao including the formulation of a comprehensive alternative livelihood program for barter traders in the area;

b. Establish mechanisms to ensure implementation of the development plan;

c. Identify budgetary allocations for the programs/projects and possible sources thereof;

d. Draft the necessary legislative issuance to effect the gradual phase-out of barter trade and undertake necessary measures to facilitate approval by Congress;

e. Submit quarterly reports to the President on its activities in the area; and

f. Perform such functions as may be assigned to it by the President.

SEC. 4. Technical and Administrative Support. The Department of Trade and Industry shall provide technical and secretariat support to the Task Force.

SEC. 5. Time Frame . The Task Force shall submit to the Office of the President, within 60 calendar days, the integrated development plan as well as the draft legislative issuance to phase-out barter trade activities in Mindanao.

SEC. 6. Funding. There shall be no additional budget appropriated on account of the creation of the Task Force. The Task Force Chairman and Member-Agencies shall perform their respective activities as part of their normal and relevant functions without additional compensation.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18 th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia