Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 462

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 403, DATED OCTOBER 30, 1996, PRESCRIBING THE IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES ON THE DRESS CODE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Special Order No. 59, dated February 19, 1997, and Section 43 of the General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act of 1997 (R.A. 8250), and in conjunction with CSC Memorandum Circular No. 14, s. 1991, and CSC Memorandum Circular No. 20, s. 1997, the following Guidelines on the Dress Code in the Office of the President of the Philippines (Proper), is hereby prescribed to amend OP Memorandum Order No. 403, dated October 30, 1996, to wit:

I. COVERAGE

This Memorandum Order shall cover the officials and employees of the Office of the President (Proper), whether permanent, casual, or temporary.

II. SCHEDULE OF UNIFORM DAYS

A. FOR LADIES:

Except as otherwise provided for in this Memorandum Order, no one shall be exempt from wearing the prescribed Monday and Tuesday uniform for ladies.

B. FOR GENTLEMEN:

The OP male employees, based on their rank position, shall wear the following prescribed uniform corresponding to the days of the week as follows:

III. APPROPRIATE OFFICER WEAR

Heads of Offices should ensure that where the wearing of the prescribed office uniform is exempt, the following should be observed:

1. Officials and employees must be dressed appropriately. No party attire, picnic clothes, sandos or T-shirts should be worn at work.

2. The use of tight fitting, seductive, micro mini, gauzy, flimsy or transparent dresses by the lady-personnel is prohibited.

3. Walking shorts, pedal pushers, leggings, tights, maong and jogging pants are likewise prohibited. However, pantaloons or such other pants worn for formal occasions are allowed.

4. The use of too much costume jewelry, flashy bangles and similar accessories are likewise prohibited. Ostentatious display of expensive jewelry is strongly discouraged and prohibited except for special occasions and official celebrations.

5. Wearing of heavy or theatrical make-up is likewise prohibited.

6. Only appropriate footwear shall be used.

IV. EXEMPTIONS

1. Women in mourning. They may wear dresses or blouse and pants either in plain black or plain white during their period of mourning.

2. Pregnant women.

3. When by the nature of their work, the personnel concerned must necessarily wear other appropriate clothing.

V. SANCTIONS

1. To ensure strict compliance of the wearing of the prescribed Monday and Tuesday uniform, the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary (SDES) shall assign personnel to act as uniform checkers in the various OP offices.

2. The names of officials and employees found violating the provision on the wearing of the prescribed uniform shall be submitted to an Evaluation Committee to be created by the SDES.

3. The Evaluation Committee shall require a written explanation from the violators and evaluate the same. The Committee shall submit to the SDES a report of its findings and recommend the appropriate penalty to be imposed.

4. The penalties to be imposed shall be as follows

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) LUIS C. LIWANAG II Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, January 30, 1998

Source : CDAsia