MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 30

PRESCRIBING MEASURES TO PROTECT LAKE LANAO AND ITS IMMEDIATE ENVIRONS

In line with the Government’s objective to rehabilitate and protect the remaining forest in the province of Lanao del Sur, more specifically the area around Lake Lanao, the following measures are hereby prescribed:

1. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources is hereby directed to stop the issuance and operation of Private Land Timber Permits (PLTPs), Timber Production Sharing Agreement (TPAs), Private Gratuitous Permits (PGPs) and all other forms of tree-cutting permits in the Lake Lanao Watershed Area.

2. The Department of National Defense is hereby directed to assign a contingent of Philippine Marines in Lanao del Sur to (a) assist the Department of Environment and Natural Resources in dismantling the sawmills that are illegal or which are legal but conducting illegal operations in Marawi City and other towns surrounding Lake Lanao; (b) flush out the illegal loggers and other legal elements who are protecting them from the watershed area, as well as confiscate all equipment used in the commission of said illegal acts; and (c) establish checkpoints at the two (2) major smuggling outlets from the watershed area, particularly at Ditucalan, Baloi, Lanao del Norte, and Kili-Kili, Bumbaran, Lanao del Sur.

3. The Lake Lanao Watershed Protection and Development Council, composed of representatives from the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, National Power Corporation, Armed Forces of the Philippines, Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, Mindanao State University, Save Lake Lanao Movement, Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Mindanao Association of Electric Cooperatives, is hereby created to (a) prepare and implement a watershed protection plan; (b) procure and install hydraulic monitoring devices; (c) establish watershed databank; (d) conduct watershed studies; and (e) prepare and submit policy recommendations to the President. The council shall be chaired by the DENR representative and funded from DENR appropriations, supported by office of the President funds.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of August in the of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Sr. Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia