MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 150

DELEGATING SOME FUNCTIONS TO THE PRESIDENTIAL MANAGEMENT STAFF AND THE PRESIDENTIAL ASSISTANT FOR POLITICAL AFFAIRS

WHEREAS , Memorandum Order No. 143 dated 7 July 1993 reiterated the functions of the Executive Secretary as provided for in Section 27, Chapter 9, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987;

WHEREAS , for the purpose of efficient administration and in the interest of the public service, the Executive Secretary may delegate such duties and functions or responsibilities to the Deputy or Assistant Secretaries;

Section 1. The following duties, functions and responsibilities are hereby delegated to the following officials in the Office of the President:

Head, Presidential Management Staff:

1. To process requests for importation of relief goods as provided under Memorandum Order No. 36 dated 9 September 1992;

2. To provide staff support and advice to the President and the Executive Secretary on policy matters, plans, programs and projects of the departments and agencies pursuant to or arising from deliberations of the Cabinet;

3. To sign memo reminders following up directives and/or Cabinet agreements issued by the President during Cabinet meetings, sectoral meetings/dialogues, Presidential visits and other meetings of the President; and

4. To process, provide staff support and advice to the President and the Executive Secretary on matters received by the Presidential Management Staff in response to directives arising out of Cabinet meetings, sectoral meetings, Presidential visits, and other meetings of the President.

Presidential Assistant for Political Affairs

1. To process referrals and endorsements to departments, agencies or offices involving requests for assistance; and

2. To process administrative and technical matters coming from the Presidential Action Center and the Political Affairs Office.

Section 2. This Order takes effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia