MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 327

CONSTITUTING TASK FORCES ON COMMUNICATING NATIONAL REFORMS AND DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, there is need for the general public to be informed more concretely about on-going reforms and the progress of national development programs which have been accorded positive recognition by many reputable institutions;

WHEREAS, this positive image of the Philippines and the government’s performance has not been comprehensively disseminated to our people;

WHEREAS, there is need for a communication program that will give emphasis to Source, Content, Audience, Medium, and Effect (SCAME) to bring government and our people closer together.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. CONSTITUTION. There is hereby constituted Communication Task Forces on the following areas:

a) The Presidency (chaired by the Executive Secretary);

b) Reforms and Development (chaired by NEDA Director General);

c) Flagships/Infrastructure (co-chaired by DPWH Secretary and the PA for Economic Affairs);

d) Social Reform (chaired by SRC Lead Convenor, to be assisted by the OPAPP Executive Director);

e) Overseas Contract Workers (chaired by DOLE Secretary);

f) Poverty Alleviation (chaired by DA Secretary, to be assisted by PA for Countryside Development and PCFP Chairman);

g) Food Security (chaired by DA Secretary);

h) Mindanao Concerns (chaired by PA for the Peace Process, to be assisted by DND Secretary, DILG Secretary, and PA for Mindanao);

i) Power/Energy (chaired by DOE Secretary);

j) South China Sea (chaired by DFA Secretary);

k) APEC/ASEAN (chaired by DFA Secretary);

l) Trade and Investments (chaired by DTI Secretary);

m) Culture and Centennial (chaired by National Centennial Commission Chairman, to be assisted by Executive Director of the National Commission on Culture and Arts and Executive Director of the Moral Recovery Program);

n) Law and order (chaired by DILG Secretary);

o) Media (chaired by the Press Secretary);

p) Traffic and Other Metro Manila Concerns (chaired by MMDA Chairman); and

q) Calamities (chaired by NDCC Chairman).

SEC. 2. FUNCTIONS. The Task Forces shall have the following functions:

a) Ensure that the true thoughts, feelings, needs, and aspirations of our people are captured through the conduct of surveys, research, consultations, field visits, and trust-building people-to-people contacts;

b) Prepare the appropriate information materials for dissemination to media on all activities and events related to their respective areas;

c) Identify developmental and other issues that need to be projected every month;

d) Organize information materials and other data for pro-active creation of inputs and other news items to media;

e) Ensure that information dissemination is timely, adequate, correct, and responsive to the daily concerns of the common tao, taking into consideration the requirements of SCAME.

SEC. 3. ORGANIZATION. The various Task Forces shall be coordinated by an Over-all Supervisor to be designated by the President. The over-all Supervisor shall constitute an Advisory Group to assist him. The Chairpersons of the various Task Forces shall designate the members of their respective Task Forces. The Chairpersons shall likewise provide for their own secretariat support.

The Over-all Supervisor shall be assisted by a composite team from the Presidential Management Staff and the Office of the Press Secretary which shall provide over-all administrative and technical secretariat support.

SEC. 4. MEDIA COORDINATION. The Press Secretary shall provide for the necessary media coordination for the Task Forces. He shall organize a pool of news and editorial writers who shall be responsible for transforming the information materials from the Task Forces into appropriate press releases for the various media.

SEC. 5. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. The Task Forces shall submit fortnightly reports to the President.

SEC. 6. EFFECTIVITY. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE this 19th day December, in the City of Manila, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia