Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 118-B

IMPLEMENTING THE EMPLOYEE SUGGESTIONS AND INCENTIVE AWARDS SYSTEM OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

An EMPLOYEE SUGGESTIONS AND INCENTIVE AWARDS SYSTEMS (ESIAS) in the Office of the President (Proper) is hereby implemented pursuant to the provisions of Rule X of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of Executive Order No. 292.

I. Objectives

A. General:

To recognize and reward officials and employees of the Office of the President (Proper), individually or in groups, for their suggestions, inventions, superior accomplishments, and other personal efforts which contribute to the efficiency, economy, or other improvement in the operation of the Office of the President, or for extraordinary acts or services in the public interest and for exemplary service and conduct.

B. Specific:

1. To encourage creativity, innovativeness for an efficient, responsive and progressive public service;

2. To foster among the officials and employees in OP the awareness and desire to maintain or sustain exemplary performance and superior accomplishments; and

3. To motivate the officials and employees of OP to contribute the national development through increased productivity.

II. Scope

The System shall apply to all officials and employees in the career or non-career service of OP, whether or not they receive compensation, regardless of amount.

III. Types of Contributions

Under the System, any of the following types of contributions shall be entitled to an award:

A. Idea type contribution – this shall refer to an idea, a suggestion, an invention for improvement to effect economy in operation, to increase production, improve working conditions or service, or otherwise benefit the government. Officials and employees who, by the nature of their duties and responsibilities are required to make suggestions, formulate plans or make recommendations to achieve greater efficiency and economy in government operations or to improve working conditions shall not, however, be eligible for awards under this type of contribution.

B. Performance type contribution – this shall refer to:

1. Performance of an extraordinary act or service in the public interest in connection with, or related to one’s official employment; or

2. Outstanding community service or heroic acts in the public interest; or

3. Sustained work performance for a minimum period of one year which is over and above the normal position requirement of the individual or group; or

4. Exemplary service and conduct.

IV. Types of Awards

A. Honor Award shall consist of:

1. The Presidential or Lingkod Bayan Award which shall be given to an individual or group of individuals in recognition of highly exceptional or extraordinary contributions resulting from an idea or performance the effect is of which nationwide and principally affects the national interest, security and patrimony.

This award consists of a gold medallion and a plaque containing the citation and signature of the President of the Philippines.

2. The Civil Service Commission or Pagasa Award which shall be conferred to an individual or group of individuals for contributions of an idea or performance resulting in direct benefits to more one department or agency. Consistent dedicated than performance exemplifying the best example in any of the profession or occupations in the public service shall be considered for this category.

This award consists of a gold medallion and a plaque containing the citation and signature of the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission.

3. The Outstanding Public Official/Employee Award or Dangal ng Bayan Award which shall be granted to an official or employee in the government who has demonstrated exemplary service and conduct on the basis of their observance of one or more of the eight (8) norms of conduct and behavior provided for under Republic Act No. 6713 and its Implementing Rules.

4. The Agency or the “Kapwa” Award which shall be given to an individual or group of individuals in recognition of contributions from an idea or performance resulting in direct benefits to the Office of the President.

This award consists of a gold medallion and a plaque containing the citation and signature of the Executive Secretary.

Nominations for this category need not be submitted to the Civil Service Commission for screening and evaluation. The SIAC shall evaluate the nominations for this category and recommend to the Executive Secretary the most qualified nominees.

B. The Incentive Awards shall consist of, though not limited to the following:

1. Performance Incentive Award shall be given to an employee who has obtained an Outstanding or Very Satisfactory rating based on OP’s approved Performance Evaluation System for the last two successive evaluation periods. This award shall be in the form of step increments in accordance with the provisions of the Joint CSC-DBM Circular No. 1, s. 1990. Provided, that the total number of recipients of step increments based on merit in any one (1) calendar year shall not be more than ten (10%) per cent of the total number personnel actually employed in OP, provided that the total number of recipients of two step increments shall not exceed three per cent (3%) thereof.

Sec. 5 of the Joint CSC-DBM Circular likewise provides that those granted step increments may still qualify for other existing incentives and awards, provided they meet the criteria of said awards.

2. Length of Service Incentive Award shall be given to an employee who has rendered at least three years of continuous satisfactory service in a particular position and which shall consist of step increments in accordance with the provisions of Joint CSC-DBM Circular No. 1, s. 1990.

In addition to step increments, the Length of Service Award shall consists of a lapel or pin differentiated as follows:

3. Productivity Incentive shall be given to an employee or group of employees who has exceeded their targets or has incurred incremental improvement over existing targets, subject to the prevailing policy on the matter.

4. Most Courteous Employee Award shall be given to an employee in accordance with the criteria and standards established under CSC MC No. 15, s. 1990 which constituted the Courtesy Campaign Program in the Civil Service, known as the “Ang Magalang, Bow”.

5. Loyalty Award shall be granted to an employee who has completed at least ten (10) years of continuous and satisfactory service in the Office of the President. The grant of this loyalty award shall be in accordance with CSC Memorandum Circular No. 42, s. 1992.

This award shall be in the form of cash bonus and a lapel emblem or loyalty pin differentiated as follows:

6. Retirement Award shall be given to a retiree who had rendered at least fifteen (15) years of satisfactory government service. This award shall be in the form of a plaque of appreciation, the design and citation of which shall be determined by the OP SIAC.

7. Cost Economy Measure Award shall be granted to an employee whose contribution in terms of suggestion or inventions or performance of functions results in monetary savings, or results in combined monetary savings and intangible benefits. The amount of cash award shall be determined by the OP SIAC in terms of a certain percentage of its estimated total value or benefit but not to exceed 20%.

8. Year-End Benefits or Thirteenth Month Bonus Plus One Thousand Cash Gift shall be granted to officials and employees in the Office of the President in recognition of their dedication to government service and in keeping with the spirit of Christmas. Said grant shall be governed by the DBM Compensation Circular in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 6686.

9. Most Punctual Award and Perfect Attendance Award shall be given to an official or employee in OP in recognition of his/her punctuality and perfect physical attendance in office.

10. Best Intervening Performer Award shall be given to an official or employee for extraordinary and vital participation in contributing to the overall success of an intervening activity, special event, program or undertaking.

These award shall consist of a mini plaque of recognition each signed by the Executive Secretary.

V. Suggestion and Incentive Awards Committee

A. Composition

A Suggestions and Incentive Awards Committee (SIAC) is hereby created to administer the Employee Suggestions and Incentive Awards System (ESIAS) in the Office of the President. Its composition, until revised shall be as follows:

B. Selection Procedures

The OP SIAC may adopt the following procedures in the selection of nominee/s to any of the honor and incentive awards enumerated above:

1. Establish criteria/qualifications of nominees, subject to the approval of the Executive Secretary;

2. Review and process documents composed of:

2.1 Personal Data Sheet; or

2.2 Service Record; or

2.3 Performance Appraisal Rating for the last two (2) rating periods; or

2.4 Courteous Service Form; or

2.5 Nomination form containing the act/idea/suggestion/invention and the subsequent result or effect which may neither be monetary nor non-monetary awards or which have direct to the OP; or

2.6 Any other documents to support the nomination.

3. Determine the form of honor or incentive awards to be granted, including the amounts involved;

4. Recommend to the Executive Secretary the personnel who shall be nominated for the honor awards or incentive awards or to both awards;

5. Recommend to the Executive Secretary its proposed annual budget to cover whatever necessary expenses it will incur in granting both the monetary and non-monetary awards in accordance with the provisions of the OP ESIAS.

VI. Forms

1. The employee making the idea type of contribution shall use the EMPLOYEE’S SUGGESTION FORM , described in Annex “A”. It shall be submitted in six (6) copies.

2. The agency head shall submit in six (6) copies a NOMINATION FOR HONOR AWARDS FORM , with specifications reflected in Annex “B”.

3. CHART FOR EVALUATING EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS RESULTING IN INTANGIBLE BENEFITS shall also be submitted in six (6) copies, specifications of which are reflected in Annex “C”.

VII. Funding

The Office of the President shall set aside in its annual budget the necessary expenses that may be incurred in granting both monetary and non-monetary awards in accordance with the provisions of this ESIAS.

VIII. Submission of Reports

The Executive Secretary shall submit to the Civil Service Commission within fifteen (15) working days after the end of each year a report on the implementation of its Honor and Incentive Awards Program.

IX. Effectivity

The Office of the President Employee Suggestions and Incentive Awards System (ESIAS) shall take effect upon the Approval by the Civil Service Commission, or its duly authorized representative.

Recommending Approval: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Approved:

PATRICIA A. STO. TOMAS Chairman

Manila, May 31, 1993

References : Annexes A, B and C

Source : CDAsia