MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 91

CREATING AN AD-HOC INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON DONATIONS FROM OVERSEAS

WHEREAS , there has been an increased flow of donations from Foreign Governments and private individuals/organizations overseas to Philippine-based beneficiaries;

WHEREAS , there are currently several government agencies involved in the processing of these donations from overseas;

WHEREAS , in order to fully harness these donations, there is a need to streamline existing policies and procedures governing the processing of overseas donations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. Creation of an Ad-Hoc Inter-Agency Committee on Donations from Overseas . – An Ad-Hoc Inter-Agency Committee on Donations from Overseas (“Committee”) is hereby created to study and recommend to the President specific measures to rationalize and streamline the existing policies, procedures, and mechanisms governing the processing of donations from Foreign Governments and private individuals/organizations overseas to Philippine-based beneficiaries.

Section 2. Composition . – The Committee shall be composed of duly authorized representatives from the following offices:

The Department of Foreign Affairs shall establish a Secretariat for the technical and staff support of the Committee.

The Committee may call upon any concerned government agency including government-owned or controlled corporations, to render whatever assistance is necessary in the pursuance of the objectives of this Order.

Section 3. Recommendations . – The Committee shall submit within thirty (30) days from effectivity of this Memorandum Order its recommendations to the President for approval and eventual adoption of proposed procedures, guidelines, and mechanisms for entry of overseas donations.

Section 4. Effectivity . – This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of February in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source: CDAsia