MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 452

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 369, SERIES OF 1996

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 369, Series of 1996, created eight (8) sports clusters each headed by selected Cabinet Secretaries and Heads of Agencies to mobilize and optimize private sector involvement in the development of Philippine Sports;

WHEREAS, the task of national sports development needs to be strengthened through more active participation, involvement and support of the private sector in coordination with the national government;

WHEREAS, there is a need for greater involvement of Government Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) specially in mobilizing private sector support and allocating resources for the development of Philippine Sports;

NOW, THEREFORE I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend and modify Memorandum Order No. 369, Series of 1996, as follows:

Section 1 Section 1 of the said Memorandum Order is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 1. Sports Clusters and Cluster Managers. There is hereby constituted, as priority sports and special sports concerns, sports clusters headed by cluster managers composed of heads of government-owned and controlled corporations, as follows:

Section 2. Section 2 of the said Memorandum Order is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 2. Function. Cluster Managers shall serve as champions for their respective sports sectors and related concerns particularly in the mobilization of financial and other resources to support the development of sports/activities in their respective clusters. “

Section 3. Implementing Guidelines. The Philippine Sports Commission (PSC), in coordination with the Philippine Olympics Committee (POC), Cluster Managers and concerned agencies, shall formulate the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) that will rationalize the utilization and management of funds that will be generated by the Cluster managers. The PSC shall submit the Implementing Rules and Regulations to the President one month after the effectivity of this Order.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of November in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia