MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 195

ESTABLISHING A CABINET CLUSTER TO PROMOTE COORDINATION ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

WHEREAS , the government has adopted diplomacy for development as the central thrust of Philippine foreign policy in order to secure continued access to world markets, resources, and technology for the country’s development requirements;

WHEREAS , effective implementation of diplomacy for development requires coordination and teamwork among the different instrumentalities and agencies of government, both in the Philippines and abroad;

WHEREAS , there is need to strengthen horizontal coordination among government instrumentalities and agencies especially in the articulation of Philippine positions abroad, projection of unified Philippine stance on foreign policy issues, and judicious utilization of resources for promotional efforts in the international arena;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. CONSTITUTING A CABINET CLUSTER TO PROMOTE COORDINATION ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS. There shall be constituted a Cabinet Cluster to Promote Coordination on International Relations (hereafter referred to as Cluster “H”) and shall be added to the Cabinet Cluster System as provided for in Memorandum Order No. 142 dated 7 July 1993.

SECTION 2. MEMBERSHIP. Cluster “H” shall be chaired by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs (or designated representative) and co-chaired by the Secretary of Trade and Industry (or designated representative). Members of Cluster “H” shall be the Cabinet Cluster Chairpersons (or designated representatives), Director-General of the National Security Council, and Chairpersons of the Bases Conversion Development Authority, Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority, and the Presidential Committee on Flagship Programs and Projects.

Secretariat support to Cluster “H” shall be provided by the Department of Foreign Affairs.

SECTION 3. FUNCTIONS. Cluster “H” shall serve as the venue and mechanism for coordination of information, official positions, terms of reference, and other matters in connection with:

foreign travel by Heads of government departments, instrumentalities, and agencies and their Undersecretaries or Deputies;

meetings or conferences held in the Philippines involving foreign officials or entities; and

other similar activities involving foreign officials or entities with major implications on Philippine foreign relations.

SECTION 4. REPORTING PROCEDURES. The following reporting procedures shall be adopted:

All Heads of government departments, instrumentalities, and agencies shall provide the Chairperson and Co-Chairperson of Cluster “H” with relevant information that will facilitate inter-agency coordination on Philippine official positions, including, but not limited to, prior notice of the schedules of their foreign travels and of meetings or conferences being organized in the Philippines involving foreign officials or entities.

The Chairperson and Co-Chairperson of Cluster “H” shall also be provided with copies of the reports on the results of abovementioned activities.

Questions regarding protocol, official statements/positions (with major implications on foreign relations), or other relevant issues related to the abovementioned activities shall be referred to the Department of Foreign Affairs for appropriate advice.

This Circular takes effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of March, in the Year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia