MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 270

CREATING THE BUKIDNON WATERSHED PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL AND PRESCRIBING MEASURES TO PRESERVE WATERSHED RESOURCES IN BUKIDNON

In order to fully protect and preserve the remaining forest in the Bukidnon Watersheds and rehabilitate open areas within the headwaters of the watershed, the Bukidnon Watersheds Protection and Development Council is hereby created the following measures hereby prescribed:

The Bukidnon Watersheds Protection and Development Council shall be composed of the Provincial Government and the representatives from concerned National Lines Agencies LGU’s Institutions and NGO’s covered by specific watersheds, namely: Upper Pulangi River Watershed, Muleta River Watershed, Tagoloan River Watershed, Cagayan River Watershed, Maridugo River Watershed, Davao/Salug River Watershed, and Agusan River Watershed.

Agencies concerned are hereby directed to abide by the policies and guidelines promulgated by the council, not contrary to existing laws and regulations, in the issuance of permits, licenses, and leases within the watersheds relative to the development and utilization of forest resources.

The Council shall:

Formulate policies and guidelines on watershed boundary and land uses, conservation, protection, utilization, development and rehabilitation consistent with existing laws and regulations and make recommendation to the President regarding inter-agency coordination/collaboration and local community development.

Enhance community-based resource management programs emphasis on socio-economic upliftment while conserving watershed biodiversity through promotion and maintenance of sustainable land use system.

Establish watershed databank management system, and submit periodic reports to the Office of the President.

Prepare and implement programs/projects relative to the Framework Plan that will enhance the watershed sustainability as well as increase geographical and industrial/sectoral productivity and makes the council an effective catalyst for environmental protection, development and management, in the process.

The Council shall be chaired by the Provincial Government with an authority to compose technical secretariat from among its members. It shall be funded by the DENR, Office of the President, Department of Energy through National Power Corporation, National Irrigation Administration and share from foreign grants and aids for the province. Further, NAMRIA shall provide the Council with the updated and relevant information, maps, satellite images, and aerial photos. All national and local agencies are hereby enjoined to fully cooperate and support the mandate of the Council.

This Memorandum Order shall likewise serve as an Implementing Order and shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22 nd day of March , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred ninety-five

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia