MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 295

DIRECTING THE ACCELERATION OF ACTIVITIES BEING UNDERTAKEN IN PREPARATION FOR THE APEC MINISTERIAL AND LEADERS MEETING IN 1996

WHEREAS, the National Organizing Commission for the 1996 Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC-NOC) was reconstituted by virtue of Administrative Order No. 160 (S.1994) and to take charge of the nationwide preparations and conduct of the hosting of the APEC Ministerial and Leaders meetings to be held in the Philippines in 1996;

WHEREAS, APEC-NOC has only less than 16 months from today to undertake and complete such manifold preparations before the APEC Meetings in 1996;

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of such endeavor, APEC-NOC has been mandated, inter alia, to formulate and implement a workplan for the proper hosting of the said meetings; supervise and monitor all activities in relation thereto; call upon any official, agent, employee, agency or instrumentality of the national or local government for assistance; and negotiate and conclude agreements and contracts (including services) necessary to successfully host the APEC meetings.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. Considering that time is of the essence and the magnitude of APEC-NOC’s task of preparing, organizing, staffing, monitoring, funding, and reporting the multitude of activities involved in such an international event, APEC-NOC and all departments, offices and agencies of government involved therein shall ensure that there are no delays in the prosecution and timely completion of all its projects.

2. More specifically, the scope and importance of this event requires the provision of state-of-the-art convention facilities, communication equipment, airport arrangements, physical security, hotel facilities, transport infrastructure, and a management information system including project management.

3. In view of the highly specialized character of these requirements, APEC-NOC shall engage the services of professionals, artists, craftsmen, planners and the like who are equipped with special training, highly specialized skills and expertise in order to ensure the highest quality workmanship; acquire equipment and other hardware which may be required by the above contractors, and incur other related expenditures necessary for them to properly accomplish their contracted tasks.

4. APEC-NOC is hereby directed to adopt such measures as would ensure the prompt, speedy and expeditious delivery of the professional services contemplated under Administrative Order No. 160 (S. 1994) and this Order, for the purpose of accelerating all its projects towards a successful hosting of the APEC Meetings in 1996. All departments, officials and agencies of government are hereby ordered to assist APEC-NOC for this purpose.

5. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia