MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 323

ADOPTING THE TAGAYTAY-TAAL INTEGRATED MASTER PLAN AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 83, dated 24 April 1993, constituted a Presidential Commission for Tagaytay-Taal, to formulate an Integrated Master Plan for the Tagaytay-Taal (IMPTT) area to serve as the blueprint of development of said subject area;

WHEREAS, the IMPTT has already been completed and the implementation thereof requires continuous monitoring and refinement to cater to the demands and limitations of the area;

WHEREAS, to ensure that all development activities in the area conform to the IMPTT, there is need to align local development plans and programs in order to achieve the envisioned development in the area;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to fast-track the implementation of the IMPTT in time for the forthcoming APEC summit on November 1996 and the celebration of the Centennial of Philippine Independence in 1998 in view of the inclusion of the Provinces of Batangas and Cavite as convergence centers for said occasions;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the adoption of the IMPTT. In line with the implementation of the IMPTT, I hereby order the following to ensure that the IMPTT will be implemented in the most expedient way:

SECTION 1. FUNCTIONS. In addition to its functions as provided under E.O. No. 84 (s. 1993), the PCTT is further tasked to:

a Continuously review and refine the IMPTT to suit the changing needs and actual situation of the area;

b) Formulate a Ten-Year Master Plan by 31 January 1996 and a Twenty-Year Integrated Master Plan by 30 June 1996 for the municipalities of Tanauan, Santo Tomas and Malvar in the Province of Batangas;

d) Promulgate necessary guidelines/measures, as may be necessary, for the continuous implementation and monitoring of the IMPTT;

e) Ensure that the major components of the IMPTT give priority to the environment with focus on environmental protection and ecological balance, and to tourism with focus on people’s access to amenities and basic comforts therein; and

f Formulate draft administrative orders, memorandum circulars, ordinances, rules and regulations, standard/form contracts, deeds of restrictions and servitudes, and other measures for the implementation of the IMPTT to assist and guide concerned local government units, government agencies, and private sector developers to ensure that all development projects in the area conform to the IMPTT.

SEC. 2. COMPOSITION. The membership of the PCTT is hereby expanded to include the following:

a) Secretary of Agriculture;

b) Secretary of Social Welfare and Development;

c) Mayor of Tanauan, Batangas;

d) Mayor of Santo Tomas, Batangas; and

e) Mayor of Malvar, Batangas.

SEC. 3. OPERATIONAL SUPPORT. All concerned government departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, shall align their development plans, programs and projects and shall extend full support and assistance for the full and immediate implementation of the programs and projects outlined in the IMPTT. At the same time, all developers and businesses of the private sector are hereby encouraged to give their full cooperation to the implementation of the IMPTT by aligning their objectives with the said Plan and coordinating their activities with the PCTT.

SEC. 4. EFFECTIVITY. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of November in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia