MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 187

ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON THE SEARCH FOR THE CLEANEST AND GREENEST BARANGAYS, MUNICIPALITIES, CITIES AND PROVINCES

WHEREAS, there is a need to inculcate in the minds of the Filipino people the values of discipline, self-reliance, resourcefulness, cooperation, cleanliness and environmental awareness;

WHEREAS, a major but basic endeavor has to be initiated to make empowerment sink into the consciousness of the Filipino people – that through the concerted actions and cooperation of the entire community, the transformation of rural and urban areas all over the country into clean and green communities can be hastened;

WHEREAS, in line with this, a nationwide search for the cleanest and greenest (as well as the dirtiest) barangays, municipalities, cities and provinces in the Philippines may be sponsored by the national government;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish a National Committee composed of government and private sector representatives to take the lead in the aforementioned search for the cleanest and greenest communities in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of a National Search Committee. There is hereby created, under the Office of the President, a National Committee on the Search for the Cleanest and Greenest Barangays, Municipalities, Cities and Provinces (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”), composed of the following members:

The Presidential Management Staff (PMS) and the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) shall jointly provide secretariat support to the Committee.

Section 2. Functions of the Committee. The Committee shall have the following functions:

a) Initiate and coordinate necessary activities for the successful implementation of the Search;

b) Set guidelines/criteria for the selection of the cleanest and greenest barangays, municipalities, cities and provinces;

c) Select the national judges who shall come from the private business/industry sector, non-government organizations and the government, and set broad guidelines for the selection of provincial judges;

d) Identify the municipalities, cities and provinces that are the worst performers in this;

e) Secure funding from, and the counterpart prizes of, the private sector; and

f) Report to the President and give appropriate recommendations on the implementation of the contest.

Section 3. Funding. For the initial year of the search (1994), an initial amount of P1,000,000.00 shall be provided by the President’s Social Fund.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia