MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 32

DESIGNATING THE SUBIC BAY METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY (SBMA) AS THE LEAD AGENCY FOR THE TURNOVER OF SUBIC NAVAL BASE AND ITS FACILITIES

In line with the enactment of Republic Act No. 7227, otherwise known as the Bases Conversion Development Authority Law, which provides for the creation of the Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority (SBMA) and the appointment of the Mayor of Olongapo City as its initial Chairman, and in view of the accelerated withdrawal of the US forces from the Subic Naval Base before 31 December 1992, the SBMA, as the lead agency, through its Chairman, is hereby tasked to perform the following functions, to wit:

1. To receive and hold, for and in behalf of the Philippine government, all areas, facilities and assets, movable or immovable, of the Base that will be turned over by the United States of America, except those intended for the Armed Forces of the Philippines;

2. To preserve, secure and maintain the base assets relinquished to the SBMA and develop and implement appropriate disposition arrangements therefor:

3. To disburse funds appropriated for the purpose, consistent with pertinent auditing and accounting rules and regulations, among others; and

4. To implement the base conversion program in line with its powers and functions, as provided under Section 13 of RA No. 7227.

To ensure the proper implementation of the abovementioned tasks, the SBMA is hereby empowered to engage the services of appropriate consultancy, security, operations and maintenance firms.

In pursuit of the abovementioned tasks, the SBMA is hereby ordered to work in close coordination with the Presidential Task Force for Bases Conversion, Department of National Defense, Department of Interior and Local Government, Department of Foreign Affairs, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department of Trade and Industry, Department of Transportation and Communications, Department of Tourism, Department of Finance/Bureau of Customs and such other government agencies the support and services of which may be necessary for the successful implementation of the Base Conversion Program.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Memorandum Order No. 26, s. 1992, is hereby expressly repealed in its entirety.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

Manila, August 29, 1992

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia

Note: This issuance is followed by Memorandum Order No. 34, s. 1992.