MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 334

RECONSTITUTING THE TASK FORCE CREATED UNDER M.O. 234-A TO ASSIST IN THE COORDINATION AND MONITORING OF VARIOUS INTER-AGENCY ACTIVITIES RELATED TO THE SAN ROQUE MULTIPURPOSE PROJECT, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, there is need to continue the various coordination and monitoring activities initiated by the Task Force created under Memorandum Order No. 234-A dated 7 October 1994;

WHEREAS, the private sector proponent has not submitted the complete feasibility study for the full evaluation and review of the unsolicited proposal, in compliance with the revised BOT Law, R.A. No. 7718;

WHEREAS, the San Roque Multi-Purpose Project (SRMP) has attracted the interest of an increasing number of private sector proponents willing to undertake the development, construction and financing of the hydroelectric project under provisions of the revised BOT Law;

WHEREAS, the SRMP Project requires a shorter time of project implementation for which various critical activities were identified as follows: a) rehabilitation of existing infrastructure in support to the project’s realization; b) identification of quarries of lahar and other construction materials; c) watershed management; d) social engineering to address the concerns of affected communities; e) active national and local government economic participation; f) fiscal incentives for the private sector proponents; and g) land acquisition and resettlement, all of which shall require the close coordination and priority support of the major government agencies;

WHEREAS, the private sector proponent for the project shall be selected in full transparency through a process of competitive public bidding, in strict compliance with the revised BOT Law.

NOW, THEREFORE, 1, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby reconstitute the Task Force as follows:

SECTION 1. Composition. The Task Force, co-chaired by the Secretary of Energy and the Governor of Pangasinan, with the Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources as vice-chairman, shall be composed of senior representatives, preferably of the rank of at least Assistant Secretary or its equivalent with the following as members:

a. Governor of Benguet

b. National Power Corporation – as the lead implementing agency

c. Department of Public Works and Highways

d. National Irrigation Administration

e. Department of Budget and Management

f. National Economic and Development Authority/Investment Coordinating Council

g. Department of Finance

h. Department of Trade and Industry/Board of Investments

i. Coordinating Council of the Philippine Assistance Program

j. Presidential Committee on Flagship Programs and Projects

k. Philippine National Bank

The Office of the President shall be represented in all the meetings of the Task Force.

SECTION 2. Functions. The Task Force shall have the following functions to:

a. provide the forum for the presentation of all private sector findings, concerns and recommendations to the different government agencies, GOCCs, LGUs, and other private institutions;

b. coordinate the preparation of all budgetary requirements and possible official development assistance for the non-power components of the project;

c. monitor the implementation of all preparatory social engineering, environmental and social acceptability aspects of the project;

d. assist in resolving conflicting issues and concerns among and between different government agencies in addressing the various aspects of the SRMP project;

e. coordinate with the Ambuklao and Binga hydroelectric plants for reservoir operations;

f. be authorized to call on any department, bureau or agency of the government including local government units and government-owned and controlled corporations, for assistance as it may need in the accomplishment of its task; and

g. coordinate with the various mining firms and other private sector groups for the purpose of a joint undertaking in the rehabilitation of the watershed areas in close cooperation with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources.

SECTION 3. Secretariat. The Department of Energy, the National Power Corporation and the Office of the President shall continue to provide the multi-agency Secretariat support for the Task Force.

SECTION 4. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately. The Task Force, reporting regularly to the President, through the Secretary of Energy, shall continue to exist until the start of construction of the project, or unless earlier terminated.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26 th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia