MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 231

DIRECTING THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TO ESTABLISH MECHANISMS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE IMPORTATION OF MINIMUM ACCESS QUOTAS COMMITTED BY THE PHILIPPINES UNDER THE URUGUAY ROUND FINAL ACT

WHEREAS , in anticipation of the ratification by the Philippine Senate of the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization and the various Agreements integral thereto, it is necessary to institute appropriate measures for the implementation of the Philippines’ commitments;

WHEREAS , in order to abide by the minimum access concessions committed by the Philippines under Article 4, Part III of the Agreement on Agriculture, of the Final Act, the Philippines will allow the importation of certain agricultural commodities under a tariff quota system;

WHEREAS , the entry of such minimum access quotas into the domestic market may create difficulties for the domestic producers of such commodities as they adjust to a more liberalized trade regime;

WHEREAS , it is necessary to devise safety nets that will assist the affected sectors through their adjustment period and strengthen their capacity to compete in more open markets;

WHEREAS , it is government’s policy to encourage greater private sector participation in the implementation of development programs, including measures to assist sectors affected by trade reforms;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. As a general rule, the sector most affected shall be given the first option to benefit from importation of minimum access quotas;

Section 2. The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a committee which shall:

(a) Develop schemes for managing minimum access importations with the end view of ensuring the stability of supplies and prices;

Study and plan out the possible use of the revenues derived from minimum access importations to fund the development of competitiveness enhancement measures embodied in the Medium Term Agricultural Development Plan, such as, but not limited to the establishment of infrastructure (e.g., irrigation, post harvest facilities, farm-to-market roads, ports) and the provision of support services (e.g. research and development, credit, human resources development);

Monitor the implementation of (a) and (b) above.

Section 3. The Committee shall report to the Secretary of Agriculture. It shall have a maximum of eleven members, with the majority of the members coming from the private sector.

The Committee shall be chaired by a senior official of the Department of Agriculture with the rank of Undersecretary.

The private sector members of the Committee shall be representatives of national farmers organizations and other private sector entities.

Private sector members shall be appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture and shall hold office for a term of two years.

Section 4. The Department of Agriculture shall provide secretariat services to the Committee from its existing personnel.

Section 5. The Secretary of Agriculture shall issue implementing guidelines and procedures to govern the importation and sale of minimum access quotas, upon the recommendation of the Committee established under Section 2 of this Order.

This Memorandum shall take effect immediately

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of September in the Year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia