MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 211

AUTHORIZING THE BASES CONVERSION DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (BASECON) TO IMPLEMENT HOUSING PROJECTS FOR THE MILITARY AND CIVILIANS DISPLACED BY BASECON’S PROJECTS PURSUANT TO R.A. 7227 AND E.O. 40, S-92

WHEREAS, Sections 8 of R.A. 7227, known as the Bases Conversion and Development Act of 1992, and E.O. 40 empower the President to authorize BASECON to dispose of certain areas in Fort Bonifacio and Villamor Air Base as the latter so determine;

WHEREAS, the Act also provides that BASECON may plan and undertake the relocation or resettlement of occupants found within its areas of responsibility as it may be deemed necessary, including making available funds for concessional and long-term housing loan assistance;

WHEREAS, E.O. 40 prescribes the transfer of priority areas of certain military camps to BASECON for disposition and development to finance BASECON’s conversion activities and the relocation of affected military personnel;

WHEREAS, there is urgent need to protect certain areas/portions of military camps transferred to BASECON from intrusion of squatters and illegal construction of structures;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Occupants of Military Camps affected by the Bases Conversion Program shall be relocated in designated relocation sites consistent with the provision of RA 7279, otherwise known as the Urban Development and Housing Act.

SEC. 2. Consistent with the Master Development Plan, only designated portions of Fort Bonifacio, Villamor Airbase, and other Camps, shall be earmarked for development of low cost socialized housing to serve as relocation sites, provided, however, that priority in the relocation of beneficiaries shall be given to active military personnel affected by the development of Fort Bonifacio and Villamor Air Base and those qualified occupants of sites identified as priority for disposition under E.O. 40.

SEC. 3. The Basecon and AFP shall draw up a plan within 90 days from effectivity of this order for the turnover to Basecon of the administration for the following portions of military camps:

3.1 Fort Bonifacio

a. Pilot housing project (bounded by C-5 and Enlisted Mens’ housing) – 7 hectares more or less;

b. Low-cost housing area – approximately 8 hectares bounded by C-5 and DPWH relocation site;

c. 7.38 hectares covered by Proclamation No. 382;

d. Approximately 9 hectares aggregate area of four parcels of vacant sections in the Taguig portion of Fort Bonifacio;

3.2. Villamor Airbase

a. Vacant areas within the Airmens Village and other portions that may be earmarked for housing;

b. Villamor golf course area;

3.3 All other areas as may be determined by Basecon and approved by the President for privatization and development pursuant to R.A. No. 7227.

SEC. 4. In view of the urgency to protect open areas, particularly those in the designated low cost housing area, BASECON is hereby authorized to negotiate with qualified contractors for the parcellary survey, fencing, security, construction of housing units, and other activities related to housing. BASECON is also authorized to purchase, through negotiation, relocation sites for families affected by the Bases Conversion Plan and to enter into join venture arrangements with developers engaged in low cost housing.

SEC. 5. In coordination with the Basecon, the AFP is hereby directed to secure the area and prevent the intrusion of squatters in areas allocated to BASECON pursuant to RA No. 7227, particularly those identified in Section 3 of this Order.

SEC. 6. The appropriate government entities, which shall include, but not limited to the DND/AFP, DILG, DENR, HUDCC, NHA, GSIS, and LGUs of Taguig and Pasay, are hereby directed to extend to Basecon such assistance as may be necessary in the implementation of the Housing Program/Projects.

SEC. 7. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia