Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 403

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 359 DATED APRIL 8, 1996 PRESCRIBING THE IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES ON THE DRESS CODE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Special Order No. 142-A and Memorandum Order No. 359 dated April 8, 1996, respectively, and in conjunction with CSC Memorandum Circular No. 14, s. 1991, the following Guidelines on the Dress Code in the office of the President of the Philippines (Proper) is hereby prescribed.

COVERAGE

This Order shall cover the officials and employees in the Office of the President of the Philippines (Proper), whether permanent casual or contractual.

II SCHEDULE OF UNIFORM DAYS

For Ladies

For Gentlemen

a. Officials and employees holding the position of PSO VI up to the rank of  Director shall wear white Barong Tagalog every Monday and long-sleeved shirt with tie or any other shade of Barong Tagalog on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.

b. White collar employees from PSO V and below shall wear white polo barong every Monday and any other shade of polo barong or polo shirt with collar on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.

c. Blue collar employees (janitors, carpenters, parking attendants, gardeners, electricians, mechanics and other civilian ground/building personnel) shall wear white polo shirt with collar every Monday and any other shade of T-shirt or polo shirt with collar on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. In addition, blue collar workers shall wear appropriate shoes at all times.

d. Employees assigned to drive OP official vehicles shall wear white polo barong every Monday and any other shade of polo barong or polo shirt with collar from Tuesday to Thursday or during weekends, whenever their services are required.

III. APPROPRIATE OFFICE WEAR

Where the wearing of the prescribed office uniform is exempt, the following should be observed:

a. Officials and employees must be dressed appropriately. No party attire, picnic clothes, sandos or T-shirts should be worn at work.

b. The use of tight fitting, seductive, micro-mini gauzy, flimsy or transparent dresses by lady-personnel is prohibited.

c. Walking shorts, pedal pushers, leggings, tights, maong and jogging pants are likewise prohibited. However, pantaloons or such other pants worn for formal occasions are allowed.

d. The use of too much costume jewelry, flashy bangles and similar accessories are likewise prohibited. Ostentatious display of expensive jewelry is strongly discouraged and prohibited except for special occasions and official celebrations.

e. Wearing of heavy theatrical make-up is likewise prohibited.

IV. OTHERS

The wearing of slippers, sandals, bakya, etc. by officials and employees in the office premises is strictly prohibited. Only appropriate footwear shall be allowed. The ladies shall wear black, cream or brown (or any of its shade) shoes. The gentlemen shall wear black or brown shoes.

EXEMPTIONS

a Doctors, dentists, nurses and other medial attendants of the Malacañang Clinic shall wear the prescribed uniform on Mondays with option to wear their professional worn/white medical uniform blazer for the rest of the week;

b. Staff of the Protocol Office and the Internal House Affairs office and other officials who may be tasked to assist the President and the First Lady during certain functions that call for formal and other attire appropriate for the occasions.

c. Women on the family way

VI SANCTIONS

a. For every non-wearing of the prescribed uniform in accordance with the schedule, one day shall be deducted from the accumulated leaves of the personnel concerned. In case the personnel concerned has no more earned leaves, then an amount equivalent to one day’s salary for every violation shall be deducted from his pay envelope.

b. Heads of Offices are hereby required to report to the Personnel Office any  violation of this order with in twenty-four (24) hours from date of violation.

c. Every  Friday after the effectivity of this Memorandum Order, the Personnel Office shall post on the bulletin boards the names of the reported for non-wearing of the prescribed uniform in accordance with the schedule, their respective offices, and the dates of the commission of the infraction, in order to give opportunity for any of those names are posted to explain or contest the imputed in fraction(s). If by the Thursday following the posting, the personnel concerned has not contested or satisfactorily explained the commission of the infraction, then the Personnel Office shall impose and record the penalties provided for in paragraph “a” of this Section, with proper notice to the Personnel concerned.

d. The authority to evaluate and decide whether or not the explanation given for non-wearing of the personnel uniform is satisfactory shall be vested in a Committee to be composed of the Head of the Personnel Office as Chairman, and the Heads of the Records Office and Presidential Action Center as Members, whose decision shall be final and unappealable.

Repeated violation of any provision of this Order shall be ground for disciplinary action in accordance with existing Civil Service law, rules and regulations.

All memoranda, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Memorandum Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

This Memorandum shall take effect November 4 1996.

(Sgd.) LUIS C. LIWANAG II Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, October 30, 1996

Source: CDAsia