Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 465

AUTHORIZING THE ADOPTION OF FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Section 6, Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of the Administrative Code of 1987, and in the interest of our employees especially those who commute from far places, the adoption of flexible work schedules in this Office is hereby authorized subject to the following guidelines:

1. The official working hours shall be from 7:00 AM to 6:00 PM, and lunch break shall be from 12:00 noon to 1:00 PM. The core working time shall be from 9:00 AM to 4:00 PM.

2. An employee who is officially on 7:00 AM to 4:00 PM schedule may report any time between 7:00 AM and 8:00 AM and complete an eight-hour service for the day. Those on schedule from 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM may report any time between 8:00 AM and 9:00 AM and also complete an eight-hour service for the day. Any one who arrives later or leaves earlier than his/her official schedule shall be considered late or on undertime.

3. All employees shall register their time of arrival and time of departure in the bundy clock and record the same in their respective log books. They shall likewise log-out and log-in during noonday break. Failure to do so at noon time or at the end of the day shall mean one-half (1/2) day absence.

4. Any employee may be required to render service beyond their eight-hour working time when necessary and justifiable, and notices for this purpose should be made in writing by the supervisor concerned. Such services shall be considered overtime services when authorized by the proper authorities.

5. All employees shall be required to attend the Flag Raising ceremonies every Monday regardless of their work schedules.

7. In adopting the above schedules, heads of offices must see to it that public service is not prejudiced. They shall prepare a fair and equitable distribution of their respective employees to the two (2) work schedules and submit the same to the Personnel Office not later than the following day from receipt of this order.

8. Special groups of employees or workers such as Household, Engineering and Communication personnel, drivers, janitors and utility aides may be required to follow a schedule appropriate for their kind of work. All services rendered beyond forty (40) hours a week shall be covered by order stating the exigency of the service, or necessary authority for purposes of overtime pay.

This Memorandum Order takes effect immediately and supersedes previous issuances regarding official working schedule.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Manila, February 26, 1998

Source : CDAsia