MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 57

ESTABLISHING A LOYALTY AWARD IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT FOR EMPLOYEES WHO HAVE RENDERED AT LEAST TEN (10) YEARS OF CONTINUOUS AND SATISFACTORY GOVERNMENT SERVICE

WHEREAS, Section 7(c), Rule X of the Civil Service Omnibus Rules implementing Book V of Executive Order No. 292 and other pertinent civil service laws and regulations provide for the grant of loyalty awards to government officials and employees under certain conditions.

WHEREAS, it is important to recognize the pivotal role of the civil service corps in the effective administration of governmental affairs;

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, a Loyalty Award in the Office of the President is hereby established as follows:

SECTION 1. Coverage. All employees of the Office of the President, whether permanent, temporary, casual or contractual who have completed at least ten (10) years of continuous and satisfactory service in the government as of September 30, 1992, shall be eligible for the Loyalty Award.

SEC. 2. Reckoning date. The computation of the Award shall be from date of original appointment in the government service to September 30, 1992.

SEC. 3. Definition of “continuous service”. The phrase “continuous service” means that there is no gap whatsoever in the required minimum service of ten (10) years. A gap of even one (1) working day disqualifies an employee from the Award. Absence without official leave and/or vacation leave without pay shall not be considered a gap, but the money value of the award corresponding to the leave so incurred shall be deducted from the proceeds of the Award of the employees concerned.

SEC. 4. Part-time service. Those who render on a part-time basis shall receive their awards pro-rata.

SEC. 5. Satisfactory service requirement. The heads of primary units shall certify that the performance ratings of the employees under their direct supervision are at least satisfactory.

SEC. 6. Cash award. The Loyalty Award shall be in cash and shall consist of a uniform amount of Five Hundred Pesos (P500.00) for every year of service for the first ten (10) years. Succeeding years, if any, shall be computed in multiples of five (5) years, meaning, service of fourteen (14) years for instance shall be computed only as ten (10).

SEC. 7. Funding. Funds for this purpose shall be chargeable to the savings of the Office of the President, subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 8. Oversight Committee. There is hereby created an Oversight Committee, composed of the Director of the Personnel Office as Chairman, and one representative each for the Legal Office, the Finance Office and the Employees Union as members, to review and decide all cases and issues which are not explicitly covered by this Memorandum Order.

SEC. 9. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order takes effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia