MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 301

DIRECTING THE ENHANCEMENT OF GOVERNMENT STATISTICS TO SUPPORT AREA- AND BASIC SECTOR-POVERTY ALLEVIATION PROGRAMS MONITORING AND EVALUATION

WHEREAS, the continuous rationalization and indigenization of poverty data to accurately reflect area- and sector- specific needs and the impact of government interventions require a review and redirection of the data-collection and data-analysis activities by National Government Agencies;

WHEREAS, in the Joint Cabinet-Governors Anti-Poverty Workshop and pre-workshop activities held in late July and early August this year, a consensus was reached that the enhancement of the government socio-economic database into a user-friendly tool for poverty alleviation policy-program gap analysis is sine qua non to effective poverty alleviation delivery systems at the regional, provincial and local levels;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. All data-collection and data-analysis activities of National Government Agencies shall reflect poverty data on an area-specific basis from regional down to barangay levels, and on a basic sector-sensitive basis. The basic sectors shall include: farmers, fisherfolk, workers in the informal sector, labor, disabled, women, youth and children, the elderly, indigenous peoples, the urban poor and the victims of calamities/disasters.

SEC. 2. The National Census and Statistics Board shall be the clearing house of the reliability and validity of poverty data, As such, the Board shall consolidate agency-generated data from appropriate agencies of government.

SEC 3. The National Information Technology Council shall ensure a user friendly network that facilitates inter-agency and national-local government exchange and access of poverty data for purposes of poverty alleviation program monitoring and policy-program gap analysis and interventions.

SEC. 4. The National Economic and Development Authority, the Presidential Commission to Fight Poverty and the Social Reform Council shall jointly provide policy guidance and technical assistance in the process of continuous rationalization and indigenization of poverty data.

SEC. 5. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11 th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia