MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 338

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE ON THE PANGLAO ISLAND TOURISM ESTATE

WHEREAS, Panglao Island has been identified by the Department of Tourism (DOT) as a priority tourism development area included in the National Tourism Master Plan;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 188 adopting the Philippine Tourism Master Plan declared Panglao Island Tourism Estate a flagship project included in the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP);

WHEREAS, there is a need to adopt well defined measures to fasttrack implementation of development plans of the Panglao Island Tourism Estate; and

WHEREAS, to enable the government to effectively implement its programs in the area, there is a need to create a body that shall orchestrate as well as address policies, planning and implementation issues on the development of Panglao Island.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Panglao Island Tourism Estate . There is hereby created a Panglao Island Tourism Estate Inter-Agency Task Force (hereinafter referred to as Task Force).

SEC. 2. Composition of the Task Force . The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

A representative each from the local tourism council, the religious sector, and the federation or association of non-governmental organizations in the province shall serve as advisers to the Task Force.

SEC. 3. Functions and Responsibilities . The Task Force shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

3.1 Facilitate and monitor the implementation of projects for the development of Panglao Island Tourism Estate (PITE);

Undertake issue resolution, including delineation of functions of concerned agencies to support the PITE;

Ensure and promote measures on environmental protection, ecotourism and sustainable development within the PITE;

3.4 Facilitate and conduct investment promotional activities to encourage local and foreign investors in the PITE in coordination with the Investment Promotion Units of the concerned agencies; and

3.5 Consult with the local government units concerned and interest groups in the localities to ensure that the community’s needs, concerns and ideas are considered in the planning, development and monitoring of the PITE.

SEC. 4. Secretariat and Administrative Support . The Department of Tourism shall provide administrative and technical support for the Task Force.

SEC. 5. Assistance From Other Agencies . The Task Force may call upon any government agency, office or bureau for assistance in the discharge of its functions.

SEC. 6. Submission of Report . The Task Force shall submit quarterly reports of its activities to the Office of the President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6 th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia