MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 478

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF REGIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEES IN ALL REGIONS NATIONWIDE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE 1998 CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION OF THE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE AT THE LOCAL LEVEL

Pursuant to Section 2 of Administrative Order 368 (dated 17 November 1997) which created the National Organizing Committee (NOC) to take charge of the celebration of the Centennial of Philippine Independence, there is hereby created a Regional Organizing Committee (ROC) in every region nationwide to take charge of the 1998 Centennial Celebration of the Philippine Independence at the local level.

The ROCs shall be tasked to coordinate and ensure complementation and synchronization of efforts by public and private sector organizations in the implementation of programs and projects relative to the celebration of the Philippine Centennial at the local level.

The ROCs shall be composed of the regional heads of the following agencies/offices:

Specifically, the ROCs shall have the following functions:

1. Act as the over-all coordinator for all activities related to the awareness and celebration of the Centennial of Philippine Independence in all cities and provinces;

2. Serve as local clearing house for the preparation and dissemination of all information about the plans and events for the Centennial Celebration at the local level;

3. Form local working groups, as may be necessary, to undertake the implementation of programs and projects related to Philippine Centennial; and,

4. Submit regular reports to the NOC Chairman concerning their respective centennial plans, programs, projects and the status of implementation thereof.

The Committee shall call upon any government department, bureau, office, agency, instrumentality, government-owned or controlled corporation, as well as private individuals and organizations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

The regional offices of concerned agencies/offices and LGUs shall be authorized to draw funds from their respective agency budgets as they may deem necessary to ensure the successful celebration of the Philippine Centennial in their respective regions.

The Regional Offices of the DILG shall provide the overall administrative and technical secretariat support to the ROCs.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29 th day of April in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia