MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 142

RECONSTITUTING THE CABINET CLUSTER SYSTEM AS PROVIDED IN MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 37 DATED SEPTEMBER 14, 1992

WHEREAS , it is necessary to introduce changes/additions in the composition of some of the existing Cabinet Clusters to enhance inter-agency coordination and expedite the implementation of vital inter-agency programs and projects;

WHEREAS , it is also imperative that additional Cabinet Clusters be created to act on matters not specifically falling within the purview of the present Cabinet Clusters;

WHEREAS , there is need to review the membership of the clusters to make them more responsive to the priorities of the President and the Medium Term Development Plan; and

WHEREAS , there is need to clarify the relationship between the Cabinet Clusters and the committees of the National Economic Development Authority;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby modify Memorandum Order 37 dated 14 September 1992, to read as follows:

SECTION 1. The Cabinet Cluster System is hereby reconstituted as follows:

Cabinet Cluster A. Agro-Industrial Development Cluster to be composed of the following:

–

–

Cabinet Cluster B. Macro-Economy and Finance Cluster to be composed of the following:

–

–

Cabinet Cluster C. Human Resource and Development Cluster to be composed of the following:

Cabinet Cluster D. Physical Infrastructure Support Cluster to be composed of the following:

–

Cabinet Cluster E. Security and Political Development Cluster to be composed of the following:

Cabinet Cluster F. Development Administration Cluster to be composed of the following:

Cabinet Cluster G. Energy Cluster to be composed of the following:

The Committee on Social Development and the Committee on Infrastructure of the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA) shall be the functional equivalent of Cabinet Clusters C and D respectively.

SECTION 2. The Executive Secretary, Press Secretary and Head of the Presidential Management Staff may attend all Cluster meetings as regular members.

SECTION 3. The Cabinet clusters shall serve as advisory committees of the President and the Cabinet. They shall identify agenda items requiring Cabinet deliberation, and recommend measures on policy and operational matters for the consideration of the President and the Cabinet.

SECTION 4. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Clusters herein designated shall serve for one (1) year effective 30 June 1993. The Cabinet Clusters shall thereafter elect their respective Chairman and Vice-Chairman to serve for a period of one (1) year. The Cabinet Clusters may create sub-committees or ad-hoc working groups as may be required from time to time.

SECTION 5. The Cabinet Clusters shall meet every month, or as often as necessary. The Chairman, in consultation with the member-agencies, and the Executive Secretary, shall set the date of the regular meetings of the Cabinet Cluster, provided, that the Executive Secretary may, whenever deemed necessary, call for a special meeting of one or more Cabinet Clusters when the subject to be taken up may require the presence of said Cabinet Cluster in the resolution thereof.

Notwithstanding the composition of a particular cluster, any Cabinet secretary may attend any cluster meeting.

While the agenda of the Cabinet Cluster is expected to consist primarily of policy and operational matters, the Cluster shall regularly provide opportunities for reflection and brainstorming on government direction.

SECTION 6. The Secretariat support for the Clusters shall be provided by the following:

The Chairman may call on any member agency to extend technical support and assistance to the Cluster as may be required. He shall submit minutes and reports of cluster activities to the Office of the President through the Presidential Management Staff.

SECTION 7. To ensure that policy and operational decisions and their implementation are consistent with the overall thrusts of the government, notices of the cluster meetings and agenda items to be discussed shall be given to all Cabinet members by the respective cluster secretariat.

SECTION 8. This Memorandum Order repeals Memorandum Order No. 37 dated 14 September 1992.

SECTION 9. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7 Th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia