Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 37

AUTHORIZING PARTICIPATION IN THE 11 th ANNUAL CAREER EXECUTIVE SERVICE CONFERENCE

The Career Executive Service Board (CESB) and the National Union of Career Executive Service Officers (NUCESO) will hold the 2012 Annual CES Conference on 14-16 November 2012 at the Garden Orchid Hotel, Zamboanga City. This year’s conference theme is “Going 4G! Good to Great, Green Governance.”

The theme’s buzz phrase “Going 4G” seeks to remind Career Executive Service Officers (CESOs) and the current public managers about next year’s 40 th CES year and more importantly, how the current CESOs have evolved as the fourth generation of public managers who distinguish themselves with the tradition of competence, integrity and excellence in service.

All CESOs / Career Executive Service Eligibles (CESEs) and Career Service Executive Eligibles (CSEEs) are enjoined to attend the said conference. The conference registration fee is P 4,500.00 per participant on live-out basis.

The said fee shall cover two (2) morning and afternoon snacks, two (2) buffet lunch, two (2) buffet dinner, administrative costs for training resource persons and training materials. Participants may charge the conference fee, hotel accommodation and travel expenses against the funds of their respective agencies in accordance with the existing policies of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and Commission on Audit (COA).

Since the conduct of this conference is considered a core function of the CESB, the same is not subject to the provisions of Administrative Order No. 103 (s. 2004).

Participants will be conferred sixteen (16) hours of training credits by the CESB as part of its commitment to lifelong learning and career growth of CESOs and eligibles.

All heads of government agencies, departments, bureaus and offices shall authorize their respective officials and employees to attend and participate in this 2012 Annual CES National Conference, on official business.

Manila, Philippines, 11 th day of September 2012.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary