MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 12

AUTHORIZING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES TO EXTEND SUPPORT AND PARTICIPATION IN THE CONDUCT OF THE “KABISIG NATIONAL GOVERNMENT EXPO AND TRADE FAIR 2011”

The KABISIG People’s Movement (KABISIG) Program was created by virtue of Proclamation No. 650 series of 1990, in order to facilitate, coordinate and monitor the implementation of government programs and projects, as well as to provide linkages between and among the private sector groups and the government agencies and instrumentalities.

In pursuit of the above mandate, KABISIG is conducting the “KABISIG National Government Expo and Trade Fair 2011” having the theme “Maging Mabuting Pilipino: Makialam, Maki-alam at Makipagtulungan sa Pamahalaan”, on the following dates and venues: January 11-14, 2011 at Davao International Trade Center, Davao City, February 22-25, 2011 at Cebu International Convention Center, Cebu City, and on June 10-14, 2011 at SM Mall of Asia.

The project which  aims to bring together in one venue all government agencies and instrumentalities, as well as Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) and Government Financial Institutions (GFIs), will likewise feature the profiles, service facilities and programs, projects, products and accomplishments of the national government and accomplishments of the national government and said agencies and instrumentalities. Also, it is an opportunity to promote public awareness and understanding of how the government works thereby promoting increased public participation in national development.

In this connection, all heads of government departments, agencies, GOCCs and other government instrumentalities or financial constitutions are hereby enjoined to extend support to- and participation in- said expo and trade fair.

All government agencies and instrumentalities in said expo and trade fair may authorize the participation of their respective offices with corresponding participation fee and other incidental expenses chargeable against the appropriations of each office, subject to the availability of funds and usual accounting and auditing rules.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary

Manila, Philippines, 09 December 2010