MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 21

AUTHORIZING PARTICIPATION IN THE 10 th NATIONAL CAREER EXECUTIVE SERVICE CONFERENCE

The Career Executive Service Board (CESB) and the National Union of Career Executive Service Officers (NUCESO) will hold the 2011 Annual Career Executive Service (CES) Conference on 9-11 November 2011 at the Garden Orchid Hotel, Zamboanga City. This year’s conference theme is “Taas noo, CESO! Pamumunong Tapat at Wasto, Dangal at Gating ng Serbisyo.”

The Conference seeks to underscore the role of Career Executive Service Officers (CESOs) in the thrust to effect transformational change among public service leaders. The Conference sessions will focus discussions on the five (5) pillars of President Aquino’s Social Contract with the Filipino People, and the essential roles of CESOs in ensuring policy and program continuity amidst shifts and political and administrative transition.

All CESOs, Career Executive Service Eligibles (CESE) and Career Service Executive Eligibles (CSEE) are enjoined to attend the said conference. The conference fee is Php 8,500.00 per participant, inclusive of hotel accommodation, meals and conference materials. Conference participants may charge said fee and their travel expenses against the funds of their respective agencies in accordance with the existing policies of the Department of Budget and Management (QBM) and the Commission on Audit (COA). Since the conduct of this conference is< considered a core function of the CESB, the same is not subject to the provisions of Administrative Order No. 103 (s. 2004).

All heads of government agencies, departments, bureaus and offices, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations ,and their subsidiaries/units shall authorize their respective officials and employees to attend and participate in this 2011 Annual CES National Conference on official business.

Manila, Philippines, 28 th day of September 2011.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary