MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 48

DIRECTING ALL CONCERNED GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO ADOPT THE GENDER EQUALITY GUIDELINES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THEIR RESPECTIVE MEDIA POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS IN ORDER TO PROMOTE GENDER MAINSTREAMING

WHEREAS, Section 14, Article II of the 1987 Constitution provides that the State recognizes the role of women in nation-building, and shall ensure the fundamental equality before the law of women and men;

WHEREAS, Section 24, Article II of the 1987 Constitution provides that the State recognizes the vital role of communication and information in nation-building;

WHEREAS, Section 16, Chapter 4 of Republic Act No. 9710 , otherwise known as “The Magna Carta of Women”, mandates the State to formulate policies and programs for the advancement of women in collaboration with government and non-government media-related organizations and to raise the consciousness of the general public in recognizing the dignity of women and the role and contribution of women in the family, community, and the society through the strategic use of mass media;

WHEREAS, the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. 9710 provide that the Office of the Press Secretary [now the Presidential Communications Operations Office (PCOO)] and its attached agencies shall ensure formulation of policies and implementation of programs pursuant to the Republic Act No. 9710 and its IRR;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 19 (B) of the IRR of Republic Act No. 9710, the PCOO, together with the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW), convened the Gender Equality Committee (GEC) mandated to promote gender mainstreaming and to formulate the gender equality guidelines and Code of Ethics for media;

WHEREAS, after conducting consultations with various stakeholders and representatives from the government and private media entities and the public sector, the GEC approved the following gender equality guidelines for media: Gender Equality Guide, Code of Ethics for Media, and Guidelines to Protect Women against Discrimination in Media and Film;

WHEREAS, Section 36, Chapter VI of Republic Act No. 9710 provides that all departments, including their attached agencies, offices, bureaus, state universities and colleges, government-owned and -controlled corporations, local government units, and other government instrumentalities shall adopt gender mainstreaming as a strategy to promote women’s human rights and eliminate gender discrimination in their systems, structures, policies, programs, processes, and procedures;

WHEREAS, Section 28 (General Provisions) of Republic Act No. 10352, otherwise known as the General Appropriations Act of 2013, provides that all agencies of the government shall formulate a Gender and Development (GAD) Plan designed to address gender issues within their concerned sectors or mandate and implement applicable provisions under Republic Act No. 9710 and other laws, and that the GAD Plan shall be integrated in the regular activities of the agencies, which shall be at least five percent (5%) of their budgets;

NOW, THEREFORE, all concerned government agencies are directed to adopt the gender equality guidelines for media, namely: Gender Equality Guide, Code of Ethics for Media, and Guidelines to Protect Women against Discrimination in Media and Film, as frameworks in developing media policies and implementing programs in order to promote gender mainstreaming.

Expenses related to the implementation of this Memorandum Circular may be charged to the GAD budget, which is at least five percent (5%) of the total agency budget, and/or other available funds of the concerned agency.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Thirteen.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary