MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 19

DIRECTING ALL CONCERNED GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO PLAN, PREPARE, AND CONDUCT ACTIVITIES IN OBSERVANCE OF THE SAVE SIERRA MADRE DAY PURSUANT TO PROCLAMATION NO. 233 (S. 2011)

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 233 (s, 2011) declared 26 September 2011 as Save Sierra Madre Day;

WHEREAS, the continuous destruction, deforestation, and deterioration of the Sierra Madre area has worsened flooding as can be seen in the devastation brought about by Typhoon Ondoy;

WHEREAS, ecological and environmental groups laud and commend the efforts of the government in protecting and preserving the Sierra Madre region through the proclamation of Save Sierra Madre Day;

WHEREAS, there is a need to raise the awareness of the general public about environmental issues and problems that plague the Sierra Madre area in order to preserve and protect the ecological balance of the forests and ecosystems and to prevent tragedies and calamities brought about by climate change and man-made activities; and,

WHEREAS, the government must do its part in protecting the environment by helping raise public awareness about the threat of climate change and environmental degradation and to lead the public in the preservation of the rich biodiversity of the country, in particular the Sierra Madre area.

The concerned government agencies are directed as follows:

SECTION 1. Preparations for Save Sierra Madre Day. The following concerned government agencies are hereby directed to plan, prepare, and conduct activities in the observance of Save Sierra Madre Day:

Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR)

Department of Education (DepEd)

Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)

Climate Change Commission (CCC)

National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC)

The concerned government agencies shall conduct activities such as but not limited to the following:

a) Harmonize all related environmental programs and activities of government agencies in observance of Save Sierra Madre Day;

b) Conduct information, education, and awareness campaigns in schools and for the general public on climate change adaptation and mitigation and environmental protection in relation to the Sierra Madre area;

c) Institute strategic awareness on disaster preparedness and prevention;

d) Mobilize local participation through consultations and dialogues with concerned stakeholders, other government agencies, civil society and the private sector on the problems and challenges affecting the Sierra Madre area; and,

e) Formulate plans and conduct program of activities aimed at promoting environment awareness, protection and preservation.

SECTION. 2. Collaborating Agencies. Other government agencies, such as but not limited to government media and information offices and local government units (LGUs), are hereby enjoined to assist and coordinate in the conduct of activities for Save Sierra Madre Day.

SECTION. 3. Coordination and Participation of Civil Society and Non-Government Organizations. All concerned government agencies are hereby directed to coordinate and ensure the participation of civil society (CSO) and non-government organizations (NGOs) in the conduct of activities for Save Sierra Madre Day. Full cooperation and assistance shall be given to CSOs and NGOs in the observance of this day.

SECTION. 4. Funding. Subject to prescribed budgetary guidelines and government auditing rules and regulations, all government agencies concerned are directed to allocate funds from available sources to cover the operational requirements for the conduct of activities in compliance with this Circular.

SECTION. 5. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Circular is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION. 6. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 26 th day of September, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary