REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE

RULES AND REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8491, S. 1998—”THE CODE OF THE NATIONAL FLAG, ANTHEM, MOTTO, COAT-OF-ARMS AND OTHER HERALDIC ITEMS AND DEVICES OF THE PHILIPPINES “

RULE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Title . — These rules shall be known, cited and referred to as the “RULES AND REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8491, series of 1998, THE CODE OF THE NATIONAL FLAG, ANTHEM, MOTTO, COAT-OF-ARMS AND OTHER HERALDIC ITEMS AND DEVICES OF THE PHILIPPINES”, hereinafter called the “Rules”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy and Objectives . — It is the policy of the state to herein prescribe the Code of the National Flag, Anthem, Motto, Coat-of-Arms and other Heraldic Items and Devices of the Philippines, ensure the promotion and implementation of its corresponding rules and regulations, and adopt effective administrative, regulatory, coordinative and supervisory programs and activities, where appropriate, in conformity with national government policies. Further, reverence and respect shall at all times be accorded to the flag, anthem, and other national symbols which embody the national ideals and traditions and which express the principles of sovereignty and national solidarity.

SEC. 3. Scope of Application . — These Rules shall apply to individuals, public and private entities, military and police agencies, and other branches and/or instrumentalities of the national and local government including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, and shall also be observed in and within the entire territory of the Philippines as such is defined in the Constitution and laws of the Republic of the Philippines.

SEC. 4. Interpretation . — In the interpretation of the provisions of Republic Act No. 8491, Series of 1998, The Flag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines, hereinafter called R.A. No. 8491, and of these Rules, that interpretation which will promote or sustain reverence and respect for the flag, the anthem, and other national symbols, all of which embody national ideals and traditions, shall be given paramount consideration.

RULE 2 THE IMPLEMENTING AGENCY

SEC. 5. The Implementing Agency . — the National Historical Institute, hereinafter referred to as the Institute, shall be the agency tasked to implement these Rules.

SEC. 6. Scope of Powers and Functions . — The Institute shall perform planning, monitoring, coordinating, implementing, and policy-formulating functions, wherever and whenever appropriate, and, in the process, exercise administrative, regulatory, and supervisory authority over the implementation of the provisions of R.A. No. 8491 within the Philippine territorial limits, and in conformity with national government policies. Such powers and functions shall include the following:

a. Formulate, coordinate and regulate the implementation of the Code of the National Flag, Anthem, Motto, Coat-of-Arms and other Heraldic Items and Devices of the Philippines, consistent with the purposes and objectives of R.A. No. 8491;

b. Plan, prepare and coordinate effective educational and information dissemination strategies which shall increase the level of national awareness of these Rules and other implementing details that may subsequently be formulated;

c. Coordinate and monitor the implementation of these Rules and ensure the compliance of all the provisions stipulated under R.A. No. 8491; and deputize, assign and/or designate government agencies, non-government organizations, major branches and units of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police, and other groups or individuals for the purpose of implementing, monitoring and coordinating tasks;

d. Set policies and procedures concerning the concept and design/visual interpretation of the national motto, coat-of-arms, seals of various local government units (town/city/province), and other government instrumentalities, medallions, awards and other forms and devices of national recognition, and strict enforcement thereof;

e. Formulate and devise appropriate legal procedures, assistance and coordinating systems for cases arising from the violations of R.A. No. 8491, including appropriate integration of this law into the Shariya Courts; and

f. Perform other related functions required to achieve the objectives of R.A. No. 8491 and these Rules.

SEC. 7. Definition of Terms . — Whenever used in these Rules, the term:

a. “Military” shall mean all branches of the Armed Forces of the Philippines including the Philippine National Police, the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, and the Bureau of Fire Protection;

b. “Festoon” shall mean to hang in a curved shape between two points as a decoration;

c. “National Flag” shall mean the National Flag and Ensign of the Philippines, unless stated otherwise, used on land and sea by public, private and the military and shall refer to the flag or any other design that so resembles it as likely to cause any person to believe that it is the flag or design stated, expressed or provided in the Constitution of the Philippines, R.A. No. 8491 and these Rules;

d. “Fly” shall mean the part of the flag outside the hoist or length;

e. “Hoist” shall mean the sleeve or heading; part of the flag nearest the staff or the canvass to which the halyard is attached;

f. “Symbol”shall mean any conventional sign which reveals man’s achievement and heroism (for orders and decorations), identification, authority and a sign of dignity (for coat-of-arms, logo and insignia);

g. “Half-mast”shall mean lowering the flag to one-half the distance between the top and bottom of the pole;

h. “Halyard” shall mean the long rope where the flag fastens and which runs up the length of the flag pole;

i. “Inclement Weather” shall mean that a typhoon signal is raised in the locality;

j. “National Anthem” shall mean the “ Lupang Hinirang”, the Philippine National Anthem;

k. “Official Residences” shall mean Malacañang, and other government-owned structures where the President resides, and other structures occupied by the Philippine Consulate or Embassies abroad;

l. “Places of Frivolity” shall mean places of hilarity marked by or providing boisterous merriment or recreation;

m. “Advertisement or Infomercial” shall mean advertisement or any information material in print, radio, television, cinema, video and the like, outdoor and electronic media, seeking to promote individuals, entities, products or services for commercial, political purposes or information campaigns;

n. “Heraldic Items and Devices” shall mean coat-of-arms, seals, logos, insignia, badges,flashes, patches, orders and decorations, medals, stars, citations, lapel pins, trophies, dry, wax or wet seals, and imprints on letterheads, envelopes and cards;

o. “Government Entities” shall mean all branches of the government, its bureaus and attached agencies, constitutional offices, local government offices, government-owned and/or controlled corporations, government financial institutions, state universities and colleges,Armed Forces of the Philippines including its basic component units; and

p. “Vexillary Items” shall mean national, local, house flags, or administrative,institution, corporate, unit and other organization’s banners.

RULE 3 CHAPTER I The National Flag

A. Design of the National Flag

SEC. 8. The National Flag shall be blue, white and red with an eight rayed golden yellow sun and three stars that are five-pointed, as consecrated and honored by the people.

B. Hoisting and Display of the National Flag

SEC. 9. The National Flag shall be displayed in all public buildings, official residences, public plazas, and institutions of learning everyday throughout the year.

SEC. 10. The National Flag shall be permanently hoisted, day and night, throughout the year, in front of the following: at Malacañang Palace; Congress of the Philippines building;Supreme Court building; Rizal Monument in Luneta, Manila; Bonifacio Monument in Kalookan City; Emilio Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, Cavite; Barasoain Church Historical

Landmark in Malolos, Bulacan; Marcela Agoncillo Historical Landmark in Taal, Batangas; Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, Libingan ng mga Bayani , Makati City, Mausoleo de losVeteranos de la Revolucion , North Cemetery, Manila; all International Ports of Entry and all other places as may be designated by the Institute.

The National Flag of these sites shall be properly illuminated at night.

SEC. 11. The National Flag shall also be displayed in private buildings and residences or raised in the open flag-staffs in front of said buildings every April 9 ( Araw ng Kagitingan ); May 1 (Labor Day); (National Flag Days) from May 28 to June 12 (Independence Day); last Sunday of August (National Heroes Day); November 30 (Bonifacio Day); and December 30(Rizal Day); and on such other days as may be declared or approved by the President and/or local chief executives.

The National Flag may also be raised and displayed at sunrise and lowered at sunset and throughout the year in the open flagstaff in front of private buildings: Provided, that proper flag ceremonies be observed in accordance with these Rules.

SEC. 12. All Government Entities should observe flag days with appropriate ceremonies. Socio-civic groups, non-government organizations and the private sector are enjoined to observe and cooperate in making the celebration a success.

SEC. 13. The National Flag shall be flown on all naval vessels and on merchant ships of Philippine registry, of more than one thousand (1,000) gross tons.

Military, civil or state vessels should fly the National Flag. Pleasure, merchant, fishing boats or yachts are also encouraged to fly the National Flag.

On board vessels of Philippine registry, the National Flag shall be displayed on the flagstaff at the stern when the vessel is at anchor. The National Flag shall be hoisted to the gaff at the aftermast when the vessel is at sea.

SEC. 14. On all aircraft of Philippine registry, the National Flag shall be prominently displayed horizontally on its fuselage at the head portion with the hoist side pointing the forward direction.

SEC. 15. ‘The National Flag, if flown from a flagpole, shall have its blue field on top in time of peace and the red field on top in time of war; if in a hanging position, the blue field shall be to the left (observer’s point of view) in time of peace, and the red field to the left(observer’s point of view) in time of war.

The National Flag could be knotted to signal that assistance is badly needed.

SEC. 16. If planted on the ground, the flagpole shall be at a prominent place and shall be of such height as would give the National Flag commanding position in relation to the buildings in the vicinity. The flagpole must not be of equal height or higher than the Independence Flagpole at the Rizal Park, Manila.

The flagpole that is planted on the ground must be straight and slightly tapering at the top.The minimum length of the National Flag is one fourth (¼) the height of the flagpole, while maximum length of the National Flag is one-third (1/3) the height of the flagpole.

SEC. 17. When the National Flag is flown with flag or flags of other countries, the flags must be of equal size and on separate staffs of the same height. The National Flag shall be hoisted first and lowered last.

When displayed in a semi-circle of flags with other countries or house flags, the National Flag should be at the center.

When displayed in a circle of flags with other countries or house flags, the National Flag should be flown on the flagpole facing the main read (point of reference- KM 0 Rizal Park,Manila); or in front of a monument; or the main entrance of the building. The flags of other countries or house flags should be arranged counter clockwise in alphabetical order, by precedence or by protocol.

SEC. 18. When displayed in a row or in a parade with flags of other countries, the National Flag shall be on the left (observer’s point of view) of the other flags. The flags of other countries should be arranged in alphabetical order from left to right.

When displayed in a row of house flags, the National Flag shall be in front of the center of the line or on the left (observer’s point of view) of the row. The house flags should be arranged in alphabetical order, by precedence or by protocol order from left to right (the observer’s point of view).

When in a parade with house flags, the National Flag shall be in front of the center of the first line. The house flags should be arranged in alphabetical order, by precedence or by protocol order from left to right (the observer’s point of view).

During special occasions, if there is only one flagpole, the house flag may be flown at the same halyard with the National Flag but below the latter and it cannot be bigger than the National Flag.

SEC. 19. A worn-out National Flag should not be thrown away. It should be solemnly burned to avoid misuse or desecration. The National Flag shall be replaced immediately when it begins to show signs of wear and tear.

SEC. 20. The National Flag shall be raised at sunrise and lowered at sunset. It shall be on the mast at the start of official school and office hours and shall remain flying throughout the day.

The National Flag shall not be raised when the weather is inclement. If already raised, the National Flag shall not be lowered for the whole day.

SEC. 21. The National Flag may be displayed:

a. Inside and/or outside a building, on stationary or movable flagpole. If the National Flag is displayed indoors on a flagpole, it shall be placed at the left of the observer as one enters the room;

b. From the top of a flagpole, which shall be at a prominent place or a commanding position in relation to the surrounding buildings;

c. From a staff projecting upward from the window sill, roof, canopy, balcony or facade of a building;

d. In a suspended position from a rope extending from a building to a pole erected away from the building;

e. Flat against the wall vertically with the sun and stars on top;

f. Hanging vertically in the middle of the two-way traffic road, the blue field should be pointing east, if the road is heading south or north and if the road is heading east or west the blue field should be pointing north; and

g. Hanging vertically at the sides or middle of the one-way traffic road, the blue field should be at the left of the observer.

SEC. 22. The National Flag shall be hoisted to the top briskly and lowered ceremoniously.

The National Flag must be properly folded before hanging for the start of the ceremony. It shall not be left hanging at the base of the flagpole while waiting for the flag ceremony.

The National Flag shall never touch anything beneath it, such as the base of the pole, ground or other object.

After being lowered, the National Flag shall be handled and folded solemnly as part of the ceremony.

C. Conduct of Flag Raising and Lowering Ceremonies

SEC. 23. All government offices, including national or local government units and institutions, shall henceforth observe the flag raising ceremony every Monday morning and the flag lowering ceremony every Friday afternoon.

These include private establishments who fly the National Flag on the flagpole in their compound.

Primary and secondary schools and other institutions of learning shall observe the flag ceremony as ordered by the Department of Education, Culture and Sports and/or the Commission on Higher Education.

SEC. 24. The observance of the flag ceremony shall be simple and dignified.

SEC. 25. During the flag raising ceremony, the assembly shall stand in formation facing the National Flag. At the moment the first note of the National Anthem is heard, everyone in the premises shall come to attention; moving vehicles shall stop. All persons present shall place their palms over their chest, those with hats shall uncover, while those in military,scouting, security guard, and citizens military training uniforms shall give the salute prescribed by their regulations, which salute shall be completed upon the last note of the anthem

The same procedure shall be observed when the National Flag is passing in review or in parade.

SEC. 26. During the flag lowering, the National Flag shall be lowered solemnly and slowly so that the flag shall be down the mast at the sound of the last note of the National Anthem. Those in the assembly shall observe the same deportment or shall observe the same behavior as for the flag raising ceremony.

D. Half-Mast

SECTION 27. The National Flag shall be flown at half-mast as a sign of mourning on all the buildings and places where it is displayed, as provided, on the day of the official announcement of the death of any of the following officials:

a. The President or a former President, for ten (10) days;

b. The Vice-President, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, for seven (7) days;

c. Cabinet Secretaries, Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, Members of the Senate and House of Representatives, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Director-General of the Philippine National Police, for five (5) days;

d. Heads of National Government Agencies, including Government Owned and Control Corporations and Government Financial Institutions, for three (3) days;

e. The Commanding Generals of the Philippine Air Force and the Philippine Army and the Flag Officer in Command of the Philippine Navy, for three (3) days;

f. Governors, Vice-Governors, city and municipal Mayors, city and municipal Vice-Mayors, for three (3) days;

g. Members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, Sangguniang Panlungsod and Sangguniang Bayan , on the day of interment;

h. Barangay Chairmen and the Barangay Councilmen on the day of interment;

i. Former National or Local Government Officials, appointive or elective, other than those specified above, on the day of interment, within their former respective territorial jurisdictions and by resolution of their respective Sanggunians;

j. Regional Directors, Superintendents, Supervisors, Principals, Teachers and other school officials, on the day of interment and by order of the proper school authorities concerned;

k. Recipients of national orders and decorations, on the day of interment and by order of the President or the Congress; and

l. Other persons to be determined by the Institute, for a period of less than seven (7) days.

In cases “c” to “e” the National Flag shall be flown at half-mast in front of the building where the deceased official is holding office and in cases “f” to “h” through Sanggunian Resolution or by order of the Local Chief Executive.

The National Flag, when flown at half-mast, shall be first hoisted to the peak for a moment then lowered to the half-mast position. The National Flag shall again be raised to the peak before it is lowered for the day.

The National Flag shall also be flown at half-mast during calamities/tragedies of national or international significance as ordered by the Office of the President.

The National Flag shall be permanently hoisted at half-mast day and night throughout the year at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, Libingan ng mga Bayani, Fort Bonifacio, MakatiCity; Mausoleo de los Veteranos de la Revolucion , North Cemetery, Manila; and in all memorial cemeteries dedicated to war veterans. The National Flag of these declared sites shall be properly illuminated at night.

E. Casket

SEC. 28. The National Flag may be used to cover the caskets of the honored dead of the military, veterans of previous wars, National Artists, and of civilians who have rendered distinguished service to the nation, as may be determined by the local government unit concerned. In such cases, the National Flag shall be placed such that the white triangle shall be at the head and the blue portion shall cover the right side of the casket. The National Flag shall not be lowered to the grave or allowed to touch the ground, but shall be folded solemnly and handed over to the heirs of the deceased or next of kin.

No object must be put on top of the National Flag, except for religious objects that symbolize”God above Country”.

F. Pledge to the National Flag

SEC. 29. The following shall be the Pledge of Allegiance to the National Flag:

Ako ay Pilipino Buong katapatang nanunumpa Sa watawat ng Pilipinas At sa bansang kanyang sinasagisag Na may dangal, Katarungan at Kalayaan Na pinakikilos ng sambayanan Maka-Diyos Maka-tao Makakalikasan at Makabansa.

Such pledge shall be recited right after the singing of the National Anthem, the throng standing with the right palm open, raised shoulder high. Individuals whose faith or religious beliefs prohibit them from making such pledge must nonetheless show full respect by standing at attention.

G. National Flag Days

SEC. 30. The period from May 28 to June 12 of each year is declared as National Flag Days, during which period all offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, business establishments, institutions of learning, private buildings and homes are enjoined to display the National Flag.

SEC. 31. The government offices and local government units concerned shall display the National Flag on main thoroughfares, parks, plazas, and other public places.

H. Specifications of the National Flag

SEC. 32. The National Flag shall have the following proportions: The width of the National Flag, 1, and the length, 2. All the sides of the white triangle, 1.

SEC. 33. The technical specifications shall be as follows:

The blue color shall bear Cable No. 80173; the white color, Cable No. 80001; the red color,Cable No. 80108; and the golden-yellow, Cable No. 80068.

The assigned cable numbers are listed in the Tenth Edition of the Standard Color Reference of America, created and issued by the Color Association of the United States, No. 343Lexington Avenue, New York, New York, 10016, Series, 1981.

SEC. 34. In order to establish uniform criteria in the making of our National Flag and to guarantee its durability by the use of quality materials, the following standards and procedures shall be observed:

a. All requisitions for the purchase of the National Flag must be based on strict compliance with the design, color, craftsmanship and material requirements of the Government;

b. The manufacturer shall send annually one meter for each color (blue, red, white and golden-yellow including canvas) of textile material to the Industrial Technology Development Institute (ITDI) or the Philippine Textile Research Institute (PTRI) of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) for evaluation. The PTRI/ITDI shall evaluate the quality and serviceability of the said textile material;

c. Flag manufacturers shall apply for annual accreditation at the Institute. Together with their application, they will submit the PTRI/ITDI laboratory test results, copy of business license, permit, company profile and other pertinent documents; and

d. All submitted sample/s of the National Flag by accredited suppliers offered for purchase for government use shall be evaluated as to design, color, materials and craftsmanship specifications by the Institute, through its Heraldry and Display Section, which shall stamp its approval or disapproval on the canvas reinforcement of the National Flag sample submitted. The National Flag sample/s shall be sent to the Institute by the requisitioning office and not by the flag supplier.

SEC. 35. All deliveries of the National Flags requisitioned by government entities shall be inspected by the requisitioning office’s internal inspector and by the Commission on Audit (COA) using the National Flag stamped “APPROVED” by the Institute as reference

The internal inspector of the requisitioning office and the COA, in case of confusion, may send another sample of the National Flag picked at random from the delivered flags for re-evaluation by the Institute.

SEC. 36. For effective information dissemination, all accredited manufacturers are required to inform all flag consumers of the provisions of these Rules.

SEC. 37. All government entities shall ensure that the requirements under the R.A. No.8491 and these Rules, with respect to the standard requisitions and deliveries of the National Flags are strictly complied with.

SEC. 38. All departments, agencies, offices, and instrumentalities of the government,government-owned or controlled corporations, local government units, including barangays, shall include in their annual budgets the necessary outlay for the purchase of the National Flag.

I. Prohibited Acts

SEC. 39: It shall be prohibited:

a. To mutilate, deface, defile, trample on, cast contempt, or commit any act or omission casting dishonor or ridicule upon the National Flag or over its surface;

b. To dip the National Flag to any person or object by way of compliment or salute;

c. To use National Flag

1. As drapery, festoon, tablecloth;

2. As covering for ceilings, walls, statues or other objects;

3. As a pennant in the hood, side, back and top of motor vehicles;

4. As a staff or whip;

5. For unveiling monuments or statues; and

6. As trademarks, or for industrial, commercial or agricultural labels or designs.

d. To display the National Flag:

1. Under any painting or picture;

2. Horizontally. It shall always be hoisted aloft and be allowed to fall freely;

3. Below any platform; or

4. In discotheques, cockpits, night and day clubs, casinos, gambling joints and places ofvice or where frivolity prevails.

e. To wear the National Flag in whole or in part as a costume or uniform;

f. To add any word, figure, mark, picture, design, drawings, advertisement, or imprint of any nature on the National Flag;

g To print, paint or attach representation of the National Flag on handkerchiefs,napkins, cushions, and articles of merchandise;

h. To display in public any foreign flag, except in embassies and other diplomatic establishments, and in offices of international organizations;

i. To use or display or be part of any advertisement or infomercial; and

j. To display the National Flag in front of buildings or offices occupied by aliens.

RULE 4 CHAPTER II THE NATIONAL ANTHEM

SEC. 40. The National Anthem is entitled Lupang Hinirang.

SEC. 41. The National Anthem shall always be sung in the national language within oroutside the country. The following shall be the lyrics of the National Anthem:

Bayang Magiliw Perlas ng Silanganan, Alab ng puso Sa Dibdib mo’y buhay. Lupang Hinirang Duyan ka ng magiting, Sa manlulupig. Di ka pasisiil. Sa dagat at bundok, Sa simoy at sa langit mong bughaw, May dilag ang tula At awit sa paglayang minamahal. Ang kislap ng watawat mo’y Tagumpay na nagniningning Ang bituin at araw niya, Kailan pa may di magdidilim. Lupa ng araw, ng luwalhati’t pagsinta, Buhay ay langit sa piling mo, Aming ligaya na pag may mang-aapi, Ang mamatay ng dahil sa iyo.

SEC. 42. The rendition of the National Anthem, whether played or sung, shall be in accordance with the musical arrangement and composition of Julian Felipe and in accordance with its original Filipino lyrics and march tempo that was adopted under Department Order No. 5 dated May 26, 1956 covered by Circular No. 21 dated June 22, 1956 and Executive Order No. 60 dated December 19, 1963.

B. Conduct in Relation to the National Anthem

SEC. 43. When the National. Anthem is played at a public gathering, whether by a band or by singing or both, or reproduced by any means, the attending public shall sing the anthem. The singing must be done with fervor.

As a sign of respect, all persons shall stand at attention and face the National Flag, if there is one displayed, and if there is none, they shall face the band or the conductor. At the first note,all persons shall execute a salute by placing their right palms over their chests. Those in military, scouting, citizen’s military training and security guard uniforms shall give the salute prescribed by their regulations. The salute shall be completed upon the last note of the National Anthem.

When the National Anthem is to be played or sung with the Anthem of any other country, the National Anthem shall be sung first.

The National Anthem shall not be played or sung for mere recreation, amusement or entertainment purposes except on the following occasions:

a. International competitions where the Philippines is the host or has a representative;

b. National or local competitions;

c. During the “signing of” and “signing on” of radio broadcasting and television stations;

d. Before the initial and last screening of films or before the opening of theater performances;

e. Civic activities, cultural shows or presentations; and

f. Other occasions as may be allowed by the Institute.

SEC. 44. All officials and employees of the national and local governments, and any agencies or instrumentalities thereof, including government-owned or controlled corporations, institutions of learning, and privately-owned entities or offices displaying the National Flag are hereby directed to comply strictly with the rules prescribed for the rendition of the National Anthem.

RULE 5 CHAPTER III THE NATIONAL MOTTO

SEC. 45. The National Motto shall be “MAKA-DIYOS, MAKA-TAO,MAKAKALIKASAN AT MAKABANSA.”

RULE 6 CHAPTER IV NATIONAL COAT-OF-ARMS

SEC. 46. The National Coat-of-Arms shall have:

Paleways of two (2) pieces, azure and gules; a chief argent studded with three (3) mullets equidistant from each other; and, in point of honor, ovoid argent over all the sun rayonnant with eight minor and lesser rays. Beneath shall be the scroll with the words “REPUBLIKA NG PILIPINAS,” inscribed thereon.

RULE 7 CHAPTER V THE GREAT SEAL

SEC. 47. The Great Seal shall be circular in form, with the arms as described in the preceding section, but without the scroll and the inscription “Republika ng Pilipinas” thereon.Surrounding the whole shall be a double marginal circle within which shall appear the words”Republika ng Pilipinas.”

The Great Seal shall bear the National Motto.

SEC. 48. The Great Seal shall be affixed to or placed upon all commissions signed by the President and upon such other official documents and papers of the Republic of the Philippines as may be provided by law, or as may be required by custom and usage. The President shall have custody of the Great Seal.

RULE 8 CHAPTER VI OFFICIAL SEALS AND OTHER HERALDIC ITEMS AND DEVICES

SEC. 49. Any branch of the government, whether national or local, government-owned or controlled corporations, state colleges and universities, including the military, may adopt appropriate coat-of-arms, seal, logo, insignia, badge, patches, banners and initiate awards,trophies, citations, orders or decorations, as may be authorized by the Office of the President or by Congress.

SEC. 50. These heraldic devices and items shall be filed with the Institute for recording and evaluation as to precedence, design, customs and traditions.

The application for approval of design and specification of the proposed heraldic items and devices shall be supported with the following documents:

a. Orders, or any forms of grants, laws of authority or creations;

b. Brief historical background, symbolism, and significance of every design component;and c. Photographs of existing structures, objects, spots, etc. to be incorporated in the design.

The Institute shall recommend such heraldic design together with the needed documents tot he Office of the President or Congress for final approval.

The approved design shall be returned to the Institute for proper recording in the National Registry of Heraldic Items and Devices and for transmittal to the requesting government entity.

SEC. 51. To conform to the basic heraldic traditions, the following shall be observed in the design, creation, modification, revision and approval of heraldic items and devices:

a. It may feature either abstract or natural emblems/visuals, representing significant aspects, or events representative or related to its history, mandates, duties, functions and visions;

b. Components of heraldic designs must feature indigenous Filipino culture, values,history, traditions and sense of nationalism;

c. Every component must be recognizable as if it is rendered or reduced to its normal required sizes;

d. No personal heraldic devices shall be allowed except the Seal of the President and the Vice-President;

e. Symbols, names, initials, logos, pictures, silhouettes or images of living persons shall not be featured in the design;

f. The name of the government entity or title of heraldic items and devices must be in prominent position;

g. All heraldic items and devices, including ribbons or sashes, must be unique from each other;

h. The National Coat-of-Arms, which may or may not include the scroll, when used as the main part or as a component of the seal, must occupy the place of honor. It shall be used only by the major branches of the government;

i. In using the National Coat-of-Arms or the Great Seal for numismatic purposes, wet or dry seals and painted or printed in monochrome, tincture representations shall be used;

j. The use of the National Flag is prohibited except where the flag has become part of its history;

k. The motto, title or phrase to be incorporated in the heraldic items and devices may be in the national language or in any local dialect; and

l. These heraldic items and devices shall not be revised or changed more than once every ten (10) years.

SEC. 52. All government entities including the military are hereby ordered to purchase all Heraldic Items and Devices from manufacturers accredited and authorized by the Institute.

SEC. 53. Engravers or manufacturers shall apply for annual accreditation at the Institute. Together with their application, they will also submit copies of business license, permit, company profile with list of Heraldic Items and Devices they made for the year and other pertinent documents.

Such items and devices shall be subject to inspection by the purchasing agency’s internal inspector and the COA representative using the design and specifications approved by the Office of the President or by Congress, through the Institute.

Any violation of R.A. No. 8491 or these Rules shall be a ground for suspension, revocation or non-renewal of accreditation.

SEC. 54. No government official or employee shall accept any orders or decorations from any foreign government without the consent of Congress, and without the prior  evaluation and documentation of such order or decoration by the Institute.

SEC. 55. Heraldic and Vexillary designs and/or items, including the National Motto, National Anthem and Pledge of Allegiance to the National Flag shall not be used or employed for numismatic, philatelic, advertisement and/or any informative purposes unless duly approved in writing by the Institute, through its Heraldry and Display Section.

RULE 9 CHAPTER VII PENALTIES

SEC. 56. Failure or refusal to observe the provisions of R.A. No. 8491, and/or any violation of these Rules shall, after proper notice and hearing, be penalized as stipulated in R.A. No. 8491

RULE 10 CHAPTER VIII EFFECTIVITY

SEC. 57. Effectivity . — These Rules shall be effective fifteen (15) days after the approval of the Office of the President and filing with Congress of the Philippines and the University of the Philippines Law Center.

RULE 11 CHAPTER IX AMENDMENT OF RULES

SEC. 58. Amendments . — The Chairman and Executive Director shall have the authority to amend, revise, repeal, or otherwise modify these RULES or any provision thereof, as may be deemed necessary to achieve the objectives of the R.A. No. 8491 and these Rules.

ISSUED this 30th day of January, Two Thousand and Two, in the City of Manila, the Philippines.

Recommending Approval:

(Sgd.) PABLO S. TRILLANA III Chairman and Executive Director

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT Approved by Authority of the President

(Sd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary