MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 284

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM FEBRUARY 1, 1989 TO FEBRUARY 28, 1990 AS THE YEAR OF CARDIOLOGY IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Philippines will host the XIth World Congress of Cardiology to be held from February 11 to 16, 1990;

WHEREAS, the said world congress will provide an international forum for cardiologists to exchange scientific information with their counterparts; to discuss recent advances in the specialized field of cardiology and allied disciplines; to tackle problems common to many countries or to specific population sectors and to seek their solution; as well as to give opportunity for the local cardiologists to renew and expand professional friendships and for the foreign cardiologists to enjoy exposure to the Philippine environment for their mutual enrichment, both professionally and culturally; and, finally, to provide contact for the young cardiologists and those from developing countries with eminent senior cardiologists thru this Congress as an educational forum in which they can participate and learn of developments in a broad range of pertinent areas;

WHEREAS, the holding of such an important event will do honor to the Filipino nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from February 1, 1989 to February 28, 1990 as the Year of Cardiology in the Philippines under the auspices of the XIth World Congress of Cardiology, Inc.

All government departments, agencies and offices including government owned or controlled corporations are hereby directed to extend their assistance and support to the XIth World Congress of Cardiology to ensure the successful observance thereof and the holding of the World Congress.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, regardless of race or creed, including private organizations or entities to support actively the holding of the XIth World Congress of Cardiology.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia