MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 652

APPROVING AND ADOPTING THE PHILIPPINE STATISTICAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM FOR 1990-1992 AND PERSPECTIVES FOR 1993-1995

WHEREAS, in order to attain an effective and efficient statistical system that meets the requirements of the government, an improved Philippine Statistical System that is dynamic and user-oriented has been envisioned in the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan 1987-1992;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Statistical Development Program was formulated with the participation of various government agencies and private groups who are producers and/or users of statistics;

WHEREAS, the approval of the Philippine Statistical Development Program has been favorably endorsed by the National Statistical Coordination Board;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the approval and adoption of the Philippine Statistical Development Program for 1990-1992 and Perspectives for 1993-1995.

Pursuant to this Proclamation:

1. The National Statistical Coordination Board shall coordinate and monitor the implementation of the Program by various government agencies. It shall likewise coordinate the Programs periodic assessment and updating.

2. The National Statistical Coordination Board Secretary General is hereby authorized, upon consultation with the Chairman, to issue such memoranda, circulars or other orders as may be considered necessary or advisable in the coordination and monitoring of the Program’s implementation as well as in its assessment and updating. For these purposes, the National Statistical Coordination Board Secretary General may create the appropriate inter-agency committees.

3. The Department of Budget and Management shall consider the integrated budget for the Philippine Statistical System recommended by the National Statistical Coordination Board that will support the Program’s implementation, monitoring, assessment and updating.

4. The private sector is enjoined to lend support to the implementation of the Program by participating in the various statistical activities which require their attention, especially as respondents to statistical surveys.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia