MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 29

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE CANCER SOCIETY, INC., TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL, MEMBERSHIP AND FUND CAMPAIGN FOR ONE YEAR.

WHEREAS , the Philippine Cancer Society, Inc., a 100% non-profit organization established in 1957 for the purpose of combating cancer, is purely dependent on voluntary contributions for the funding of its humanitarian services;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Cancer Society is currently implementing a massive Information and Education campaign aimed and making our people more cancer conscious, so that, alerted on time concerning the symptoms of this dreaded disease, those afflicted may seek immediate treatment;

WHEREAS , statistics gathered by the Society from various local clinics and hospitals show that the prevalence of cancer is increasing every year; and

WHEREAS , in order to carry out these expanded services of the Society, it needs greater outlay of funds and this can only be achieved through the continued support and cooperation of the public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Philippine Cancer Society, Inc., to conduct a national educational, membership and fund campaign for a period of one year from the promulgation of this proclamation.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, irrespective of nationality, race, or creed to assist in this humanitarian endeavor by giving generously of their means. Furthermore, I hereby authorize all school officials, public and private to solicit voluntary contributions from school teachers and children to support the activities of the Philippine Cancer Society. Likewise, I authorize all government financial institutions and government-controlled corporations to donate portions of their funds to the Philippine Cancer Society in support of its services. I hereby also announce that all donations given to this charitable cause shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement and all other taxes, and shall be fully deductible for income tax purposes.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) FULGENCIO S. FACTORAN, JR. Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia