MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 536

DECLARING MAY 4 OF EVERY YEAR AS “INTEGRATED BAR OF THE PHILIPPINES FOUNDATION DAY”

WHEREAS, on January 16, 1973 the organization of lawyers was created under Supreme Court Rule 139-A (Integration Rule) and became known as the Integrated Bar of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, under Proclamation No. 1397, March 17, was designated as Integrated Bar Day throughout the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the said Integrated Bar of the Philippines was constituted into a body corporate on May 4, 1973 by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 181, thereby giving the said organization juridical personality;

WHEREAS, the general objectives and purposes of the Integrated Bar are to elevate the standards of the legal profession, improve the administration of justice and enable the Integrated Bar to discharge its public responsibility being officers of the judicial courts;

WHEREAS, it is important that the members of the legal profession be continuously reminded of the objectives and lofty purposes of their organization, as well as their public responsibility, in order that such ideals and noble ends may be more fully and effectively attained;

WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper that a day within each year be designated and proclaimed as Integrated Bar of the Philippines Foundation Day so as the members of legal profession will better understand and appreciate the nature and objectives of the Integrated Bar, as well as project the Integrated Bar into the national consciousness with renewed vigor and spirit in the discharge of its public responsibility, and the most appropriate choice for the purpose is May 4, considering that the Integrated Bar first became a body corporate with juridical personality on the said day;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim and designated May 4 of every year as “Integrated Bar of the Philippines Foundation Day”.

I call upon the citizens of the Philippines, most especially the officers and members of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines and all its Chapters throughout the Philippines, to observe the day with appropriate activities designed to promote the objectives and purposes of the organization, especially in its nationwide program of free legal assistance to the needy and deserving members of the community.

Proclamation No. 1397 entitled “Designating March 17 of Every Year As Integrated Bar Day Throughout the Philippines” dated February 11, 1975 is hereby revoked.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (SGD.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia