MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 219

CALLING UPON THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS TO JOIN THE NATION-WIDE CONSUMER EDUCATION CAMPAIGN FOR THE VALUE-ADDED TAX.

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 273, dated July 25, 1987, directed the adoption of the Value-Added Tax;

WHEREAS, the Value-Added Tax was conceived to rationalize the system of taxing goods and services by replacing the tax on original and subsequent sales tax and percentage tax on certain services with a multi-stage value-added tax;

WHEREAS, the Value-Added Tax will simplify tax administration and make the tax system more equitable;

WHEREAS, the imposition of Value-Added Tax has caused confusion and opposition among the consumers and other sectors of our society primarily due to lack of information and the attempt of some to exploit the tax for personal gains; and

WHEREAS, the postponement, revocation and outright repeal of Value-Added Tax in reaction to the temporary problems encountered will only spawn more serious and damaging effects to the consumers and the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby:

1. Call upon all manufacturers, producers and distributors of goods and services subject to Value-Added Tax to publish and disseminate suggested selling prices of their products and services in conspicuous places, newspapers and other forms of media for the benefit of the consumers, and to update the same from time to time so as to provide consumers leverage and protection against exploitation;

2. Direct the Department of Trade and Industry and other concerned departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of government to supervise and assist the private sector in undertaking the publication of selling prices and in the conduct of other consumers education projects, such as dialogues and workshops;

3. Call upon the different chambers, associations and groups of manufacturers, traders and consumers to participate in this drive, as well as to police their own ranks; and

4. Request all of the foregoing to bring to the attention of the Office of the President any problem that needs Presidential action.

This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia