MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 669

DECLARING DECEMBER 8, 1990-DECEMBER 8, 1991 AS THE QUADRICENTENNIAL OF THE FOUNDATION OF THE TOWN OF ANTIPOLO, RIZAL, IN CONSONANCE WITH THE DECADE OF CULTURE, AND DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, the year 1991 marks the 400th anniversary of the foundation of the town of Antipolo, Rizal, having as its nucleus the visita of Bosoboso, and the establishment of the doctrina , in 1591;

WHEREAS, Antipolo’s rich ethnics traditions, colorful rituals and May Festivals have gained prominence as the pearl of Philippines curacies;

WHEREAS, the Filipino people wishes to mark this momentous year with fitting activities, and eventually making the town itself as the premier center of historical pilgrimage in the country;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create an Executive Committee that will coordinate with the National Historical Institute in the planning and execution of the commemorative activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare December 8, 1990-December 8, 1991 as the Quadricentennial of the Foundation of the Town of Antipolo, Rizal, in consonance with the Decade of Culture, and designate the National Historical Institute to take charge of the celebration and to undertake the following activities, in coordination with the Executive Committee created for the purpose:

1. To prepare and take charge of the general program of activities of the Quadricentenary and submit a copy thereof to the President;

2. To help generate further the spirit of community through earnest pursuit of peace and progress for the people of Antipolo;

3. To write and publish the history of Antipolo and install a historical marker for said town;

4. To coordinate with the Central Bank for the issuance of legal tender coins in consonance with the Decade of Culture;

5. To encourage the propagation of the Tipolo tree Artocarpus Incisa for ecological and medicinal purposes;

6. To coordinate with the Postal Service Office for the issuance of commemorative stamp;

7. To coordinate with the Land Transportation Office for the issuance of commemorative car plates;

8. To set up a commemorative exhibit and prepare documentary materials for broadcast and print media;

9. To initiate the production of souvenir items such as postcards, decals, pins, keychains, T-shirts, brochures, pamphlets and other novelty item to give meaning and substance to the celebration;

10. To hold a seminar on the role of Antipolo in national history and development;

11. To bestow honor and awards to outstanding Antipolonians and all those residents who have contributed to the welfare of the town in all fields of endeavor.

The Executive Committee shall be composed of representatives from the government offices and the private sectors. In undertaking the abovenamed activities, the National Historical Institute in coordination with the Executive Committee, is hereby authorized to accept or receive donations and other conveyances of funds, materials and services gratuitously for use in the furtherance of its purposes and objectives subject to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 373.

Similarly, it may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance or information as it may need in the performance of its functions.

IN WITNESS, WHEREOF, I, have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia