MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 13

PROCLAIMING JUNE 1986 – MAY 1987 AS THE YEAR OF THE PROTECTION OF FILIPINO EXPLOITED CHILDREN.

WHEREAS , it is the policy of the State to promote the well-being and total development of Filipino youth and children, and to protect them from exploitation, abuse, improper influences, hazards and other conditions or circumstances prejudicial to their physical, mental, emotional, social and moral development;

WHEREAS , recent reports on rampant child abuse and exploitation, especially in Metro Manila and tourist spots throughout the country, have generated the righteous indignation of Philippine society and have inspired greater and coordinated efforts by both government and civic organizations towards a national plan of action integrating all programs and services pertinent to the welfare and well-being of children;

WHEREAS , the United Nations has declared June 4, 1986 as “International Day of Innocent Children Victims of Aggression;”

WHEREAS , the government recognizes the initiatives of non-government organizations who have taken an active role even in the past as in the present in their crusade against child prostitution and exploitation, pornography and obscenity among our fellow Filipino;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the period from June 1986 – May 1987 as the Year of the Protection of Filipino Exploited Children, and hereby create an inter-agency Task Force composed of government organizations to prepare a national plan of action, mobilize resources for its implementation and to monitor the implementation of the same.

The Inter-Agency Task Force is instructed to direct its programs and activities towards the objectives of developing a sense of national awareness of the problems of child abuse and exploitation and generating a sense of national motivation, responsibility and commitment for its prevention.

All ministries, agencies, offices and other instrumentalities of the government are hereby directed to support and/or implement programs, projects and activities for innocent Filipino children who are victims of exploitation, abuse, or aggression, including their rehabilitation, as well as for the prevention of similar crimes on other children.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia