MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 329

DECLARING THE PERIOD 1988 TO 1998 AS THE PHILIPPINE DECADE OF CULTURE, AND CREATING A COMMITTEE FOR ITS APPROPRIATE OBSERVANCE.

WHEREAS, the General Assembly of the United Nations, through Resolution No. 41/187 adopted at its session of 8 December 1986, proclaimed the period 1988–1997 the World Decade for Cultural Development to be observed under the auspices of the United Nations and the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, fully subscribing to the objectives of the said Decade, to wit: acknowledging the cultural dimension of development, affirming and enriching cultural identities, broadening participation in culture, and promoting international cultural cooperation, is a signatory to the aforementioned Resolution;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is concurrently celebrating 1988 to 1998 at the Decade of the Centennial of Filipino Nationalism, Nationhood and the Philippine Revolutionary Movement; and

WHEREAS, it is important that a coordinated and sustained observance of this Decade be ensured;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declared the period 1988 to 1998 as the Philippine Decade of Culture.

For the purposes of formulating plans and devising ways and means for the effective execution of appropriate activities and/or projects for the commemoration of the Philippine Decade of Culture, there is hereby created a Committee to be composed of:

The Committee is empowered to call upon any office, agency or instrumentality of the government for cooperation and assistance in the discharge of its functions.

The Committee shall coordinate with existing public and private entities in the promotion and direction of commemorative celebrations for the observance of the Decade of Culture throughout the Philippines and shall take all other measures necessary for the successful execution of all the programs and activities adopted in celebration of the Decade of Culture.

This clarifies Administrative Order No. 66, dated March 13, 1988, in that the National Organizing Committee created thereunder is responsible for the First International Festival Conference on indigenous and traditional cultures in Manila on October 20 to 25 as one of the principal activities of the Decade of Culture, but not for the entire Philippine Decade of Culture.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia