IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11767,
THE FOUNDLING RECOGNITION AND PROTECTION ACT

Recognition and Protection Act, the following Implementing Rules and Regulations are
hereby promulgated:

ARTICLE |
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. Title. —- These rules and regulations shall be known and cited as the

Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. 11767 (R.A. No. 11767), also
known as the Foundling Recognition and Protection Act.

SECTION 2. Dectaralion of Policies. — The State values the dignity of every human being and
guarantees full respect for human rights. A child has the same general human rights as an
adult, with specific rights that recognize their specific needs. As such, the State shall protect
their rights and ensure their access to assistance, including proper care, nutrition, and special
protection from all forms of neglect, abuse, cruelty, exploitation, and other conditions
prejudicial to the development of every child.

The State shail uphold the best interests of the child, incluciing and especially the child with
distinct vulnerabilities, such as the neglected, stateless, anc abandoned or deserted, by
proactively and diligently inquiring into the facts of the child's birth and parentage. It recognizes
the generally accepted thrust of international jaw lo reduce and prevent statelessness. It shall
protect any child with no known parents by ensuring a natural-born citizen status consistent
with the tenets set forth/enumerated under the Constitution, the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child, Hague Convention on Certain Questions Relating to Conflict,
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and other relevant instruments, and the
generally accepted principles of international law. The State shall also adopt measures to
ensure that support services are provided to foundiings and acts inimical to their welfare are
penalized.

In furtherance of the State policy to create one body to exercise all powers and functions
relating to allernative child care, State services relating to the protection and welfare of
foundlings shall be placed under the National Authority for Child Care (NACG).

SECTION 3. Generai Objectives. — These IRR shall recognize foundlings as presumed
natural-bom citizens, provide a streamlined process to expedite the issuance of a Certificate
of Live Birth (COLB) under the Act; and to define the roles and functions of the concerned
offices such as the NACC, Safe Haven providers, Local Government Units (LGU), and the
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), in the care and registration of foundiings.

SECTION 4. Definition of Terms. — For purposes of R_A. No. 11767 and these IRR, the
following terms are defined;

(a) Act refers to Republic Act No. 11767, otherwise known as the Foundling Recognition
and Protection Act;

FLA No.1 1767 - The Faundiing Recognition and Protection Act
Implementing Rides and Requiatons Page lof is

(b) Alternative child care refers to the provision of planned substitute parental care by a
child-caring or child-placing agency to a child who is orphaned, abandoned, foundling,
neglected, or surrendered. This may include foster care, kinship care, family-like care,
and residential care. Altemative child care’ will also be provided to abused and
exploited children, children with disabilities, children living with HIV/AIDs, victims of
trafficking, physical, psychological and sexual abuse, offline and online sexual
exploitation, children at risk, children in conflict with the law and children in situations
of emergency or crisis and armed conflicts as defined In RA 11642:

(c) Case Study Report refers to a written report as a result of a comprehensive
assessment conducted by a licensed social worker as to a person's ethno-cultural,
economic, medical, spiritual and psychosocial background, current functioning, and
facts or circumstances of abandonment or neglect. The report shall also state the
approximate age of the foundling, efforts of the social worker to locate the foundiings'
biological parent/s, legal quardian/s, or relative/s. Provided, That for adult foundlings
with no foundling certificate, no exhaustive case study report by the social worker shall
be required but the LSWDO shall issue a case study report on his/her background anc
qualifications as a foundiing under the Act;

(d) Certificate Declaring a Child Legally Available for Adoption (CDCLAA) refers to the
final written administrative order issued by the NACC declaring a child as legally
available for adoption. The rights of the biological parents, guardian, or other
custodians to exercise parental authorily over the child shall cease upon issuance of
the CDCLAA;

(e) Child refers to a person below eighteen (18) years of age or a person eighteen (18)
years of age or over but who is unable to fully take care or protect himself or herself
from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation, or discrimination because of physical or
psychosocial disability or condition:

(f) Child-Caring agency refers to a duly registered, licensed and accredited agency by the
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), that provides twenty-four
(24)-hour residential care services for abandoned, foundling, orphaned, neglected,
voluntarily committed or involuntarily committed children and other children in need of
altemative child care;

(9) Child-Placing agency refers to a govemment or a private non-profit or charitable
agency duly registered, licensed and accredited by the DSWD to provide
comprehensive child welfare services including receiving and processing petitions for
adoption and foster care, evaluating the prospective adoptive parenUs (PAP/s) or
foster parents, preparing the child case study report and home study report and provide
post placement services. The Local Sacia! Welfare and Development Office (LSWDO)
and accredited NGOs and Faith-Based Organizations (FBOs) are considered child-
placing agencies;

(h) Finder refers to a person of lega! age who discovered the deserted or abandoned child.
Provided, That if the actual finder is a minor, his or her parent or legal guardian shall
assist in making the report of the circumstances. Provided, Further that if the
infantichild is relinquished to a safe haven provider, tha Head of the safe haven
provider shall be the finder;

(i) Foundling refers to a deserted or abandoned child or infant or person with unknown
facts of birth and parentage. This shall also include those who have been duly
registered as a foundiing during his or her infancy/childhood but have reached the age
of majority withoul benefiting from adoption procedures upon the passage of the Act;

RA. No, 11767 ~The Founding Recognition and Protection Act
frophecterting; Rules and Reequtations Page 2 of 15

Provided, That only cases of foundiings found within the premises of the Philippine
Embassies/Consulates, offices and within the territories abroad shall be covered by
the Act. Foundling shall also be used interchangeably with a person with no known
parents; 7

(j)) /afant refers to a founding thirty (30) days old and younger.

(k) Local Civil Registrar (LCR) refers to the Office of the Local Civil Registry responsible
for the civil registration program of the city or municipality pursuant to the Civil Registry
Law and files, keeps and preserves the books required by law and issues certified
transcripts or copies of the registered documents;

(!) Local Social Welfare Development Officer (LSWDO) refers to a person who is a duly
licensed social worker and appointed by the local chief executive to head the
provincial, city, or municipal social welfare development office which serves as the
frontline of the Local Government Unit (LGU) in the delivery of social welfare and
development programs and services. Tha LSWDO shail designate a senior regisiered
social worker to manage cases of adoption, foster care, and other alternative child care
programs;

(m) Media refers to traditional media (newspaper of general circulation in the locality), radio
in the locality, television, and social media platform;

(n) National Authority for Child Care (NACC) refers to the one-stop quasi-judicial agency
on domestic and alternative child care, attached to the DSWD and acts as the Central
Authority for all alternative child care programs including domestic and intercountry
adoption. It is composed of a Council and a Secretariat headed by an Executive
Director;

(©) Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) refers to the agency which enforces the civil
registration functions in the country. Il is headed by the National Slatistician and Civil
Registrar General who provides overall direction in the implementation of the Civil
Registry Law and related issuances and exercise technical supervision over the civil
registrars;

(p) Regicnal Aiternalive Child Care Office (RACCO) refers to the Regional Offices of the
NACC created from the Adoption Resource and Referral Units (ARRU) of the DSWD
Field Offices. They are tasked to ensure a well-functioning system of receipt of local
applications to adopt or to foster, loca! petitions for CDCLAA and adoption, and other
requests regarding alternative placement and well-being of children;

(q) Relinquishment For the purposes of the Act, refers to the act of placing an infant 30
days old and younger to a safe haven provider by the parent or finder;

(r) Residential Care Facilities (RCF) refer to government facilities that provide 24-hour
residential group care to children on a temporary basis whose needs cannot, at the
time, be adequately met by their biological parents and other allemative child care
family arrangements;

(s) Safe Haven refers to a person, non-govemment or government facility charged with
the custody of an infant or child;

(t) Social Worker refers to a licensed practitioner by the Professional Regulations
Commission (PRC) who, by academic training and social work professional
experience, possesses the skills to achieve the objectives as defined and set by the

PLA. NO. 19757 = The Founcling Recognition and Protection Act
Irapiecenertirng uber ar Reyudations Page 3 of 15

social work profession, through the use of the basic methods and techniques of social
work (casework, group work, and community organization) which are designed to
enable individuals, groups and communities to meet their needs and to solve the
problems of adjustment to a changing pattern of society and, through coordination with
an organized social work agency which is supported partially or wholly from
government or community solicited funds;

(u) Stateless Person refers to a person who is nol considered as 4 national by any State
under the operation of its law;
ARTICLE Il
SAFE HAVEN
SECTION 5. Safe Haven. — Notwithstanding Articles 276 and 277 of the Revised Penal Code
and Republic Act No. 7610, any parent who relinquishes/entrusts an infant thirty (30) days old
and younger to the following persons or entities shall be exempted from criminal liability:

(a) A licensed child-caring agency:

(b) A licensed child-placing agency;

(c) A church: Provided, That, for purposes of these rules, a church and other places
known/recognized shall be defined as a place devoted to religious worship held with
regularity;

(d) Department of Health (DOH)-accredited health facilities including hospitals,
infirmaries, city health offices, birthing homes, rural health units, lying-in clinics and
barangay health stations;

(e) A Local Social Welfare and Development Office (LSWDOQ); and

(f} DSWD managed residential care facilities and LGU managed residential care facilities.

Provided, That such relinquishment/entrustment did not result in gross negligence or death of
the infant.

SECTION. 6. Duties and Responsibilities of the Safe Haven Provider ~ The Safe Haven
provider shall:

(a) Act appropriately to provide care to the infant;
{b) Act as a temporary custodian of the infant;

(c) Inform the parent that they may, but is not required to answer questions regarding the
identity and medical history of the infant;

(cd) Confirm, if practicable, that the parent wishes to permanently relinquish parental rights
and release the infant for adoption; and

(e) Within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of relinquishment of the child by the birth
parent/s to the safe haven provider or from the report by a finder that a foundling was
discovered, as applicable, inform the NACC through the RACCO that a child has been
relinquished in its custody, including all information surrounding the identity and

RA. No. 11767 — The Foundling Recognition and Protection Act
: ee 7 . Page 4of 15

circumstances of abandonment of (he child. The safe haven provider may use the
fastest means available in reporting the case and in sending a written report.

SECTION 7. Status of Infants Relinquished under the Safe Haven Provisions. — Infants
relinquished under the safe haven provisions of the Act shall be considered foundilings.
Provided, That facts of birth and parentage could nol be ascertained,

SECTION 8. immunity for the Safe Haven Provider. — A sate haven that receives an Infant
pursuant to the Act shall not be liable for any civil damages for any act or omission done in
maintaining custody of the infant: Provided, That the safe haven provider acts in good faith
without gross negligence.

SECTION 9. Duties and responsibilities of the finder. The finder shall:

a) Immediately report within forty-eight (48) hours, the discovery of the foundling to either
the LSWDO, or Punong Barangay or police station or any safe haven provider where
the foundling was discovered. Provided, That in the event that the foundling is found
in a different barangay from the residence of the finder, both Punong Barangays or
police stations shall be informed. The finder may use the fastest means available in
reporting the case. Provided, Further that if the foundling was relinquished to a safe
haven provider, the Head of the safe haven provider shall, within forty eight (48) hours,
report the circumstances of the foundiing to the LSWDO, or Punong Barangay or police
station;

b) Execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of the case of the foundling: and

c) Cooperate in any way possible with the proper authorities in the conduct of a proactive
and diligent search and inquiry to establish the identity of a foundiing.

In case the finder/s apply/ies to become foster parent/s of the foundiing, the NACC, through
the RACCO, or LSWDO, or a child-piacing agency shall be assessed in accordance to the
provisions under Republic Act 10165, as amended.

SECTION 10. Duties and responsibilities of the LSWDO, Barangay Officials, Community
Police Assistance Center (COMPAC) or Police Stations and DOH accredited health facilities.

Provided, That whoever receives the initial report on the foundling, refer the foundling to a
heaith/medical facility for immediate medical care that the foundling may require.

A. Barangay Officials:

1. Take custody of the foundling until referral to the LSWDO, conduct a search
and inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the discovery of the foundling
within twenty-four (24) hours:

2. Report and refer the case of the foundling to the LSWDO who shall within forty-
eight (48) hours submit an initial report to the NACC through the RACCO
regarding the presence of a foundling within their jurisdiction. The barangay
officials may use the fastest means available in reporting and referring the
case;

3. Ensure and/or follow-up with the finder on the execution of an affidavit;

4. Issue a blotter report on the result of the search and inquiry and endorse the
same to the LSWDO; and

RA No. 11767. Tho Founding Recognition and Protection Act of
Implementing Rules and Reguintors Page Sof 15

5.

Submit a Quarterly report to the LSWDO with a summary of cases of foundlings
reported to their office on or before the Sth day of the succeeding month.

B. COMPAC/Police Stations

Upon receipt of the report of the finder regarding the foundling, conduct a
search and inquiry to investigate the circumstances of the foundling within
twenty-four (24) hours;

Report and refer the case of the foundling to the LSWDO who shall within forty-
eight (48) hours, submit an Initial report to the NACC through the RACCO
regarding the presence of a foundling within their jurisdiction. The
COMPAC/Paolice stations may use the fastest means available in reporting and
referring the case;

Assist the barangay officials and the LSWDO in the conduct of search and
inquiry on the circumstances of the foundling;

. Issue a blotter report on the result of the search and inquiry and endorse the

same to the barangay officials and/or LSWDO;

Issue a certification on the circumstances surrounding the foundling’s
discovery, and the results of the search and inquiry conducted; and

Submit a Quarterly report to the LSWDO with a summary of cases of foundlings
reported to their office on or before the 5th day of the succeeding month.

c. LSwbDo:

RA No. 91767 - The

Within twenty-four 24 hours from receipt of the report from the finder, barangay
officials or COMPAG/Police stations, submit an initial report to the NACC
through the RACCO regarding the presence of a foundling within their
jurisdiction. Tha LSWDO may use the fastest means available in reporting and
referring the case;

Coordinate with the NACC through the RACCO and facilitate the provision of
appropriate care and services in line with the foundling's needs and best
interests, including but not limited to placement to licensed foster parent or, if
a foster parent is not available, referral to the nearest safe haven provider,
consistent with existing laws:

. Within fifteen (15) working days, prepare a comprehensive and exhaustive

report on the foundiing describing the manner by which the foundling was
found, when and where the foundling was found, who is the finder, and efforts
done including television, radio or print media or tri-media or social media to
locate the biological parenV/s of the foundling and submit the report to the
NACC through the RACCO;

Coordinate and facilitate the provision to foundiings of appropriate government
care and services, inciuding but not limited to assistance in registration,
facilitation of documents for adoption, education, legal and police protection,
proper nourishment, medical care for survival and development, and admission
to safe and secure child care Centers, in their respective local government units,
and

Foundling Recognition and Protection Act Page 6o0t15

tmplemanting Rules and Regulations

6:

Submit a Quarterly report to the NACC through the RACCO with a summary of
cases of foundlings reported to their office on or before the 15th day of the
succeeding month.

D. DOH Accredited Health facilities — Within twenty-four (24) hours, report and refer
the foundling te the LSWDO, residentia! care facilities and/or registered, licensed and
accredited child caring agency/child-placing agencies together with the medical report
on the foundling.

E. Child-Caring/Child-Placing Agency

Within 24 hours from receipt of the foundling, report to the LSWDO regarding
the admission of the foundling in their facility; The child-caring/child-placing
agency may use the fastest means available in reporting the case:

Provide appropriate care and services in line with the foundling’s needs and
best interest, including but not limited to placement to licensed foster parent
consistent with existing laws;

Within fifteen (15) working days, prepare a comprehensive and exhaustive
report on the foundling describing the manner by which the foundling was
found, when and where the foundiling was found, who Is the finder, and efforts
done including television, radio or print media or tri-media or social media to
locate the biological parent/s of the foundling and submit the report to the
NACC through the RACCO;

Coordinate and facilitate the provision to foundiings of appropriate government
care and services, including but not limited to assistance in registration,
facilitation of documents for adoption, education, legal and police protection,
proper nourishment, medical care for survival and development; and

Submit a Quarterly report to the NACC through the RACCO witha summary of
cases of foundlings admitted in their facility on or before the 5th day of the
succeeding month.

F. Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) — Coordinate with the Philippine
Embassy/Consulate or Offices abroad for the return of the foundiling to the Philippines,
and to the NACC for the referral of the foundling to a registered, licensed and
accredited child caring agency or a residential care facility.

SECTION 11. Duties and responsibilities of the Philippine Embassies (PE) / Philippine
Consulates (PC), Offices and Territories Abroad:

(2) Conduct investigation as to the facts of birth of the foundling found within the premises
of the Embassy/Consulate or office and within the territories and report the foundling's
circumstances to the head of the embassy/consulate or office;

(b) Within fifteen (15) working days, prepare a comprehensive and exhaustive report on
the foundling describing the manner by which the founcling was found, when and
where the foundling was found, who is the finder, and efforts done to locate the
biological parent/s of the foundling;

(c) Facilitate the registration and issuance of the COLB of the foundling; and

FLA No.1 1767 ~The Foundling Recognition and Protection Act
R Page 7 of 15

implomerting Rukes are

(d) Coordinate with the DFA for the return of the foundiing to the Philippines, and to the
NACC for the referral of the foundling to a licensed and accredited child caring agency
ora residential care facility.

ARTICLE Ill
STATUS AND LEGITIMACY

SECTION 12. Citizenship Status of a Foundling Found in the Philippines andior in Philippine
Embassies, Consulates, Offices and Territories Abroad, — A foundling found in the Philippines
and/or in Philippine. Embassies, Consulates, offices and territories abroad is presumed a
natural-born Filipino citizen regardless of the status or circumstances of birth. As a natural-
born citizen of the Philippines, a foundling is accorded with rights and protections at the
moment of birth equivalent to those belonging to such a class of citizens whose citizenship
does nol need perfection or any further act.

The presumption of the natural-born status of a foundling may not be impugned in any
proceeding unless substantial proof of foreign parentage is shown, and that the foreign
citizenship may be transmitted from the parent/s to the foundling. The natural-bom status of a
foundiling shall not also be affected by the fact that the birth certificate was simulated, or the
person was legally adopted or that there was an absence of a legal adoption process, or that
there was inaction or delay in reporting, documenting, or registering a foundling.

SECTION 13. Administrative Adoption and Status of Legitimacy. — The founding, if still a
minor, shall be declared legally available for adoption by the NACC subject to existing laws,
rules, and regulations and taking into consideration the best interest of the child. The COLB
shall be the sole basis in declaring a Foundiling as legally available for adoption.

The relevant provisions of Republic Act No. 11642, otherwise known as the “Domestic
Administrative Adoption and Alternative Child Care Act", shall apply in the adoption of
foundlings.

Consistent with Section 41 of Republic Act 11642, once the adoption |s finalized, the adopted
foundling shall be considered the legitimate child of the adopter for all intents and purposes
and, as. such, is entitled to all the rights and obligations provided by law to legitimate children
bom to them without discrimination of any kind. To this end, the adoptee is entitled to love,
guidance, and support in keeping with the means of the family, The legitimate filiation that is
created between the adopter and adopted foundling shall be extended to the adopter'’s
parents, legitimate siblings, and legitimate descendants.

The adopter is also given the right to choose the name by which the adopted foundling is to
be known, consistent with the best interest of the child.

SECTION 14. Alternative Child Care Options. — The NACC, LSWDO, and any accredited
child-caring or child-placing agency shall ensure that foundlings are provided with alternative
child care options, such as but not limited to foster care, or even residential care, consistent
with existing laws, while the search and inquiry into the facts of birlh and parentage of the
foundling is ongoing.

SECTION 15. Right to Government Programs and Services. — A foundling shall, as a matter
of right, be entitled to every available government programs or services, including registration,
facilitation of documents for adoption, education, legal and police protection, proper
nourishment, and medical/health care for survival and development, and admission to safe
and secure residential care facility, child-caring/child-placing agencies.

RA, No. | 1767 - The Foundling Recegnition and Protection Act
lmptementing Rules and Reguiatans Pane 8 of 5

The NACC, through the RACCO, all relevant government agencies, the concemed LGU,
police authorities and the finder shall, at all times, consider the child's best interests in all
actions or support services provided for a foundling.

ARTICLE IV
REGISTRATION

SECTION 16. Conduct of Search and Inquiry. — Within fifleen (15) working days afler
relinquishment or reporting, submission of the affidavit of the finder or other concerned person
or the information that there is a probable foundling was brought to the attention of the NACC
unless more time is needed in view of significant developments, the NACC, through the
RACCO, a social worker of the safe haven provider that has temporary custody of the
foundling child shall conduct a proactive and diligent search and inquiry into the facts of birth
and parentage of the foundling.

SECTION 17. Procedures in the Conduct of Search and Inquiry, - The RACCO, a social
worker of the safe haven provider that has temporary custody of the founding shall, within
fifteen (15) working days upon receipt of tha comprehensive and exhaustive case study report
from the LSWDO, child-caring/child placing agency, the NACC, through the RACCO, prepare
an official report attesting that the facts of birth and parentage of the foundiing remain unknown
despite the proactive and diligent search and Inquiry conducted. The report must be
comprehensive, and exhaustive and must include all the facts regarding the parents and the
birth of the foundling: Provided, That, for adult foundlings with no foundiing certificate, no
exhaustive case study report by the social worker shall be required but the LSWDO shall issue
a case study report on his/her background and qualifications as a foundling under the Act. The
NACC report shall be used for the application for and issuance of the COLB.

For children found abroad, the Philippine Embassy/Consulate and Offices or the DFA must
attest that the facts of birth and parentage of the foundling remain unknown despite the
proactive and diligent search and inquiry conducted. The case study report must be
comprehensive, and exhaustive and must include all the facts regarding the founding.

SECTION 18. Proof of Biological Parent Search. — The following shall be sufficient proof that
such efforts to locate the biological parents, guardians, or relatives have been made:

(a) Certification from radio/or TV stations or proof of publication in newspapers of general
circulation or tri-media whichever is applicable that the case was aired on three (3)
different occasions;

(b) Proof of search through the official socia| media account of the concerned LGU, and
safe haven twice in two (2) consecutive weeks; and

{c) Ifthe foundiing is found abroad, certification from the finder, or Head of the Philippine
Embassy/Consulate or Office that the biological parent/s have not been found despite
diligent search and inquiry.

SECTION 19. Procedure for Reporting of a Foundling. — The following procedure shall be
followed:

A. Iftound within the Philippines

1. The finder shall report within forty-eight (48) hours upon discovery of the
foundiling to the Barangay Officials or COMPAC/Palice Stations. Provided, That

RA No. 11787 ~The Fouling Rerogrilion ord Protection Act
; sti Page 9 of 15

in informing the Barangay officials or COMPAC/Police Stations, the finder may
use the fastest means available to report and the date of reporting shall be the
date when the initial report was made.

2. The finder shall also execute an Affidavit of the Finder stating the
circumstances of the discovery of the foundling within forty-eight (48) hours,

B. If found Abroad

1. The finder shall, within forty-eight (48) hours upon discovery of the foundling,
report to the Philippine Consulate/Embassy or Office regarding the foundling
and his/her circumstances.

2. The finder shall execute an Affidavit of the Finder stating the circumstances of
the discovery of the foundling within forty-eight (48) hours before the head of
the Philippine Consulate/Embassy or Office and endorse the same to the latter.

3. Within forty-eight (48) hours upon receipt of the report of the finder, the
Philippine Consuiate/Embassy or Office shall report to the DFA Office
regarding the foundling. The DFA shall coordinate with NACC for the referral
of the foundiing to a registered, licensed and accredited child-caring agency or
@ residential care facility.

SECTION 20. Requirements for the Registration of Foundling. — The following documents
shall be required before the foundling may be registered with the LCR:

A. Infant/Child
{a) Affidavit of the finder;

(b) Certification/biotter from the barangay captain or police authority on the
circumstances surrounding the foundling's discovery: Provided, That, in the
event that the child is found in a different barangay from the residence of the
finder, both barangay officials shall issue a certification/blotter; and

(c) Report of the NACC duly signed by the authorized officer.
B. Adult Foundling
(a) Affidavit of the finder; and

(b) LSWDO case study report on the foundlings’ background, including the
estimated age of the foundling, and qualifications as a foundling under the Act.

SECTION 21. Procedure for the Registration of a Foundling. — The following procedure shall
be followed;

(a) The NACC through the RACCO or social! worker of the safe haven provider shall fill
out and submit the application for registration to the LCR which shall issue the COLB
of the founding after receipt of the requirements: Provided, That one who has an
existing certificate of foundling or a similar official document issued before the
implementation of the Act may secure a COLB before the LCR, which shall
immediately issue one, without cost, on the basis of such document alone: Provided,
Further, That a certificate of foundling or a similar official document shall continue to
have the same lagal effect as a COLB,

RA No 11767 . The Founding Recogition anid Protectan Att Page 10 of 15
Implemanting Ruins and Regulations

For adult foundiings, they shall fill out and submit the application for registration to the
LCR which shail issue the COLB after receipt of the requirements.

(b) The LCR shall review and prepare the COLB based on the initial draft of the COLB
prepared by the registrant. Four (4) copies of the COLB shall be prepared by the LCR.

(c) Thereafter, the LCR shail cause the registration of the COLB of a person with no known
parent/s in the Registry of Book of Foundlings

(d) Within five (5) working days from the registration in the Registry of Book of Foundlings
Live Birth of the COLB of a person with no known parent/s, the LCR shall provide the
copies of the COLB bearing the civil registry number as follows:

4, The first copy shall be given to the registrant.
2. The second copy shall be given to the document owner.

3. The third copy together with a copy of the Case Study Report shall be
forwarded to the PSA-Office of the Civil Registrar General (OCRG),

4. The fourth copy shall be retained by the LCR Office for safekeeping.

(@) Tha PSA-OCRG. upon receipt of all the required docurnents, shall verify the
authenticily, accuracy, and completeness of the documents.

(f) Thereafter, the PSA-OCRG shail either upload the COLB in the Civil Registration
Service database or, if applicable, provide feedback to the LCR Office, the registrant
and the document owner.

The concemed agencies shall streamline the registration process for a foundiing, regardless
of age and circumstances, in order to expedite the issuance of a COLB and without placing
any unnecessary burden on the foundling: Provided, That the foundling has the right to access
all the documentary requirements submitted for registration: Provided, Further, that in the
COLB and succeeding public documents, the foundiing shall not be referred to as such, or in
any other discriminatory manner. Provided, Furthermore, that the foundling shall not be
considered stateless between the period of finding or discovery and the issuance of the order
of confirmation of citizenship; Provided, Finally, that the privacy and the best interest of the
foundling shall be protected at all times.

SECTION 22. Revocation of issued COLB. — The biological parent/s, the NACC through its
RACCO or the LSWDO or the safe haven provider may at any time file a petition for the
ravocatian of the COLB before the LCR where the COLB was originally registered based on
the following grounds:

(a) The parentage of the foundling has been established; or

(b) Fraud to conceal the material facts of birth or parentage of the person that would
otherwise not render the person as a foundiling.

If the parentage of one founding is established but cannot acquire the citizenship of the
parents which will result in statelessness, the foundling shall retain Philippine citizenship until
such time that jt can be established that the foundling is able to benefit from the citizenship of
either parent.

RA NolTi707 The Foveding Recagnlion und Protactar Act 3
fools Pecans Page 11 of 15

SECTION 23. Recovering Lege! Custody and Resioring Parental Authority, — The biological
parent/s or legal guardian of a foundling may petition the NACC to recover the legal custody
and restore parental authority over the foundling child: Provided, That if the child was
voluntarily committed, or if any of the following is pending with the NACC:

(a) Petition for issuance of Certificate Declaring a Child Legally Available for Adoption
(CDCLAA);

(b) Supervised Trial Custody, or
(c) Petition for Adoption,

The relevant provisions of Republic Act No. 11642 specifically, Section 27 of the Implementing
Rules and Regulations of the Republic Act No. 11642, otherwise known as the “Domestic
Administrative Adoption and Alternative Child Care Act" shall apply.

The NACC through its RACCO or the LSWCDO or the safe haven provider shall provide
counseling and other necessary programs and services to the biological parents, and the
intervention/assistance to authorities when the biological parents of a foundling are identified
and express the desire to take custody or exercise parental authority over the founding.

SECTION 24. Requirements and procedures for recovering legal custody and restoring
parental authority. The follawing requirements and procedures shall apply:
A. Requirements

(a) Genetic test result;
(b) Parenting Capability Assessment Report duly signed by the LSWDO;

(c) Notarized petition for recovering legal custody and restoring parental authority;
and/or

(d) Court Decision on Legal Guardianship

B. Procedures
(a) The petition for racovering legal custody and restoring parental authority shall
be filed only by the biological parent/s or legal guardian to the RACCO nol later
than three (3) months after relinquishment to the safe haven provider or
knowledge that the child has been relinquished to a safe haven provider:

(b) The biological parent/s shall submit a result of genetic testing, which shall mean
deoxyribonucleic acid tests, from a government laboralory. The cost of the
genetic testing shall be shouldered by the biological parent/s or legal quardian.
If the petition is filed by the legal guardian, submission of a court decision
granting lega! guardianship shall be submitted.

(c) Within fifteen (15) working days from receipt of the petition, the RACCO shall
investigate the merits of the petition for recovering legal custody and restoring
parental authority; render a recommendation, and transmit a copy of such
recommendation, together with the supporting documents to the NACC
Executive Director.

(d) Within ten (10) working days from receipt of the petition and recommendation
from the RACCO, the NACC secial worker shall review the petition and endorse
recommendation to the NACC Executive Director for approval.

FLA No. 11767 ~The Foundling Ascdyrition und Prolection Act
Implemoriting Rulas and Regulations ot Si Page 12 of 15

(e) Within ten (10) working days frm receipt of the recommendation of the social
worker, the NACC Executive Director shall approve the recommendation and
endorse the same to the Secretary of the DSWD for approval during the
transition period. If no action was taken bythe DSWD Secretary or his
representative within ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the endorsement,
the NACC [executive Director's Decision shall be deemed approved, After the
transition period, all recommendations shall be signed by the NACC Executive
Director.

SECTION 25. Standard Forms, documentation and reporting Requirements. — The NACC,
together with the PSA, shail formulate and produce official, uniform, and standard forms of the
documentary requirements that will be easily used and submitted.

ARTICLE V
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION 26. Violations and Penalties, — The following penalties shall be imposed:

(a) The penalty of imprisonment of nat less than six (6) months but not more than six (6)
years shall be imposed on any person who falsifies or is involved in the falsification of
the registration of the supposed foundling, including the documents required therefor:
Provided, That a public officer found to have been involved in such act of falsification
shall be punished by the penaity next higher in degree:

(b) The penalty of imprisonment of not less than six (6) months but not more than five (5)
years shall be imposed on the finder, the concerned NACC or RACCO employees,
staff of child-caring and child-placing facilities, safe haven providers. police officers,
city, municipality and barangay officers, health employees, hospital staff and any other
concemed person who refuses, delays, or obstructs the conduct of search and inquiry
into the facts of birth and parentage of the foundiing:

(c) A fine ranging from Five Hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) to One million pesos
(1,000,000.00) shall be imposed on a safe haven provider that does not report within
forty-eight hours that an infant was relinquished within its premises;

(d) Without prejudice to criminal liability under other laws, a fine ranging from One million
pesos (1,000,000.00) to Five Million pesos (P5,000,000.00) or imprisonment of not
less than three (3) months but not more than two (2) years, or both, shall be imposed
on any person who faisifies or is involved in the falsification of the registration of the
supposed foundiing, including the documents required therefor, to facilitate the crime
of kidnapping or trafficking in persons: Provided, That a public officer found to have
been involved in such act of falsification shall be punished by the penalty next higher
in degree and shall be perpetually disqualified from office.

The penalties under this section are without prejudice to other liabilities arising from existing
civil, administrative, and criminal laws for the same act or violation,

RA No, 11767 ~The Foundling Recegnitum and Protection Act
: rent Page 13 of 15

ARTICLE VI
FINAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 27, Advocacy and Information Dissemination. - The NACC, in coordination with the
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), tagether with |SWDOs, Local Council for the Protection
of Children (LCPC), Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG), and other relevant
stakehokers shall conceptualize, conduct, and coordinate the information dissemination and
advocacy campaigns which includes but not limited to the provisions and implementation of
this Act, and the issues and concerns affecting a founding through the different media
platforms,

SECTION 28. Data Collection. —\n arcer to develop and implement more responsive policies,
plans, and programs for foundlings, regular and synchronized data collection shall be
conducted by the LGUs in coordination with the PSA, NACC, and other relevant stakeholders.
The collection, preservation, and sharing of data shall be conducted pursuant ta Republic Act
No, 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy Act of 2012".

SECTION 29. Retroactive Application. — The Act shall have retroactive effect for any foundling
insofar as it does not prejudice or impair vested or acquired rights pursuant to existing laws.

SECTION 30. Implementing Rules and Regulations, — Within ninety (90) days from the
approval of the Act, the Secretary of the Department of Social Welfare and Development
(DSWD) and the Executive Director of the Inter-Country Adoption Board shall, in consuitation
with the Secretary of the Department of Justice, Secretary of the Department of Interior and
Local Government (DILG), Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), Council for the Welfare of
Children (CWC) and two (2) representatives from child-caring agencies catering to abandoned
children and foundilings, formulate the rules and regulations lo implement the Act.

SECTION 31. Transitory Provision. — All the benefits of this Act shall also apply to foundlings
duly registered as such during their childhood, but have reached the age of majority without
benefiling from adoption procedures: Provided, That such foundling shall undergo the
procedure and comply with the requirements outlined in the IRR within ten (10) years from its
effectivity.

Before the establishment of the NACC as provided under Section 56 of Republic Act No.
11642, the functions of the NACC relating to foundlings shall remain with the DSWD. The
functions of the RACCO shall, during the three (3) year period, be performed by the DSWD
field offices in coordination with the LSWDOs.

SECTION 32. Repealing Ciause. — All other laws, decrees, executive orders, issuances, rules,
and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with this Act are hereby likewise repealed or
amended accordingly.

SECTION 33. Separabilily Clause. — |f for any reason, any section or provision of these IRR
is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not affected thereby
shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 34. Suppletory Clause. - Republic Act No, 11642, otherwise known as the
“Domestic Administrative Adoption and Alternative Child Care Act", Republic Act No. 11222
or the “Simulated Birth Rectification Act", Executive Order No. 209, s. 1987 or “The Family
Code of the Philippines", and other existing and applicable laws on adoption and on chile
welfare, care and protection shall have a suppletory application to these IRR.

RA NO, 11707 ~ The Founding Recogriian and Protection Act
Impiomenting Rules and Reguintions Page 14 of 15

SECTION 35. Effectivity. - These IRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days after the completion
of the publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation or the Official Gazette.
Three (3) certified true copies must be filed with the University of the Philippines Law Center's
Office of the National Administrative Register (UPLC-ONAR),

Approved in the City of Manila this 9th day of September 2022.

Department of Social Welfarg and Development

B INC. is JR.

Secretary
Depai nt of Interior and Local Government

CLAIRE DENNIS S. MAPA ANGELO M. TAPALES
National Statistician Executive Director
Philippine Statistics Authority Council for the Welfare of Children

Please see attached document.
COLYN 41. PIMENTEL-GANA

President i
Association of Child Caring Agencies of the Philippines Association of Child Garine/Agencies of the Philippines

[MOCK TRANSLATION] é Psat
C OLYN 41. PIMENTEL-GANA

MENARDO T-GUEVARRA
Solicitor General
Office of the Solicitor General

RA No, 11787 - The Four nd Protection Act
kee iemie ne Page 15 of 15