REVISED IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS (RIRR)
of
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8972 (R.A. No 8972) or the “SOLO PARENTS WELFARE ACT
of 2000"
as amended by
REPUSLIC ACT NO. 11864 (R.A. No. 11964) or the “EXPANDED SOLO PARENTS
WELFARE ACT"

ARTICLE |
TITLE, PURPOSE AND CONSTRUCTION

Section 1. Title. = These rules and regulations shall be known and cited as the
Revised Implementing Rules.and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. 8972 (R.A. No.
8972) or the “Solo Parents Welfare Act of 2000", as amended by Republic Act No, 11864
(R.A. Mo. 11981) or the “Expanded Solo Parents Welfare Act’.

Section 2. Purpose, — These Revised IRR are promulgated pursuant to Section 24
of RA No. 17881 to prescribe the procedure and guidelines for the effective
implementation of the “Expanded Solo Parents Welfare Act’.

Section 3. Construction. — These Revised IRR shall be liberally construed in favor
of the solo parent and applied In accordance with and in furtherance of the policy and
objectives of the law and in favor of equity and compassionate social justice. In case of
conflict and/or ambiguity, which may arise in the implementation of thesa Revised IRR,
the concemed agencies shall issue the necessary clarification,

ARTIGLE Ill
DECLARATION OF POLICIES AND OBJECTIVES

Section 4. Declaration of Policy. = |t is the policy of the State to promote a just and
dynamic social order that ensures the prosperity and independence of the nation and free
the people from poverty through policies that provide adequate social services, promot
full employment, a ising standard of living and an improved quality of life. The State shall
also promote social justice In all phases of national development, value the dignity of
every human person and guarantee full respect for human rights. Towards these ends,
the government shall:

@. Support the natural and primary rights and duty of salo parents in rearing their
children by providing for their basic needs, and extending to them assistance in
social services and welfare benefits, with the end in view of uplifting their status
and ciroumstances;

6. Adhere to intamational agreements and national laws on families,

Section 5. Objective, — These Revised IRR seek to clarify the scope and application
of the Act in order that the proper parties may avail of its additional benefits,

ARTICLE Ill
DEFINITION OF TERMS

Section &. Definition of Terns. —As used In thease Revised IRI, the following terms
shall mean as follows:

a “Act” — refers to RA. No. 11867 or the “Expanded Solo Parents Welfare Act’:

b. “Adolescent parents” — refer primarily to men and women who are nineteen (19)
years of age and below, who have a child or children and opt to parent and raise the
child or children on his/her own;

c. “Adoptive parent’ — refers to a person who, through adoption, is considered the
legitimate parent of a child over whom he/she has parental authority, In order for an
individual to become an adoptive parent, he/she must complete all the legal
requirements and must have been decreed as qualified to adopt a child by the court,
pursuant to Republic Act No. 8552 (R.A, No, 8552) or the “Domestic Adoption Act
of 1998"; or by the National Authority for Child Gare (NACC), pursuant to Republic
Act Mo. 11642 (R.A. No. 11642) of the “Domestic Administrative Adoption and
Alternative Child Care Act”

d, “Baby's milk" — refers to breastmilk substitute, defined as any food being marketed
or otherwise represented as partial or total replacement for breastmilk, whether
sultable for that purpose. Infant formula is a breastmilk substitute fonmulated
industrially in accordance with applicable Codex Alimentarius standards, to satisfy
the normal nutritional requirements of Infants up to six (6) months of age and

adopted to their physiological characteristics, pursuant bo the Imalementing Rules
and Regulations of Republic Act No 10028 (R.A. No, 10028) or the Expanded
Breastieeding Act, Executive Order No 61, series 1986 and its Revised
Implementing Rules and Regulations issued as Administrative Order No 2006-0012:

"BIR" = refers to the Bureau of intemal Revenue:

“Child-minding canter’ — refers to a facility or an area within the workplace or in
accessible locations to the sala parent or workplace of the guardian provided by the
employer where the solo parent employee's child, children, or dependents who are
aged seven (7) years cki and below is/are habitually received for purposes of cara
and supervision during working hours;

“Children or dependents — refer to those fiving with and dependent upon the sola
parent for support who are unmarried, unemployed and twenty-two (22) years ald
orbelow, or those over twenty-two (22) years old but are unable to fully take ¢are or
protect themselves from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation or discrimination
because of a physical or mental disability or condition; Provided’ that children or
dependent's entitled to be supported beyond the age of majority shall be limited to
those who are in school of in training for some profession, trade or vocation,
consistent with and as provided in Article 194 of Executive Ordar No 209 (E.0. No.
208), or The Family Code of the Philippines: Provided, further That this definition
shall only apply for purposes of availing of the benefits under this Act

“Cohabitation” — refers to a ving arrangement whereby a couple who Is not mamied,
is living together in the same household, Couples in such a living arrangement may
be of the same or different gender;

“CHED* — refers to the Commission on Higher Education:

“GSG" — refers to the Civil Service Commission;

“DepEd” — refers to the Department of Education:

“DILG" = refers to the Department of the interior and Local Goverment:

“DM = refers to the Department of Migrant Workers;

t

“DOF - refers to the Department of Finance;

“DOH" = refers to the Department of Health:

“DOLE* — refers to the Department of Labor and Employment;

"DSWD" ~ refers to the Department of Social Wolfare and Development;
"DT!" = refers to the Department of Trade and Industry;

“Flexible working schedule” — also known ae flexitime or gliding schedule refers to a
work arrangement granted to a solo parent amployee, whether ptivata or public, to
vary the arrival and departure time in the workplace without affecting the core work
hours as defined by the employer, or agreed upon by the solo parent employee and
his/her employer;

“Foater parent"—refers to a person who is duly licensed by the Department of Social
Welfare and Development or the NACC to provide foster care to a child or children;

“Legal guardian" — refers to a person granted legal guardianship over the person or
property, or both, of a minor or an incompetent, by a court of proper jurisdiction;

“LGU* — refers to the focal government unit which includes the province, city,
municipality, or barangay:

“Means-tested" — refers to the determination whether a solo Parent has no visible
means of Income, or his/her income is otherwise insufficient to enable the solo
Parent to provide sole parental care and support to-e child, children, or dependent's
owing to the demands for subsistence of his/her family and the conditions prevailing
in the place of residence;

"NEDA" — refer to the National Econamic and Development Authority:
“WHA — refer to the National Housing Authority:
“Parental care and support’ — refer to the acts of nurturing and providing for the

basic needs, health care, mental and physical safety, emotional support, and
development of the personality of the child, children, or dependentis, and do not

dd,

hh,

depend solely on the financial capability of or support given by the person obligated
to support;

“Parental leave" — refers to leave benefits granted ta a solo parent to enable the
performance of parental duties and responsibilities where physical presence is
required or beneficial to the child or children:

“PAO* — refers to the Public Attorney's Office:
“PC\W" — refers to the Philippine Commission on Women;

“Pansion-tested" —pafers to the determination whether a solo parent is not recelving
any pension, retirement benefits or payout, or his/her pension, retirement benefits
or payout is otherwise insufficient to enable the scle parental care and support to a
child, children, or dependent/s owing to the demands for subsistence of his/her
family and the conditions prevailing in the place of residence:

“PSA’ — refers to the Philippine Statistics Authority;

“PhilHaalth’ — refers to the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation;

“Relative within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity’ — “consanguinity”
fefers to relationship by blood: “affinity” refers to refetionship by marriage: ‘relative
within the fourth civil degree* includes one’s spouse, parents, grandparents, greal-
grandparents, great-great-grandparents, children, grandchildren, great
grandchildren, great-great grandchildren, uncles, aunts, great-uncles, great-aunts,
first cousins by virtue of a blood relationship or marriage:

“Registered Social Worker’ — for the purpose of these Revieed IRR, rafers to a
professional who is a graduate of Bachelor of Science in Social Work, duly licensed
by the Professional Regulations Commission as such, pursuant to Republic Act No.
4973 (R.A. No. 4373) or An Act to Regulate the Practice of Social Work and the
Operation of Social Work Agencies in the Philippines and for Other Purposes, who
works WEh the poor, persons in vulnerable situations and marginalized households
and communities such as the solo parent sector;

“Solo Parent identification Card" — refers to the Solo Parent Identification Card
(SPIC) issued to the solo parent as his/her competent proof of identification and

mm,

the primary evidence of his/her status a8 a solo parent to enable him/her to avail of
the benefits under this Act

“SPD" — refers to the Solo Parants Division;

“SPO* — refers to the Solo Parents Office:

“Spouse” —refers to a husband or wife by virtue of a valid mariage or a partner in a
common-law relationship as defined in Article 147 of Executive Order No. 209,
otherwise known as "The Family Code of the Philippines":

“Subsidy-tested” -refers to the determination whether a solo parent ts not receiving
any form of aid, support, grant, or appropriation, in cash or kind, from the
government or a private entity, or his/her aid, support, grant, or appropriation, in
cash or kind, from the government or a private entity is otherwise insufficient to
enable the solo parent fo provide sole parental care and support to a child, chikdren
or dependents owing to the demands for subsistence of his/her family and the
conditions prevailing in the place of residence:

“TESDA* — refers ta the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority; and
“Telecommuting” — refers to a work arrangement that allows an employee to work
from an altemative workplace, in whole or in part, with the use of talecommunication
and/or computer technologies.

ARTICLE Iv

CRITERIA, QUALIFICATION AND CATEGORIES OF SOLO PARENTS

Section 7, Criteria for Assistance. — Any solo parant whose income in the place

of residence is equal to or below the poverty threshold as set by the PSA and subject to
the assessment of the duly appointed or designated social worker in the area shall be
eligible for assistance; Provided, however, That any solo parent whose Income ls above
the poverty threshold shall anjay the benefits mentioned In Sections 5, 6,7, 8, 9,10 and
411 of the Act.

Section 4. Qualificatians of Soto Parent, —A solo parent seeking benefits other than
those provided for under Article 'V of these Revised IRR shall be qualified based on the
following:

8. Aresident of the place where the assistance is sought, as certified by the barangay
chalrperson, or his/her duly authorized representative: Provided, That If the solo
parent is a transferee from another barangay, he/she shall secure a clearance from
his/her previous barangay, indicating whether he/she has availed of any benefits for
solo parents, and the nature of such benefits:

b. With an income: level equal te or below the Poverty threshold as determined by the
PSA and assessed by a social worker as provided for in these Revisad IRR:

Section 9. Eligibility Assessment, — An applicant who demonstrates the need for
assistance under the Act is subject to the objective and thorough assessment by a social
worker at the CityMunicipal Social Welfare and Development Office. The assessment,
based on the comprehensive package of social protection services for solo parents and
thelr familles, shall cover, but not be Hmited to, the following:

a Determination of the applicant's category as defined in the next succeeding
Paragraphs of these Revised IRR;

b. Evaluation of the needs of the applicant and hisfher children as the bases fer the
provision of the appropriate services and interventions;

c. Identification of the level of readiness of the applicant to racelve a particular
servica/assistance, which shall serve as basis for the conduct of social preparation
activities prior to the provision of such service/assistance: and

d. Identification of existing and potentially available resources that may support the applicant and his/her children,

Section 10. SPIC and Booklet - The SPO of the province or city, or the SPD of the
municipality shall review and verify the documents submitted by the applicant and shall
issue the SPIC and booklet, within seven (7) working days from receipt of the complete
documents.

The SPIG and booklet shall be valid for one (1) year, subject to renewal conditioned
upon the assessment and evaluation of the solo parent by the social worker.

The SPIC shail include the following particulars:

(a)

(b)

On its frontal side:

(1) The full name (first, middle and last name} of the solo parent

(2) Date and place of birth of the solo parent

(3) Residence address of the solo parent

(4) Soto parent category

(5) Photograph of the solo parent taken af the C/MSVVDO at the time of application
or renewal of the SPIC

(8) Signature and/or thumbprint of the solo parent

(7) Validity period of the SPIC

On its dorsal side:

(1) Names, birth date/s, and relation to the solo parent of the qualified chadren
and/or dependents

(2) Signatures, names, and designations of City/Municipal Mayor and of the Head
Social Worker of the C/MSWWDO

(3) At the option of the solo parent, his/her contact details may be indicated,

Section 11. Procedure for Issuance of the Solo Parent Identification Card. — Any

person who applies fora SPIC under this Act shall observe the following process:

b. 1,

Visit the Social Welfare and Development Crfice of the city or municipality of histher
residence to manifest the need for assistance:
Fill up application form for the assistance, supplying but not limited to, the following:
Name, age, and residence address
Date and place of birth
Information about employment, amount of and sources of income, pension, or
subsidy, when applicable;

. Information about children, including names of qualified children, ages, if in schoal,

name of scnool and grade level, if with disability, Persons with Disability card or
any proof of mental or physical disability that prevents the child/children from taking
care of themselves

. Circumstances of being a solo parent and submission of the documentary

requirements for the applicable category, set forth in Sections 12 and 13 of these

Revised IRR.
Undergo the nacessary assessment process conducted by the assigned social
worker who shall prepare the social case siudy report based on the

information/data/documents provided for by the applicant, a5 well as on the social
worker's assessment of said applicant, indicating therein the appropriate services
needed.

The Social Case Study Report, together with a referral letter prepared by the social
worker, shall be forwarded by the City/Municipal Social Welfare and Development
Office to the concemed agency which provides the @ppropriste or required
assistance/service,

d. Prior to the issuance of the SPIC, the SPO aor the SPD, shall require the applicant
sclo parent to attend the Solo Parents Orientation Seminar to apprise him/her of the
rights, dutles, and obligations as a sala parent, including the benefits, assistance,
and services available to himvher. The solo parent who has attended the seminar
shall be given a Certificate of Attendance,

@ The SPO of the province or city, or the SPD of the muntcipality shall review and
verify the documents submitted by the applicant and shall issue the SPIC and
booklet, within seven (7) working days fram receipt of the complete documents,

f In case of dispute, the Municipal\City/Provincial Social Welfare and Development
Office (MIC/PSWIDO), as the cage may be, shall resolve the same, which may
include notifying the applicant to comply with the requirements within five (5) working
days.

Section 12. Categorias of Solo Parent. - A solo parent refers to any individual wha
falls under any of the following categories:

a. A parent who provides sole parental care and support of the child or children due
te:

(1) Birth of a child or children as a consequence of rape, even without a final
conviction of the offender, Provided, That the mother has the sole parental
custody, Care and is the sole support of the child or children: Provided further,
that the mother under this catagory may still ba considered a solo parent under
any of the categories in this section.

(2) Death of his/her spouse:

(8) Detention of his/her spouse for al least three (3) months or service of sentence
for a criminal conviction:

(4) Physical or mental incapacity of his/her spouse as certified by a public or
Private medical practitioner: Provided, That the physical or mental incapacity
of the spouse prevents him/her from performing hisfher parental duty;

(5) Legal separation or de facto separation from his/her spouse for at least six (6)
months and the solo parent is entrusted with the sole parental.care and support
of the child or children;

(8) Declaration of nullity or annulment of marriage se decreed by a court
recognized by law, of due to divoree, subject to existing laws, and the sale
parent is entrusted with the sole parental care and support of the child or
children; or

(7) Abandonment by the spouse for at least six (6) months:

A spouse or any family member of an OFW, as defined in item (e) of this Section, of
an Overseas Filipino Worker (OFW), or the guardian of the child or children of an
OFW: Provided, that tha sald OFW belongs to the low or semi-skilled worker
category, and is away from the Philippines for an uninterrupted period of twehve (12)
manths; Frovicted, further, that the OFW, his/her spouse, family member or quardian
of the child, or children of an OFW, belongs to low or semi-skilled worker category,
subject to the assessment of the duly appointed or designated social worker:

An unmarried mother or father whe keeps and rears his/her child of children;

Any legal guardian, adoptive or foster parent who solely provides parental care and
support tea chikd or children;

Any relative within the fourth (4") civil degree of consanguinity or affinity of the
parent or legal guardian whose death, or disappearance, absence or abandonment
of the child or children, for at least six (6) months, led to the said retative assuming
S0l@ parental care and support of the child or children; Provided, That in cases of
solo grandparents who are senior citizens and whe have the sole parental care and
support over their grandchild ar grandchildren who are unmarried, or unemployed,
and twenty-two (22) years old or below, or those twenty-two (22) or over but who
are unable to fully take care or protect thamselves fram abuse neglect, ervelty,
exploitation or discrimination because of physical or mental disability or condition,
Provided, further, That the child or children entitled tobe supported beyond the age
of majority shail be limited to thesa who ara in school or in training for some

Profession, trade or vocation, consistent with and as provided in Article 194 of
Executive Order No 209 (E.0, No, 209), of The Family Gade of the Philippinea; The
solo grandparents shall be entitled to the benefits of this Act in addition to the
benefits granted to them by Republic Act No. 9994 (R.A. No 9994) or the “Expanded
Senior Citizens Act of 2003" or

f. A pregnant woman who provides sole parental care and support to her unborn child
of children,

Section 13, Documentary requirements for the issuanee of the SPIC. — For purposes.
of registration and issuance of SPIC and booklet, the sofa parent shall submit
authenticated or certified true copies of the following documents to the SPO or SPD of
the place where the solo parent resides:

a. For the solo parent with child or children as a consequence of rape falling under
Section 4(a)(1) of this Act

(1) Birth certificaters of tha child or childran.

(2) Complaint affidavit

(3) Medical record on the incident of rape.

(4) Sworn affidavit deciaring that the solo parent has the sole parental care and
support of the child or children at the time of the execution of
affidavit: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and
booklet, only the sworm affidavit shall be submitted every year. and

(5) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of
the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the parental cara and
support of the solo parent.

6, For tha solo parent on account of the death of the spouse falling under Section
4(a)(2) of this Act

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children,

(2) Mariage certificaw.

(9) Death certificate of the spouse,

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent is not cohabiting with a partner or
co-parent, and has the sole parental care and support of the child or
ehildran: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC ard
boakiet, only the swom affidavit shall be submitted every year; and

nine

(5) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent Is a resident of
the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the Parental cane and
support of the solo parent.

¢. For the solo parent on account of the deterition or criminal conviction of the
spouse falling under Section 4(a)(3) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children,

(2) Marriage certificate.

(3) Certificate of detention or a certification that the spouse is serving sentence for
at least three (3) months issued by the law-enforcement agency having actual
custody of the detained spouse or commitment order by the court pursuant to a
conviction of the spouse.

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent is nat cohabiting with 8 partner or
coparent, and has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and
booklet, requirament numbers (3) end (4) under this paragraph shall be
submitted every year; and

(5) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of

the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the parental care and
Support of the solo parent.

d, For solo parent on account of physical or mental incapacity of the spouse falling
under Section 4(a)(4) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children.

(2) Marriage certificate or affidavit of cohabitation,

(3) Medical records, medical abstract, or a certificate of confinement in the National
Genter for Mental Health or any medical hospital or facility es a result of the
spouse's physical or mental incapacity, which record, medical abstract or
certificate of canfinemaent of the incapacitated spouse should have bean issued
not mare than three (3) months before the submission, or a valid Person With
Disability ID issued pursuant to Republic Act No 10754 and Republic Act No,
T27T, or the Magna Carta for Disabled Persons:

(4) Sworn affidavit that the solo parent is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent
and has sole parental care and support of the child or children: Provided, That
for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and booklet, requirement
numbers (3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be submitted every year; and

(5) Atfidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of
the barangay and that the child of children |s/are under the perental care and
support of the solo parent,

8. For the solo parent on account of legal or de facto separation of spouse failing
under Section 4(a)(5) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children,

(2) Marriage certificate.

(3) Judicial decree of legal separation of the spouses or, in the case of de
facto separation, an affidavit of two (2) disinterested persons attesting to the
fact of separation of the spouses: and

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent is not cohabiting with a partner or

co-parent, and has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and
booklet, requirement numbers (3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be
submitted every year, and

(5) Affidavit of = barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of

the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the parental care and
support of the solo parent,

f. For the solo parent on account of declaration of nullity or annulment of marriage
or divorce falling under Section 4(a)(8) of this Act

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children,

(2) Marriage certificate, annotated with the fact of declaration of nullity of marriage
or annulment of marriage.

(3) Judicial decree of nullity or annulment of marriage or judicial recognition of
foreign divorces.

(4) Swom affidevit declaring that ihe solo parent is not cchabiting with a partner or
Co-parent and has sole parental care and support of the child or
children; Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and
booklet, only the sworn affidavit shall be submitted every year, and

(5) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of

the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the parental care and
Support of the sola parent.

g. For the solo parent on account of abandonment by the spouse falling under
Section d(a)(7) of this Act:
(0) Birth certificates of the child or children.

(2) Marriage certificate or affidavit of the applicant solo parent.

(3) Affidavit of two (2) disinterested persons attesting te the fact of abandonment of
the spouse,

(4) Police or barangay record of the fact of abandonment,

(5) Sworn affidavit dectaring that the sclo parent is not cohabiting with a partner or
co-parent, and has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, Thal for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and
booklet, only sworn affidavit shall be submitted every year, and

(6) Affidavit of @ barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of

the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the parental care and
support of the solo parent.

h. For tha spouse or any family member of an OFW falling under Section 4(b) of this
Act

(1) Birth certificate’s of dependents.

(2) Marriage certificate, ifthe applicant is the spouse of the OFW, or birth certificate
or other competent proof of the relationship between the applicant and the
OFW, if the applicant is a family member of the OFW.

{3) Philippine Overseas Employment Administration Standard Employment
Contract (POEA-SEC) or its equivalent document.

{4) Photocopy of the OFW's passport with stamps showing continuous twelve (12)
months of overseas work, or a certification from the Bureau of immigration.

(5) Proof of income of the OFW's spouse or family member.

(8) Swom affidavit declaring that the solo parent is not cohabiting with a partner or
coparent and has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and
booklet, requirement numbers (3), (4), (5), and (6) under this paragraph shall
be submitted every yearn and

(7) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of

the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the parental care and
support of the solo parent,

L Fer the unmarried father or mother who keeps and rears the child or children
falling under Section 4(c) of this Act:
(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children,
(2) Certificate of No Marriage (CENOMAR),
(3) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parant ie not cohabiting with a partner or
oo-parant and has sole parental care and support of the child or

children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent SPIC and
booklet, requirement numbers (2), (3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be
submitted every year; and
(4) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent Is a resident af
the barangay and that the child or children ia/are under the parental care and
Support of the salo parent,

J. Farthe solo parent who is a legal guardian, adoptive or foster parent falling under
Section 4(d) of this Act:

(1) Birth cerificate/s of the child or children,

(2) Proof of guardianship, such as the decision Granting legal guardianship issued
Sy a court; proof of adoption, such as the decreas of adoption issued by a court,
orerderof Adoption issued by the OSD or the National Authority on Child Cara
(NACC); proof of foster care such as the Foster Parant Lioanse issued by the
DSWD of the HACC,

(3) Swan affidavit dectaring that the solo parent is not cohabiting with a partner or
co-parent and hes sole parental care and support .of the child or
Children: Provided, That for purpeses of lesuance of Subsequent SPIC and
booklet, requirement numbers (3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be
submitted every year: and

(4) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that tha solo parent is a resident of

the barangay and that the child or children is/are under the parental care and
support of the solo parent.

k, For any relative within the fourth (41h) civil dagree of consanguinity or affinity of
the parent or legal guardian who assumes parental care and support of the child
or children falling under Section 4/e) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate’s of the child or children,

(2) Death certificate, certificate of incapacity, or judicial declaration of absence or
presumptive death of the parents or legal guardian; police or barangay recerds
evidencing the fact of disappearance or absence of the parent or legal guardian
for at least six (6) months,

(3) Proof of relationship of the relative to the parent or legal guardian, auch as birth
certificate, marriage certificate, family records, or other similar or analogous
proof of relationship

(4) Swom affidavit declaring that the solo parent has sole parental care and support
of the child of children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of subsequent

SPIG and booklet, requirement numbere (3) and (4) under this paragraph shall
be submitted every year; and

(5) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that the solo parent is a resident of
the barangay and that the child or children isfare under the parental care and
support of the solo. parent: and

|. For the solo parent who ig a pregnant woman failing under Section 4(f) of this Act:
(1) Medical record of her pregnancy.
(2) Affidavit of a barangay official atlesting that the solo parent is a resident of
the barangay; and
(3) Sworn affidavit dectaring that the solo parent Is not cohabiting with a partner or
Go-parent who Is providing suppor to the pregnant woman,

m. For the solo parent availing subsidy and discounts provided for under Section 18,
paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Act, the following additional documentary
requirements shall be submitted:

(1) Affidavit of no employment.

(2) Income Tax Return (ITR) or similar tax returns,

(3) Social case study issued by the C/MSWDO; or

(4) Any verifiable proof of income or Certificate of Indigency.

Custodians of the documents, records, data, or information shall ensure that utmost
confidentiality of the same, in compliance with Republic Act No. 10173 (R.A. No, 10173),
of the “Data Privacy Act of 2012°,

Section 14. Prooadure for Application of Benefits. — An applicant who was
determined by a social worker to be eligible for assistance may apply for benefits under
this Act throwgh the following:

a, The solo parent may go to the agency providing such benefit, bringing with hev/him
the SPIC issued by the City/Municipality Social Welfare and Development Office.

b, Undergo the necessary qualifying process required by the agency as prescribed by
these Revised IRR; and

& Comply with the requirements set forth by the agenoyfagencies providing the
benefits and services subject to the existing rules and regulations of the concamed
agencyfagencies.

ARTICLE V

BENEFITS

Section. 16. Comprehensive Package of Social Protection Services, — A
comprehensive package of social protection services for solo parents and thelr families
shall be developed by the Secretary of the DSWD in coordination with the heads of the
BOH, DepEd, CHED, TESDA, DOLE, DOF, DMV, DOJ, NHA, DILG, DTI, BIR, csc.
PhilHealth, NEDA, PCW, Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines (ULAP), and LGUs
and other concemed government agencies, civil society organizations, and
hongovemmental organizations (NGOs), with recognized credentials in providing
services for solo parents.

Section 16. DSWD services — The DSWD shall coordinate with the consemed
agencies, which shall include providing technical assistance and resource augmentation,
inthe implementation of the comprehensive package of social protection services for solo
parent and their families, The package shail Initially include:

a. Livelihood developmant services, which include training on livaihood skills, basic
business management, value orientation, and the provision of seed capital or job
placement governed by the procedure of the agency giving such benefits. The
Criteria and procedure for evaluation of beneficiaries for the purposes of availing of
the benefits of this Item shall be provided for by the LGUs, DOLE, TESA, DTI, and
DSwo.

6. Provision of medical, burial, educational, or transportation assistance to Individuals
in crisis situations, based on the existing program guidelines of the Assistance to
Individuals in Crisis Situations (AICS),

& Counseling services, which include individual, peer group or family counseling. The
criteria and procedure for evaluation of beneficiaries for the purposes of availing of
the benefits of this item shall be provided for by the OSWwD,

d, Parent effectiveness services which Include the provision and expansion of
knowledge and skills of the solo parent on early childhood development, behavior
management, health care and proper nutrition, rights and duties of parents and
children;

@ Provision of critical incidence stresa debriefing of the DOH, which includes:
preventive stress management strategy designed to assist solo parents in coping
with crisis situations and cases of abuse,

1 ‘Targeted interventions for individuals in need of ‘special protection which Include
temporary shelter, counseling, legal advice and assistance, medical care, self-
concept or age-building, crisis management, sexual and reproductive health, and
Spiritual nourishment in coordination with other government agencies, civil society
organizations, and non-governmental organizations with recognized credentials in
providing services for solo parents; and

@. Legal Assistance for solo parents and their child, chileiran, ar dependents, in line
with the standard procedures of the Commission on Human Rights (CHR}, the PAO
and the Integrated Bar of ihe Philippines (IBF), non-government organizations and
law schools with legal ald clinics, which provide free legal assistance to indigeants,
vulnerable and marginalized groups, including solo parents.

Section 17. TESDA Services — The TESDA shall provide the following services for
solo parents and their families:

Facilitate the conduct of skills training to all qualified beneficiaries either through
school-based, center-based, community-based, or enterprise-based program
modality subject to the availability of funds and In line with the TESDA's rules: and
reguiations on Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) scholarship

programs.

Conduct assessment and issue a corresponding Certificate of Competency (COC)
te those who achieve the required units of competency, or a National Certificate
(NG) to suecessful beneficiaries, In lina with the TESDA’s rules and reguietions on
Certification and Assesement and

Give priority to the beneficiaries endorsed by the Solo Parent Office (SPO) or the
Salo Parent Division (SPB).

Section 18, Participating Agencies. - The DOH, DepEd, CHED, OOLE, DOF, DMW,
DOJ, NHA, DILG, DTI, BIR, CSC, Philhealth, NEDA, and PCW shall formulate their
fespective programs and services for solo parents in line with the comprehensive
package of social protection sarvices as well as promulgate their respective rules and

regulations for the proper implementation of the programs and services, within a
feasonabie time after the effectivity of these Revised IRR,

Section 19. Flexible Working Schedule — The employer shall provide for a flexible
wark schedule for solo parents: Provided, That the same shall not @ffect individual and
Company productivity: Provided further, That any employer may request exemption from
the above requirements from the DOLE on cartain meritorious grounds,

In the case of employees In the Government service, flexible working hours will be
subject to the discretion of the head of tha agency. In no case shall the employee's
working hours be less than forty (40) hours of work per week, The agency shall ensure
that the public is assured of the continuous service of the agency from 8 o'clock in the
moming to o'clock in the aftemoon, to include lunch breaks on all working days.

Section 20. Telecommuting - An employer in the private sector may offer a
telecommuting program to its employees on a voluntary basis, and upon such terms and
conditions as they may mutually agree upon, pursuant to Republic Act No. 11185 (ALA.
11965), or the “Telecommuting Act,” and its Implementing rules and regulations.
Provided, That such terms and conditions shall not be less than the minimum labor
standards set by law; Provided further, That solo parent employees shall be given priority
by their employer,

The CSC shail promulgate guidelines on telecommuting for government employees,
upon such tems and conditions thet shall be beneficial to them, giving priority to sole
parenis working in the public sector,

Section 21. Work Discrimination = No employer, whether public or private, shall
discriminate against any solo parent employee with respect to emplayment terms and
conditions on account of his/her status.

Section 22. Parental Leave — In addition to leave privileges under existing laws, a
forfeitable and noncumuiative parental leave of not more than seven (7) working days
with pay every year shall be granted to any sala Parent employee working in the private
or public sector, who hes rendered service of at least six (8) months, regardless of
employment status: Provided, that a valid SPIC Is the only requirement to avail of parental
leave by qualified solo parents,

A solo parent kasambahay shall alse ba entitied to the seven-day parental jeave
benefits, provided that they have rendered service of at least six (6) months to the same
employer,

Section 23. Conditions for Entitiament of Parental Leave, — Solo parents shall be
entited to parental leave provided that:

& They have rendered at jeast six (6) months of service, whether continuous or
interupted, at the time of the effectivity of the Act.

6. ‘They have notified histher employer of the availment therecf within a reasonable
time; and

G They have presented a valid SPIC,

Section 24. Non-conversion of Parental Leave. — In the event that the parental
leave is not availed of, sald leave shall not be convertible to cash unless ‘specifically
agreed upon previously by the employer and the employes,

Section 25. Crediting of Existing Leave. — If there is an existing or similar benefit
under a company policy, or a collectve bargaining agreement (CBA) or collective
negotiation agreement (CNA) the same shall be credited as such, ifthe same is greater
than the seven (7) days provided fer in the Act, the greater benefit shall prevail.

Emergency or contingency leave provided under a company policy, or a collective
bargaining agreement shall not be credited as compliance with the parental leave
Provided for under the Act and these Revised IRR.

Section 26. Educational Benefits - The DepEd, CHED, and TESDA shail provider
scholarship programs for solo parents and_a full school scholarship, for one (1) child of a
solo parent in institutions of basin, higher, and technical vocational skills education:
Provided, That the said solo parent or child of a solo parent has all the qualifications sat
for the scholarship program of the DepEd, GHED or TESDA: Provided, further, That the
other children, if any, of a solo parent shall be given priority in the education programs
under Republic Act No 10687 (R.A. No, 10687), or the “Unified Student Financial
Assistance Systam for Tertiary Education (UniFAST) Act"; Republic Act No 10931 (R.A.
No. 10931), or the "Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act*: and other laws

relating to the education programs of the government. Non-formal education programs
appropriate for solo parents and their children may, likewise, be provided,

For purposes of this section, the children must ba dependent on the solo parant
for support, unmarried, unemployed and twenty-two years of age or below,

The DepEd, CHED and TESDA shall promulgate rules and regulations for the
proper implementation of this program.

Section 27, Application Procedure. — Without prejudice te the rules and regulations
that the DepED, CHED and TESDA shall promulgate for the proper Implementation of
this program, a solo parent applicant for educational benefits shall:

a Secure an application form from the DepEd, CHED or TESDA for thelr intended
education program

b. Submit the duly accomplished application form together with the required
documents to the appropriate agency.

¢. The following are the documents required to be attached to the application form:

SPIC

Barangay Clearance of the solo parent

. Certificate of Live Birth, if the applicant |s tha child of the solo parent

Notice of admission from the schoal of the applicant

. Original or Certified True Copy of the transcript of record, or the Report Card of the

last year the applicant atiended school, and

§. Such other documentary requirements that the DepEd, CHED or TESDA may
require In accordance with the rules and regulations that they shail promulgate to
implement this program.

please

Section 28. Medical Assistance. - The DOH shall ensure accass to package of
primary care services for solo parent and thelr children through the retained hospitals and
medical centers, and the LGUs through their provincial/district/city/municipal hospitals
and rural health units (RHUs).

Section 29. Child-Minding Centers - The DOLE and the CSC shall promote and
encourage the establishment of appropriate child-minding santers within the workplace,
or in accessible locations to the workplace or residence of the solo parent.

Section 30. Employers to Establish and Maintain Child-Minding Centers — National
government agencies with more than three hundred (300) employees, Including
government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), and Private employers with
two hundred (200) or more employees, may establish child minding centers to
accommodate their employees’ children who are aged seven (7) years and below,

The child-minding centers shall be available free of charge to their employees, with
priority given for those who are solo parents as defined under this Act. This service shail
be provided within the workplace, as much ag possible, or in secessible locations to the
employees, particularly the solo parents.

Section 31, Breastfeeding In the Workplace - The DOLE and the CSC shall continue
to encourage all nursing working mothers, including solo parents, fo practice
breastfeeding in the workplace, in keeping with the policy of the State under R.A. No,
10028, its implementing Rules and Regulations, and other related issuances.

Employers, both in the private and public sacters, shall allocate space In all work
establishments that Is conducive, safe, and sufficient for the estabSshment of lactation
Stations for the use of nursing mothers, unless exempted fram setting up @ lactetion
station,

Employers shall give breastieeding mothers additional breake in addition to the regular
time-clf for meals to express their breast milk, and that nursing mothers shall continue to
be entitled fo such breaks to express breast milk for a year after the birth of a child, or
until such time that the mather is lactating.

Employers shall provide the abovementioned support mechanisms for nursing
mothers to express thelr breast milk for the period of at least one year after the birth of
her child or children, or until such time that the mother is still lactating.

Section 32. Social Safety Assistance - During digasters and calamities as declared by
the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC}, or
pandemics and other public health crises aa declared by the DOH, the solo parents and
their children shall be entitled to social safety assistance such as food, medicines, and
financial aid for house repair from the LGUs where the solo parents and their children are
residing. The LGUs shall ensure that tha budgat for social safety assistance is included

Z2

in the calamity funds of the LGUs In accordance with Republic Act No. 7160 (RLA, No.
7160) or the Local Government Code of 1991,

ARTICLE VI
ADDITIONAL BENEFITS

Section 33, Additional benefits, — A solo parent shall be entitisd to the following
additional benefits:

&. Means-, pension-, and subsidy-tested monthly cash subsidy of One Thousand Pesos
(P1,090.00) per month per solo parent who is earning a minimum wage and below.
to be allocated by the conoamed city or municipal government in accordance with
Section 17(b)(2)(Iv) af the Local Government Code: Provided, That for fifth (5!) class
municipalities and lower, aa well as the five hundred (500) municipalities with tha
highest poverty incidence based on the latest municipal-level small area poverty
estimates, cash subsidy allocations may be taken from the Gender and
Development (GAD) budget and the amount of cash subsidy per recipient shall be
dependent on the GAD budget: Provided, further, That the sole parent under this
section is mot a recipient of any other cash assistance or subsidy from any other
government programs: Provided, finally, That a beneficiary who is also a senior
citizen or a person with disability may continue recelving senior citizen or person
with disability benefits withaut forfelting the benefits under this Act.

The DILG shall provide the rules and reguiations on the allocation of the funds-and
distribution of the 1,000 additional benefit to solo parants in accordance with the
Local Government Code,

b. Aten percent (10%) discount and exemption from the value-added tax (VAT) on
baby's milk, food and micronutrient supplements, and sanitary diapers purchased,
duly prescribed medicines, vaccines, and other medical supplements purchased
from the birth of the child or children until six (5) years of age, where the solo parent
is unemployed or is gaming less than two hundred fifty thousand pesos
(P250.000.00) annually, subject to adjustment in accordance with the provisions on
the exempt taxable Income under the National intemal Revenue Code (NIRC), as
amended by Republic Act No. 10963 (R.A. No. 10963) or as the "Tax Reform for
Acceleration and Inclusion (TRAIN Law): Prowided, That nothing in this section shall
violate the provisions of RA, No, 10028,

a3

The purchase of baby's milk, food and micronutrient supplements, and sanitary
diapers as well as medically prescribed medicines, vaccines, and other medical
Supplements from drug stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, and similar
establishments, for the exclusive use and enjoyment of a child until six (8) years of
age, shail be subject to guidelines that shall be issued by the DOH within thirty (30)
days from the effectivity of these Revised IRR, in coordination with the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), PhilHealth and DILG, and subject to a reguiar review as
deemed necessary.

The establishments may claim the discounts provided herein as tax deductions.
based on the cost of the goods sold: Provided that the cost of discount shall be
allowed a3 deduction from the gross income for tha same taxable year that the
discount Is granted; Provided further, that the total amount of the claimed tax
deduction net of VAT, if applicable, shall be included in their gross sales receipts for
tax purposes and shall be subject to proper documentation and to the provisions of
the NIRC, as amended.

For this purpose, the DOF through the BIR shall issue the appropriate Revenue
Regulations on the 10 per cent (10%) discount and VAT exemption within thirty (30)
days from the effectivity of these Revised IRR.

Automatic coverage under the National Health insurance Program (MHIP)
administered by the PhilHealth with the solo parent's premium contributions to be
paid by the National Government: Provided, That the sole parent's premium
contribution In the formal economy shall be shared equally by the solo parent's
employers and the National Government.

‘The PhilHealth shall promulgate rules and regulations beneficial to solo parents and
their children for the proper implementation of this provision.

Prioritization of solo parents in reentering the workforce, and their children as
applicable, In apprenticeships, scholarships, livelihood training, reintegration
programs for OFWs, employment information and matching services, and other
poverty alleviation programs of the TESDA, OT|, GHED, DepEd, DOLE, DMW, and
other related government agencies, subject to the standard eligiblity and
qualifications; and

&. Prioritization and allocation in housing projects with liberal terms of payment on
goverment low-cost housing projects In accordance with housing law provisions:
Prioritizing applicants below the poverty line as declared by the Philippine Statistics
Authority (PSA),

The NHA shall make available housing units to solo parents In its hausing projects
Subject to existing disposition policies or may refer them to other housing projecis,
@3 appropriate,

Section 34, Presentation of the SPIC to avail of additional benefits, - To avail of the
additional benefits under this section, the solo parent shall present hisher SPIC. In
availing of the additional benefits under paragraph (b) of this section, the solo parant
booklet shall also be presented, in addition to the SPIC.

ARTICLE Vil
LIMITATION AND TERMINATION OF THE BENEFITS OF A SOLO PARENT

Section 35. Limitation of the benefits of a Solo Parent. — Only a solo parent
exercising sole parental custody, care and support of a child, children, or dependents is
entitled to claim the benefits of a solo parent under this Rule: Provided, That a solo parent
shall not lose his/her status as a solo parent if the other parent provides occasional
assistance and/or seasonal gifts thal do not meet the lagal requirement of support under
The Family Code of the Philippines: Provicied, furfher, That the absence of a valid and
legal marriage between the mother and father of the child, chiddren, or dependents does
not automatically entitle either individual to the benefits under this Act if the factual
circumstances demonstrate that parental custody, care and support are shared by the
mother and the father,

Section 36. Termination of the benefits of a Solo Parent. —\When a solo parent, as
defined under this Act ceases to be such by mason of a change of status and
circumstances, the said solo parent shall be Ineligible to avail of the benefita under this
Act.

The DepEd, CHED and TESDA shall issue the guidelines for the ineligible solo
parent or the child or children of the ineligisle solo parent who is/are receiving education
benefits, to allow the ineligible solo parent, or his child or children to continue attending
school until completion of the academic year.

The NHA shall likewise issue the guidelines for the availment of housing benefits

of the ineligible solo parent who has availed of housing program, to allow the ineligible
solo to cantinue under such terms and conditions reflective of his/her change of status
and circumstances.

Section 37, Procedure for Termination of Benefits. — In cases where a solo parent

has a change of status or circumstances making him/her ineligible to avail of the
benefits of the Act, the procedure for the termination of benefits of such sain parent
shall be as follows:

A solo parent shall declare his/her intention to withdraw from the avaiiment of the
benefits under this Act to the City or Municipal Social Welfare Development Office
(S/MSWDO) of the LGU which issued his/her SPIC which he/she shall surrendar to
the said CMSWODO.

If the solo parent does not voluntarily declare his/her intention to continue ‘or
terminate the provision of benefite and services before the lapse of one year from
the issuance of the SPIC, the Social Worker, based on a report by the employer or
any Interested person, shall conduct the necessary assessmentievaluation to
ascertain if grounds for termination and withdrawal of benefits exist.

¢. The solo parent shall be informed of the result of the assessment/evaluation conducted

by the Social Worker, including the termination of tha benefits or servicas, if
warranted, through a written notice, with proof of receipt of the solo parent, The
termination shall take effect immediately upon the receipt of the noliea of
termination, subject to the provisions of the preceding section, The solo parent
whose benefits have been terminated shall not use higher SPIC after receipt cf the
notice of termination, a6 provided in Section 26 of the Act.

The solo parent's fallure to renew his/her SPIC on or before the end of the year of
its issuance shall result in the automatic expiration of the SPIC after one (1) year of
its issuance.

Section 38. Reinstatement of solo parent's benefits. — The termination of said

benefits shall be without prejudice to the reapplication of the solo parent and
fainstatement of said benefits should the circumstances so warrant.

Section 38, Relocation of the solo parent and his/her child, — In the event a solo
Parent decides to relocate with his/her child, children ander dependents, he/she shall
inform the C/MSWDO which issued hisher SPIC. The C/MSVVDO of the place of origin
shall endorse and transmit the solo parent's records to the C/MSWDO of the place of
relocation,

It shall be the duty of the C/MMSWDO Social Welfare Officer of the place of relocation
who receives said records, to assign a sacial worker to monitor the status of the relocated
solo parent and his/her child, children and/or dependents. Moreover, it shall also be the
duty of said officer to coordinate with the concerned agencies of any changes in the status
of the solo parent receiving benefits from said agencies.

ARTICLE Vill
SOLO PARENTS OFFICE AND SOLO PARENTS DIVISION

Section 40. The SPO and SPD — Thera shall be established a Solo Parent Office
(SPO) under the Provincial Social Welfare and Development Office in every provinee and
city, and a Solo Parent Division (SPD) under the Municipal Social Welfare and
Development Office in every municipality.

The head of the SPO must be a licensed social worker and the head of the SPD
must possess a bachelor's degree in social work. The heads of the SPO and the SPD
who shall hold permanent positions with at least a Salary Grade 12 and Salary Grade
10, respectively, and shall be appointed by the provincial governor or city or municipal
mayor, as the case may ba.

The SPO shall have at least three (3) staff members with a designation of Social
Welfare Officer |, whila the SPD shall have at feast one (1) staf member who holds a
degree in Bachelor of Science in Social Work, regardless of licensure pursuant to
Republic Act 4373, otherwise known 28 the Act to Regulate the Practice of Social Work
and the Operation of Social Work Agencies in the Philippines.

The offices of the governor, mayor, or social welfare office, as the cage may be,
shall exercise supervision over the SPO or SPD relative to their plans, programs, and
activities. The SPO or SPD shall establish linkages and work together with accradited
civil society and nongovernmental organizations, political organizations, and the
barangays in their respective areas,

Section 41, Duties of the CityMunicipal Social Welfare and Development Office

(CiMSWDO). - The C/MSWDQ, through its social workers, has the following duties:

a. b.

To asgesses the eligibility of the selo parent applicant,

To take charge of the printing of the SPIC and institute proper control on the
issuance of such,

To monitor the status of the solo parants and their families.

To coardinate with the concemed agencies of any changes in the status of the sola
Parent recelving benefits from said agencies,

To conduct orientation seminars for solo parent applicants to apprise them of their
fights, duties, and obligations, as well as the benefits, assistance, and services
aveilable to qualified solo parents.

Section 42. Sola Parents Help Desk. —A solo parents help desk shall be established

in every barangay to render immediate assistance tosolo parents and their children,

Section 43. Duty of the Provincial Social Welfare and Development Office

(PSWDO). — The PSWOO shall be responsible for the creation of the centralized
database in its jurisdiction, pursuant to Sections 18 and 24 of the Act.

Section 44, Duty of the LGUs — The LGUs shall submit thelr lists of solo parents to

the DILG on a quarterly basis,

In cases of multiple entries or other badges of fraud, the DSWD shall notify the

concemed LGU for its appropriate action.

Section 45. Duties of the SPO or SPO, - The SPO and the SPD shall:

Plan, implament, moniter, and evaluate yearly work programs in pursuance of the
objectives of this Act.
Conduct quarterly validation of solo parents with SPIC to valickate thelr civil status,
assess their current situation, and recommend the services required by tha solo
Parent and/or available in the LGU and. The SPO/SPD may utilize the solo parents’
federation and associations at the local level in the conduct of the
validation/assassament,
Draw up a list of evallable and required services by the solo parents.
Maintain and regularly update, on a quarterly basis, the list of solo parents.
Issue free SPC and booklets to qualified solo parents.

{. Serve as a general information and liaison canter, Previding information, education
and communication (IEC) materials for solo parents for thalr use or for their children
or dependents.

9. Monitor compliance with the provisions of this Act, particularly the grant of privileges
and additional benefits.

h. Report ta the governor, mayor or office of the social walfare, any individual,
establishment, business entity, institution or agency that violates any provision of
the Act.

i, Assist the solo parents in filing the complaints against any individual, establishment,
business entity, institution or agency that refuses or fails to provide the Privileges
and additional benefits of solo parents granted under the Act and

|. Provide such other services as may be required under the Act.

ARTICLE Ix
RECORDING AND MAINTAINING A SOLO PARENTS DATABASE
Section 46, Recording and Maintaining a Solo Parents Database. - The DSwo,
in coordination with the DILG, shall establish and maintain a centralized database of all

solo parents who have been issued SPIC and booklets by the SPOs and SPDs,

To this end, the LGUs shall submit the list of solo parents receiving benefits under
this Act to the DSWD on a quarterly basis,

The OSWD and DILG shail also coordinate with the Department of Information,
Communication and Technolegy (DICT) in the establishment and maintanance of the

centralized database of all solo parents who have been issued SPIC and booklets by the
SPOs and SPDs.

ARTICLE X
NATIONAL SOLO PARENTS DAY AND WEEK
Section 47. National Solo Parents’ Day and Week. - To commemorate the role and
significance of every solo parent in the Philippines, the third week and third Saturday of
April of every year are hereby declared Solo Parents Week, to be celebrated In the LGUs,

and National Sola Parents Day, to be participated by NGAs, respectively.

ARTICLE XI
SPECIAL CATEGORIES OF SOLO PARENTS

Section 48. Abused, Abandoned, or Neglected Solo Parents or Solo Parents who
are victim of Domestic Violence - In cases where a solo parent had been abused,
abandoned, or neglected by his or her co-parent, he or she may eeek the help of the LGU
and DSWD Field Offices or Social Welfare Action Desk (SWAD) offices situated in the
place where the solo parent resides,

The LGU end the DSWD Field Office or Social Wailfare Action Desk officer shall
coordinate with the respective barangay officials and/or police officers assigned in the
nearest Philippine National Police station where the abused, abandoned, or neglected
Parent resi¢es and in need of immediate and appropriate police assistance,

The LSU and the DSWD Field Office or Social Welfare Action Desk Officer shall
assist the abused, abandoned or nagiected solo parent in securing legal, psychosocial,
and other forms of assistance In the filing of cases of domestic viclence or any other legal
action against the errant co-parent. Such assistance may include initiating discussion with
and mediating between the parties, in cases of economic abuse, such 3s, but rat limited
to thé errant ¢o-parent's fallure or refusal to support, or giving inadequate suppor, despite
being gainfully employed and capable of giving support, to the parent who has been
sbused, abandoned, or neglected by the co-parent and who fs in need of support for
herself and/or for her child ander children with the co-parent, with the objective of coming
to an agreement for the support of the spouse and their common child or children.

Section 49. Special Protection for Adolescent Solo Parents - In addition to the
provisions of this Act, adolescent solo paranta, including victims of child Mmartiages, shail
also be provided with assistance from the DSWD and the DOH which may include
counseling and psycho-social services and from the DepEd, CHED, and TESO in the
form of home-based, in-acheol, or tachnical education, as warranted,

ARTICLE Xi
INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING AND MONITORING COMMITTEE

Section SO. Inter-Agency Coordinating and Monitoring Committee (IACMC), — An
inter-agency coordinating, and monitoring committee is hereby established and shall be
composed of the following:

{a) Chairperson - Secretary of DSWD,
(b) Vice-Chairperson - Secretary of DILG
(c) Members:

(1) Secretary of DOF;

(2) Secretary of DOH;

(3) Secretary of DepEd,

(4) Secretary of DOLE:

(5) Secretary of DTI;

(6) Secretary of DOJ;

(7) Secretary of DMV

(8) Chairperson of CHED:

(9) Chairperson of CSC;

(10) Ghainperson of POW

(11) Director General of NEDA;

(12) Director General of TESDA;

(13) General Manager of NHA:

(14) President of PhilHealth;

(15) Representative of ULAP; and

(16) Representative of civil society and non-governmental organizations with

recognized credentials in providing services to solo parents ta be appointed by the

Secretary of the DSWD,

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and members of the IACMC shall meet
quarterly and shall submit a report to Congress on the implementation of this Act every
three (3) years from the establishment ofthe |ACMC., The Chalrparsan, Vice-Chaimperson,
and members of the IACMC, except for numbers (15) and (16), may designate their
respective representatves who must have at least the rank of Assistant Secretary or its:
equivalent,

dl

The AGMC shall accurately gather demographic data an the golo Parents and their
children, by utilizing the Community-Based Monitoring System (CSIMS) under Repubiic
Act No. 11315 (R.A. No. 11315), or the ‘Community-Based Monitoring System Act’. The
PSA shall conduct every four (4) years an Updated demographic survey on solo parents
and their children. Further, the “ACMC shall act as the oversight committee for the
implementation of these IRR.

ARTICLE xii

JOINT CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE ON SOLO PARENTS

Section 51, Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on Salo Parents, - A daint
Congressional Oversight Committee on Solo Parents (JCOCSP) is hereby created to
monitor the implementation of this Act, The JCOCSP shall sat the overall framework for
reviewing the implementation of this Act, determining inherent vulnerabilities in the law.
and recommending the necessary legislative or executive meaeures,

The JCOGSP shall be composed of five (5) senators and five (5) raprecentatives
fo be appointed by the Senate President and House Speaker, respectively. The JCOCSP
shall be co-chaired by the Chairpersons of the Committee an Revisions of Laws of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on Women, Children, Family Relations
and Gender Equality of the Senate,"

ARTICLE XIV
PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES

Section 42. Prohiblied Acts and Penalties. — The following acts are prohibited and
shail be penalized accordingly:

&, Any person, corporation, entity, or agency that refuses or fails to provide the banefits

granted to the solo parent in violation of this Act shall suffer the following penalties:

1, Forthe first violation -a fine of not less than Ten Thousand Pesos (P'10,000.00)

but not more than Fifty Thousand Pesos (P50,000.00) or imprisonment of mot

less than six (8) months but mot more than one (1) year, or bath, at the
discretion of the court.

a2

2 For any subsequent violation - a fine of not leas than One Hundred Thousand
Pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than Two Hundred Thousand Pesos
(P 200,000.00) or imprisonment of not less than one (1) year but not mare than
two (2) years, or both, at the discretion of the court

ifthe offender is a comporation, partnership, organization, or any similar entity,
the officials and employees who directly participated in the vidlation/s shall ba
held liable, The proper authorities may, efter due notice and hearing, also
cause the cancellation or revocation of the business permit, permit to operate,
franchise, and other similar privileges granted to any business thal fails to
abide by the provisions of this Act and its IRR.

if the offender is a foreigner, the foreigner shall be deported immediately after
the service of the sentence withaut need of turther deportation proceedings.

Any person who misrepresents his/her status or falsifies any document to avail of
tha benefits, of causes another person to avail or be denied of the benefits
provided under this Act, or any person who sbuses the privileges and benefits
granted hereln shall be punished with a fine of nat more than Fifty Thousand
Pesos (P50,000.00) and imprisonment of not less than six (6) months but not more
than one (1) year, or both, at the discration of the court.

When the offender or the person responsible for the offenses punishable under
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section is a public officer or employee as defined in
Executive Order No. 292, or the ‘Administrative Code of 1987", and the offense was
committed in the exercise of official duties, such officer or employee shall suffer the
penalty of removal from office and perpetual disqualification from holding public
office, In addition to the penalty provided in the preceding paragraph: Provided
further, That a portion of the fines shall go to the salo parents’ fund in the local levai,

The penalties under this Act shall be without prejudice to the imposition of higher
penalties existing under other laws.

aa

ARTICLE XV
FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 53. Information Dissemination —The DSWD, in coordination with the DILG,
DepEd, DOH, CHED, TESDA, DOLE, DOF, DMW, DOJ, PAO, NHA, DTI, BIR, PhilHealth,
CSC, PCW, Philippine Information Agency (PIA), Government Service Insurance System
{GSIS), Social Security Service (SSS), League of Provinces af the Philippines (LPP),
League of Cities of the Philippines (LCP), League of Municipalities of the Philippines
(LMP}, Liga ng mga Barangay (LNB), Sangguniang Kabataan Federation, ULAP, LGUs,
CSOs, and NGOs focused on solo parents, and with the media shall disseminate to the
public information regarding this Act and its implementation, to ensure that solo parents
know thair righta, duties and obligations and the available benefits and services to therm,

as well as to ansure thet solo parents aré portrayed on masa media truthfully and free:
from stigma and discrimination;

Section 54. Appropriations. — The amount necessary te cary out the provisions of
this Act shall be included in the budget of the concemed government agencies in the
General Appropriations Act (GAA),

Government agencies and LGUs may also utilize a portion of their respective GAD

budget to implement this Act anchored on the guidelines issued by the DAM, NEDA, and
PCW.

Section 55. Repealing Clause, - All laws, decrees, executive orders,
administrative orders, or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of the Act are
hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

Section 56. Separability Clause, — if any provision of the Act is held invalid or
unconstitutional, other provisions not affected thereby shall continue to be in full foros
and effect.

Section 57. Transitory provision - There shall be 2 period of lx (6) months to one
(1) year to allow DILG, the LGUs and DBM to identify the funds and establish
mechanisms for the allocation and distribution of funds for the additional benefits due
to the qualified solo parents,

Section 58, Eftectvty Clause. ~ These Rovised IRR shal take effec teen (15)
days following the publication in the Official Gazette or in g
; i newspaper of general

Approvedthis-29th day of September 2022.

Secretary of Social and Se at Suuatasation
Development kée-—
BENJAMIN E. DIOKNO DR. MARIA RO VERGEIRE
Secratary of Finance Ole, of a
SARA Z, DUTERTE BIENVENIDO E. LAGUESMA

Secretary of Education aA

ALFREDO E. PASCUAL ATTY. JESUS CRISPIN C. REMULLA
Secretary of Trade and Industry

Secretary of Justice
SUSAN V, OPLE DR. JO MARK M. WIBRE
Secretary of Migrant Workers Chairperson of Commission on Higher
Education

DR. ARSENIO M. BALISACAN
Director General of National
and Development A

JOEBEN TAl : :
(General Manager of National Housing Oc, P Insurance
Authority

Union of Local Authorities of the
Philippines

The IRR was a result of series of meetings with partner agencies and public consultations a5
during the months of August to September 2022.

RA No. 11861also known as the The Expanded Solo Parents Welfare Act
Implementing Rules and Regulations