 
58/(, 
 
 
WKHIXOILOOPHQWRIWKHGHFODUHGSROLF\REMHFWLYHVRI5$1R 
 
58/(,, 
 
KHUHE\GHILQHGDVIROORZV 
 
 
E %RDUGRI'LUHFWRUV%RDUGUHIHUVWRWKHJRYHUQLQJERG\RIWKH0DKDUOLND
 
 
'%3 


(f) Maharlika Investment Corporation (MIC) refers to the State investment body, 
a government-owned and -controlled corporation (GOCC) created under 
R.A. No. 11954 which shall be responsible for the overall governance and 
management of the MIF;

(g) Maharlika Investment Fund (MIF or Fund) refers to the fund created under 
R.A. No. 11954;

(h) Regular Director refers to a director appointed by the President of the 
Philippines who shall serve in the Board full-time, and shall not hold any 
other public office during his tenure, unless otherwise provided in R.A. No. 
11954; and

(i) "Santiago" Principles refers to the twenty-four (24) Generally Accepted 
Principles and Practices (GAPP) voluntarily endorsed by the International 
Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds (IFSWF) members. The GAPP for 
Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs) are designed as guidelines that assign 
best practices for the operations of SWFs. They are the rules followed by 
SWF that promote stability in the global financial system, set proper controls 
on investment risks, and implement sound governance structure.

RULE III 
Maharlika Investment Corporation

Section 4. Establishment of the Maharlika Investment Corporation. The 
"Maharlika Investment Corporation" created under R.A. No. 11954 shall act as the 
sole vehicle for the purpose of mobilizing and utilizing the MIF for investments in 
transactions in order to generate optimal returns on investments (ROIs), while 
contributing to the overall goal of reinvigorating job creation and accelerating 
poverty reduction by sustaining the economy's high growth trajectory, while 
ensuring sustainable development.

The MIC shall govern and manage the Fund in accordance with the 
objectives and purposes set forth in R.A. No. 11954, and other laws, rules and 
regulations, and it shall adhere to the Santiago Principles and other internationally-
accepted standards of transparency and accountability: Provided, That the MIC 
shall coordinate with all relevant institutions to ensure harmonization of policies.

Section 5. Place of Business. The MIC shall have its principal place of 
business in Metro Manila, but may maintain branches and offices in such other 
places, within and outside the Philippines, as the proper conduct of its business 
may require.

Section 6. Capitalization and Initial Funding. The MIC shall have an 
authorized capital stock of Five hundred billion pesos (଑500,000,000,000.00) to be

divided into Five billion (5,000,000,000) shares, with a par value of One hundred 
pesos (଑100.00) per share which shall have the following classifications and 
features:

(1) Common shares of Three billion seven hundred fifty million (3,750,000,000) 
equivalent 
to 
Three 
hundred 
seventy 
five 
billion 
pesos  
(଑375,000,000,000.00), to be subscribed by the National Government, its 
agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned and -controlled 
corporations (GOCCs) or government financial institutions (GFIs): Provided, 
That, One billion two hundred fifty million (1,250,000,000) shares equivalent 
to One hundred twenty-five billion pesos (଑125,000,000,000.00) shall 
initially be subscribed by the following:

(a) Land 
Bank 
of 
the 
Philippines 
² 
Fifty 
billion 
pesos

(b) Development Bank of the Philippines ² Twenty-Five billion pesos 
(଑25,000,000,000.00); and

(c) National Government ² Fifty billion pesos (଑50,000,000,000.00);

Provided, further, That, of the One hundred twenty-five billion pesos 
(଑125,000,000,000.00), Seventy-five billion pesos (଑75,000,000,000.00) 
pertaining to the contributions of the Founding GFIs shall be fully paid by 
them. The contributions shall be deposited to the account of the Treasurer 
of the Philippines for the benefit of the MIC.

The details of the transfer of the contributions from the account of the 
Treasurer of the Philippines to the MIC shall be discussed at the 
organizational meeting of the Board. The Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) shall 
transfer the contributions to the account of MIC within five (5) business days 
from receipt of the relevant Board Resolution.

The Fifty billion pesos (଑50,000,000,000.00) pertaining to the National 
Government contributions shall be deposited in the MIC designated account

(2) Preferred shares of One billion two hundred fifty million (1,250,000,000) 
equivalent to One hundred twenty-five billion pesos (଑125,000,000,000.00) 
to be made available for subscription by the National Government, its 
agencies or instrumentalities, GFIs or GOCCs, as well as reputable private 
financial institutions and corporations, except Social Security System (SSS), 
Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), Philippine Health Insurance 
Corporation (PhilHealth), Home Development Mutual Fund (Pag-IBIG 
Fund), Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA), and Philippine 
Veterans Affairs Office (PVAO) Pension Fund: Provided, That, preferred

shares shall be non-voting, non-participating, non-convertible, and may be 
issued from time to time by the Board of Directors in one or more series, 
specifying the relative rights, preferences and further limitations thereof.

For this purpose, the right to vote of the stockholders in accordance with 
Sections 6, 31, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 61, and 76 of the 
Revised Corporation Code shall not apply in so far as the preferred 
shareholders are concerned.

Additional investments may likewise be sourced from investments of 
reputable private and State-owned financial institutions and corporations in 
the form and under the terms and conditions that the Board of Directors may 
prescribe. A single private sector shareholder's interest includes the direct 
or indirect shareholdings in MIC held by the shareholder, as well as those 
held by the corporation, its subsidiaries, affiliates, and related parties that 
are owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the shareholder.

The contribution of the National Government shall come from the following 
sources:

(a) 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) Dividends. For the first and 
second fiscal years upon the effectivity of R.A. No. 11954, One 
hundred percent (100%) of the BSP's total declared dividends, as 
computed under Republic Act No. 7653, also known as the "New 
Central Bank Act," amended by Republic Act No. 11211, shall be 
remitted to the National Government for the capitalization of the MIC, 
in 
the 
amount 
not 
exceeding 
the 
Fifty 
billion 
pesos 
(଑50,000,000,000.00) initial subscription of the National Government 
to the capitalization of the MIC under this Section: Provided, That, the 
Monetary Board may recommend to the President of the Philippines 
the reduction of BSP's dividend contribution to the MIC whenever 
economic conditions may warrant. Thereafter, the dividends of the 
BSP shall be remitted to the National Government to fund the 
increase in the capitalization of the BSP in accordance with Section 
2 of Republic Act No. 7653, as amended by Republic Act No. 11211.

(b) 
Government Share in the Philippine Amusement and Gaming 
Corporation (PAGCOR). Ten percent (10%) of the National 
Government's share from the income of the PAGCOR, as provided 
for in Presidential Decree No. 1869, as amended: Provided, That, the 
share earmarked for the Universal Health Care Act under Sec. 37 (b) 
of Republic Act No. 11223 shall not in any manner be diminished: 
Provided, further, That, the above funding from PAGCOR will be for 
a period of five (5) years. Other government-owned gaming operators 
and/or regulators shall also contribute ten percent (10%) of their 
revenues from gaming operations. Within thirty (30) days from the

effectivity of the Implementing Rules and Regulations, the 
Governance Commission for GOCCs (GCG) shall submit the list of 
government-owned gaming operators and/or regulators that should 
remit to the MIC. The list shall be updated annually, or as often as 
necessary. The remittance of revenues of gaming operators and/or 
regulators shall be for five (5) years.

PAGCOR and other government-owned gaming operators and/or 
regulators shall remit the National Government's share to the Bureau 
of the Treasury (BTr). Thereafter, the BTr shall immediately release 
and transfer the portion intended for the MIF to the MIC, subject to the 
usual budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules and regulations.

(c) 
Department of Finance-Privatization and Management Office 
(DOF-PMO).

i. 
Properties, real and personal, identified by the Privatization 
Council. The real and personal properties to be identified by the 
Privatization Council to be contributed to the MIC shall be 
directly related to its mandate. The properties to be contributed 
to the MIC shall be appraised at their fair market value at the 
time of their transfer. The title, as well as all rights and obligations 
pertaining thereto, shall be transferred to the MIC: Provided, 
That, the MIC shall in no case be held liable for outstanding tax 
liabilities of the properties; and

ii. 
Proceeds from the privatization of government assets, the 
amount of which shall be determined by the Privatization Council 
consistent with the fiscal program of the government.

(d) 
Other sources based on the fiscal regime to be implemented by the 
National Government, which may include but not limited to the 
following: 
i. Royalties; 
ii. Special assessments; and 
iii. Shares of stock owned by the Republic of the Philippines; 
subject to laws, rules, and regulations applicable to the 
transfer and disposition of said shares.

Except for item (ii), other contributions to the MIC capitalization shall 
be determined by subsequent law, or any appropriate body, as 
applicable.

The Founding Government Financial Institutions (GFIs) and the National Government may, upon recommendation of the Advisory Body, and without prejudice to additional

subscription and payment, use its stock dividends from its unappropriated retained 
earnings in the MIC, to subscribe and pay for the balance of the authorized capital 
stock.

The government agencies and GOCCs providing for the social security and 
public health insurance of government employees, private sector workers and 
employees, and other sectors and subsectors, such as, but not limited to, the SSS, 
GSIS, PhilHealth, Pag-IBIG Fund, OWWA, and PVAO Pension Fund shall be 
absolutely prohibited, whether mandatory or voluntary, to contribute to the 
capitalization of the MIC.

Section 
7. 
Increase 
in 
Capitalization. 
The 
Board, 
upon 
the 
recommendation of the Advisory Body, shall request Congress for legislation to 
increase the capitalization of the MIC up to such an amount, as may be necessary 
to attain the objectives of the law.

Section 8. Corporate Powers. The MIC is hereby authorized to adopt, alter, 
and use a corporate seal which shall be judicially noticed; to enter into contracts; 
to lease or own real and personal property, and to sell or otherwise dispose of the 
same; to sue and be sued; and otherwise to do and perform any and all things that 
may be necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of R.A. No. 11954.

The MIC may acquire and hold such assets and incur such liabilities in 
connection with its operations authorized by the provisions of R.A. No. 11954, or 
as are essential to the proper conduct of such operations.

The MIC may compromise or release, in whole or in part, any claim of or 
settled liability to the MIC, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed 
by the Board, upon favorable recommendation of the Advisory Body, to protect the 
interests of the MIC and the integrity of the MIF: Provided, That, in no event shall 
the MIC compromise or release any claim or liability in excess of the amount as 
prescribed under relevant laws, rules and regulations.

Section 9. Functions of the Maharlika Investment Corporation. In 
carrying out its objectives and functions, the MIC shall:

(a) Establish a diversified portfolio of investments in the local and global 
financial markets and in other assets that promote the objectives of the 
Fund, which function shall include the crafting of investment policies, 
guidelines and targets, and risk management limits and monitoring 
procedures;

(b) Manage and invest the initial and future contributions to the Fund in 
accordance with R.A. No. 11954;

(c) Accept and manage investment mandates whose investment purpose is 
to increase income for development goals;

(d) Develop and foster skills in finance, economics, risk mitigation, good 
governance, and other related areas, consistent with the capacity and 
capabilities build-up of human resources in the industry; and

(e) Implement international best practices in investing and managing assets 
accepted standards and principles of transparency and accountability.

Section 10. Issuance of Bonds. The MIC may issue all kinds of bonds, 
debentures, and securities, and/or the renewal or refunding thereof (hereinafter 
called "Bonds"), within and/or outside the Philippines, at such terms, rates, and 
conditions as the Board of Directors may determine, subject to compliance with the 
provisions of applicable law, and rules and regulations promulgated by the 
Monetary Board.

To the extent applicable, the MIC shall provide for appropriate reserves for 
the redemption or retirement of the Bonds. These bonds and other obligations, to 
the extent applicable, shall be redeemable at the option of the MIC at or before 
maturity and in such manner as may be stipulated therein and shall bear such rate 
of interest as may be fixed by the MIC.

Such obligations shall be secured by the assets under the management of 
the MIC, including the stocks, bonds, debentures, and other securities purchased 
or held by it under the provisions of R.A. No. 11954. These bonds and debentures 
may be long-term, medium, or short-term, with fixed interest rate or floating interest 
rate.

In no instance shall the Philippine government guarantee any Bonds issued 
by the MIC.

Section 11. Administrative and Operational Expenses of the Maharlika 
Investment Corporation. The Board of the MIC is authorized to disburse from the 
Fund such amounts as may be necessary for administrative and operating 
expenses, the total of which shall not exceed two percent (2%) of funds managed: 
Provided, That, the Board of Directors shall set annual targets to reduce operating 
and administrative expenses as a share of funds managed: Provided, further, That, 
the foregoing ceiling shall decrease as the size of the Fund increases based on 
industry practice.

If expenses in any year are less than the maximum amount permissible, the 
difference shall not be availed of as additional expenses in the following years.

RULE IV 
Maharlika Investment Fund

Section 12. Establishment of the Maharlika Investment Fund. The 
Maharlika Investment Fund (MIF) created under R.A. No. 11954 shall adhere to 
the principles of good governance, transparency, and accountability. The Fund 
shall initially be sourced from the capitalization of the MIC, as provided for in R.A. 
No. 11954; the investible funds of select GFIs and from contributions of the 
National Government, as well as other sources of funds, as provided in R.A. No. 
11954: Provided, That, other GFIs and GOCCs may invest into the MIF, subject to 
their respective investment and risk management strategies, and approval of their 
respective boards: Provided, further, That, government agencies and GOCCs 
providing for the social security and public health insurance of government 
employees, private sector workers and employees, and other sectors and 
subsectors, such as, but not limited to, the SSS, GSIS, PhilHealth, Pag-IBIG Fund, 
OWWA, and PVAO Pension Fund, shall be absolutely prohibited, whether 
mandatory or voluntary, to invest in the MIF: Provided, furthermore, That, the 
investments in the Fund made by LBP, DBP, and other GFIs shall not exceed 
twenty-five percent (25%) of their current net worth, as of end of the month 
subsequent to the transfer of the contributions from the account of the Treasurer 
of the Philippines to the MIC.

Additional investments may likewise be sourced from investments of 
reputable private and State-owned financial institutions and corporations in the 
form and under the terms and conditions that the Board of Directors may prescribe.

The Fund shall be used to invest on a strategic and commercial basis in a 
manner designed to promote fiscal stability for economic development, and 
strengthen the top-performing GFIs through additional investment platforms that 
will help attain the National Government's priority plans.

Section 13. Objective of the Maharlika Investment Fund. The objective 
of the MIF is to promote socio-economic development. This will be achieved by 
making strategic and profitable investments in key sectors to preserve and 
enhance long-term value of the Fund; to obtain the optimal absolute return and 
achievable financial gains on its investments; and to satisfy the requirements of 
liquidity, safety/security, and yield in order to ensure profitability. In pooling the 
investible funds from the GFIs, and channeling them to diversified financial assets 
and development projects, the MIC's activities shall contribute to a prudent and 
transparent management of the government resources.

RULE V 
Investments

Section 14. Allowable Investments. Subject to strict compliance with the 
Investment and Risk Management Guidelines, the Board of Directors of the MIC 
may engage in the following investments:

(a) Cash, foreign currencies, metals, and other tradeable commodities;

(b) Fixed income instruments issued by sovereigns, quasi-sovereigns and 
supranationals;

(c) Domestic and foreign corporate bonds;

(d) Listed or unlisted equities, whether common, preferred, or hybrids;

(e) Islamic investments, such as Sukuk bonds;

(f) Joint ventures or co-investments, mergers and acquisitions;

(g) Mutual and exchange-traded funds invested in underlying assets;

(h) Real estate and infrastructure projects: Provided, That, investments in 
infrastructure projects shall be directed towards the fulfillment of national 
priorities such as the national infrastructure program of the Department 
of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and other infrastructure 
agencies, the inclusive innovation industry strategy of the Department of 
Trade and Industry (DTI), and the public investment programs of the 
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA);

(i) Programs and projects on health, education, research and innovation, 
and other such investments that contribute to sustainable development;

(j) Loans and guarantees to, or participation into joint ventures or 
consortiums with Filipino and foreign investors, whether in the majority or 
minority position in commercial, industrial, mining, agricultural, housing, 
energy, and other enterprises, which may be necessary or contributory 
to the economic development of the country, or important to the public 
interest; and

(k) Other investments with sustainable and developmental impact aligned 
with Section 17 of R.A. No. 11954, as may be approved by the Board, 
such as those covering idle properties, whether located within or outside 
the Philippines, owned by government agencies and instrumentalities.

The Investments in real estate, including agro-industrial estates and 
economic zones, estate infrastructure and other development projects, whether 
alone or in partnership with other corporate entities, shall be limited to high-impact 
projects as approved by the appropriate approving body, to ensure that these are 
in line with the socioeconomic development program of the government.

The Board of Directors of the MIC shall likewise ensure that all allowable 
investments as provided in this Section are in accordance with the principle of 
sustainability.

Section 15. Forms of Joint Ventures and Co-Investments. In line with 
Section 14 (f) of R.A. No. 11954, the Board shall prescribe the form, as well as the 
terms and conditions, of the joint venture and/or co-investment, subject to pertinent 
laws, rules and regulations: Provided, That, the board and management of the MIC 
shall ensure that all transactions with private and other State-owned entities in a 
joint venture or co-investment are not prejudicial to the interest of the government 
and complies with the principles under the last paragraph of Section 12 of R.A. No.

To ensure transparency and accountability, the MIC shall regularly publish 
the terms and conditions of the arrangement, in the form and manner as 
determined by the Board, as well as all financial statements and reports relative to 
the operations of the joint venture and/or co-investment on its website, which shall 
be immediately updated and made easily accessible to the public.

Section 16. Prohibited Investments. In no case shall the MIC, in whatever 
manner or devise, invest in areas that are explicitly prohibited under existing laws 
and conventions to which the Philippines is a party.

Section 17. Investment Policy. The Board of Directors shall formulate 
written policies in relation to the following matters:

(a) Directions on the acceptable balance between risk and return of the 
overall portfolio;

(b) Investment policies, including asset allocation and rules on diversification 
across asset classes, geographies, sectors, required minimum credit 
ratings, policies that promote environment, social, and governance (ESG) 
principles, 
mandates, 
strategies, 
and 
guidelines 
on 
financing 
infrastructure projects and other investments, including Public Private 
Partnership projects;

(c) Risk management for the investments, including prudential standards and 
concentration limits to avoid undue risk concentration from excessive 
exposures;

(d) Standards for assessing the investment performance;

(e) Matters relating to international best practices for institutional 
investments;

(f) Matters specific to rules and regulations where investments are 
domiciled;

(g) Procedural framework and cooperation among investors, including fund 
commitments, co-investments, voting requirements, exit mechanisms, 
and other matters pertaining to the pooling of funds and the management 
thereof;

(h) Matters relating to the procedure for assessing, deploying, and liquidating 
investments;

(i) Disclosure and transparency mechanisms to oversee compliance by 
various departments of the MIC with the standards, procedures and 
policies set by the Board;

(j) Aside from the potential earnings, the Board shall take into account risks 
other than economic, such as climate risks and those that are reported 
under rules and regulations of government agencies requiring ESG 
reporting as well as resource valuation studies and natural capital 
accounting in making investment decisions; and

(k) All other matters needed to be discussed to guarantee compliance with 
the objectives of the MIF.

In the formulation of its investment policies, the Board of Directors shall be 
guided by the principle that priority must be given to investing in government 
infrastructure and other developmental projects which would yield the highest 
return on investment coupled with the developmental impact of lower cost of living 
and lower cost of basic commodities, as well as in those investments that 
incorporate ESG considerations and sustainable practices. The Board of Directors 
shall ensure that policies formulated are consistent with the objectives of the Fund, 
and the same shall be subject to periodic review, or as may be necessary.

All investment policies approved by the Board of the MIC shall be posted on 
its website which shall be immediately updated and be made easily accessible to 
the public.

Section 18. Limitations and Safeguards on the Maharlika Investment 
Fund.  The management of the MIF shall be subject to a set of investment policies, 
guidelines, and risk management limits and procedures, as approved by the Board 
of Directors, upon due consideration of the recommendations of the Advisory Body.

Investment and risk management strategies of the MIC shall be in line with the 
policies and objectives hereunder stated to ensure the long-term viability of the 
Fund.

Investment and risk management plans, strategies and activities of the MIC, 
involving the MIF, shall be disclosed and published on its website that will be 
immediately updated and made easily accessible to the public.

No guarantee involving financial liability arising from any action of the MIC 
shall be binding upon the Philippine government without obtaining the written 
authority of the proper authorities under existing laws.

Section 19. Fees and Charges on the Establishment of the Maharlika 
Investment Fund. Third-party fees and all charges incurred in connection with the 
establishment and effective management of the MIF, such as custody fees, 
transaction fees, clearing fees, and management fees payable to external fund 
managers, shall be charged against the MIF, in accordance with the applicable 
policies on fund disbursements.

RULE VI 
Governance

Section 20. Board of Directors. There shall be nine (9) members of the 
Board of Directors composed as follows:

(a) The Secretary of Finance shall sit as the Chairperson in an ex-officio 
capacity; 
(b) President and Chief Executive Officer (PCEO) of the MIC as Vice-
Chairperson; 
(c) President and CEO of the LBP;  
(d) President and CEO of the DBP;  
(e) Two (2) Regular Directors; and  
(f) Three (3) Independent Directors from the private sector.

Provided, That, in case of a merger, consolidation, abolition, or dissolution of 
any of the founding GFIs, the seat in the Board of the absorbed, dissolved, or 
abolished GFI shall be filled by one of the next highest-ranking officers authorized 
by the Board of the GFI, which assumed the rights of the absorbed, dissolved, or 
abolished GFI.

The Secretary of Finance and the PCEO of LBP and DBP, as ex-officio 
members may designate and authorize an alternate, who shall be at least an 
Undersecretary or Executive Vice President in rank, respectively.

Unless specifically limited in the letter of designation, the duly designated ex-
officio Alternate may act and vote with the same power and legal effect as that of

the ex-officio Director in the Board and Board-Level Committee meetings, and 
during the entire period that the ex-officio Director is a Board Member.

The ex-officio members of the Board shall designate a qualified Alternate 
through a written notice to the MIC. The ex-officio member may also revoke the 
designation of the Alternate at any time, provided it shall be effective only upon 
written notice to the MIC.

The duly-designated Alternate shall also cease to act with the power and 
authority of the ex-officio member upon the subsequent designation of another 
Alternate, when the ex-officio member has ceased to be a member of the 
Governing Board, or upon the death, civil interdiction or the resignation from the 
public service of the ex-officio member concerned.

All Directors shall continue to hold office until their successors shall have been 
appointed and duly qualified, unless sooner removed or resigned.

Section 21. Qualifications of the Regular Directors. Regular Directors 
must possess the following qualifications:

(a) Citizen of the Philippines;

(b) At least thirty-five (35) years of age; and

(c) Must be of good moral standing and reputation, of recognized probity and 
independence, and have substantial experience and expertise in any of 
the following: 
            (i) Corporate governance and administration;  
            (ii) Investment in financial assets; and 
           (iii) Management of investments in the global and local markets.

Section 22. Appointment of Regular Directors. The Regular Directors shall 
be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the 
Advisory Body.

Section 23. Term of Regular Directors. The Regular Directors shall serve 
for a term of three (3) years, unless sooner removed for cause.

In case of removal or resignation, the appointment to any vacancy shall only 
be for the unexpired term of the predecessor. The appointment of a Regular 
Director to fill such vacancy shall be in accordance with the manner provided for 
regular nomination, shortlisting and appointment of Regular Directors.

Section 24. Conflict of Interests and Divestments of Regular Directors. 
The Regular Directors shall serve in the Board full-time, and shall not hold any 
other public office or post during their tenure. Neither will the Regular Directors

have or possess any private financial and business interest while in office. In this 
regard, Regular Directors shall be required to resign from, divest themselves of 
any and all interests in any private institutions that would put them in conflict with 
the interests of the MIC before assumption to their office.

Section 25. Qualifications of Independent Directors. The Advisory Body 
shall ensure that the selected Independent Directors are with proven probity, 
competence, expertise and experience in finance, economics, investments, 
business management, or law, and are highly capable to contribute to the 
attainment of the objectives and purposes of the MIF.

Section 26. Appointment and Term of Office of Independent Directors. 
The Independent Directors shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, 
upon the recommendation of the Advisory Body, for a term of one (1) year. The 
Independent Directors shall be eligible for reappointment: Provided, That, the 
cumulative term of an Independent Director shall not exceed nine (9) years.

Section 27. Conflict of Interests of Independent Directors. The 
Independent Directors shall not hold any business or financial interests and other 
relationships which could, or could reasonably be perceived to, materially interfere 
with his exercise of independent judgment in carrying out their responsibilities as 
directors.

Section 28. Restriction After End of Tenure. At least one (1) year from the 
end of their tenure, the Regular and Independent Directors shall be barred from 
employment, whether in full-time or advisory capacity, in any private company and 
institution, the interests of which directly compete with or in conflict with the MIC.

Section 29. Bond of the Board of Directors. The PCEO, Regular and 
Independent Directors shall be bonded to the government for the faithful 
performance of all duties imposed upon them by law and for the faithful accounting 
of all funds and public properties coming into their custody or control in accordance 
with the Public Bonding Law under the Revised Administrative Code, Executive 
Order No. 449, s. 1997, and related laws and issuances. Prior to the discharge of 
duties, said members shall be required to secure a fidelity bond of Ten million 
pesos (଑10,000,000.00).

Section 30. Submission of Nominations for Vacant Regular and 
Independent Director and PCEO Positions. In the interest and exigency of 
service, the Advisory Board shall submit to the Office of the President the list of 
nominees to vacant Regular and Independent Director, and PCEO positions not 
later than thirty (30) days from such vacancy: Provided, That, the President may 
either accept or reject the recommendation of the Advisory Body: and, Provided, 
finally, That, the President may require the Advisory Body to submit additional 
names of nominees.

Section 31. Screening and Shortlisting of Candidates by the Advisory 
Body. In line with the Fit and Proper Rule of the GCG, the Advisory Body shall 
formulate its rules and criteria in the selection and nomination of prospective 
appointees pursuant to Secs. 21, 25, 32 and 37 of these Rules. On the basis of 
such criteria, the Advisory Body shall select suitable and qualified candidates for 
vacancies in the PCEO, and Regular and Independent Director seats from the 
public and private sectors. Provided, That, the Ad Hoc Technical Unit created 
documents against the checklist of qualifications provided by the Advisory Body to 
ascertain if they are all qualified, using a non-discretionary "pass/fail" criterion 
within Fifteen (15) days from receipt of the list of potential candidates from the 
Advisory Body. Provided, further, That, only those nominations and applications 
that meet all the qualifications and do not have any of the disqualifications will be 
transmitted to the Advisory Body for further evaluation and shortlisting. The 
Advisory Body shall then submit to the Office of the President the list of nominees 
for PCEO, Regular and Independent Directors not later than thirty (30) days from 
receipt of the qualified candidates from the Ad Hoc Technical Unit.

Section 32. Powers and Functions of the Board of Directors. The 
primary function of the Board of Directors is to govern and manage the MIC, its 
assets, and investments in accordance with R.A. No. 11954. The specific functions 
of the Board shall include the following:

(a) To direct the management and operations, and administration of the MIC;

(b) To approve and implement the Investment and Risk Management 
Guidelines and such other investment policies, guidelines, and parameters to 
effectively carry out the purposes of R.A. No. 11954;

(c) To set minimum criteria and targets for investments;

(d) To oversee the investment processes which may include asset allocation, portfolio construction, monitoring, and risk management;

(e) To approve the issuance of debt and debt-like instruments;

(f) To develop short, medium, and long-term strategies appropriate for 
investments;

(g) To meet and consult with the Advisory Body quarterly, or as may be 
necessary;

(h)To engage as may be necessary an International Advisory Consultant 
whose main responsibility is to advise the Board on its development strategy 
and investment business, equip executives and management with insights on

geopolitical and macroeconomic issues, international financial market 
conditions, and global investment trends;

(i) To engage external fund managers and investment advisors, as may be 
necessary, to manage the MIF;

(j) To declare dividends in accordance with law and subject to the provisions 
of Republic Act No. 7656;

(k) To determine in accordance with Republic Act No. 10149, or the "GOCC 
Governance Act of 2011," the organizational structure, staffing pattern, number 
of personnel of the MIC, and define their duties and responsibilities as well as 
their compensation and other emoluments: Provided, That, the Board shall 
determine the positions that are highly technical, including their compensation 
and other emoluments, and bonuses: Provided, further, That, in all cases, such 
compensation and emoluments shall be comparable with the prevailing rates 
in the private sector. The organizational structure, staffing pattern and 
compensation structure of the MIC shall be subject to the approval of the 
President of the Philippines;

(l) To exclusively prescribe a system for performance standards and evaluation 
for officials and employees of MIC;

(m) To set the criteria and procedures for termination of employment of officials 
and employees for:

(1) Gross violation of the provisions of R.A. No. 11954 or investment policies 
and guidelines set by the Board of Directors;

(2) Commission of acts inimical to the MIF or the Republic of the Philippines, 
such as any loss suffered by the Fund caused by negligence, willful 
misconduct, fraud, or actions in breach of any Investment Agreement; 
and/or

(3) Failure to meet performance standards set by the Board of Directors.

(n) To appoint key and critical officials and employees as may be necessary to 
assist the Board of Directors in carrying out its functions;

(o) To submit semestral reports on investment performance to the Advisory 
Body and to the President of the Philippines;

(p) To review and certify the MIC/MIF financial statements;

(q) To act as Trustee of the MIF and such other assets as may be assigned to 
it and direct how its assets are managed;

(r) To constitute an Audit Committee from among its members. The Audit 
Committee shall recommend to the Board the engagement of an external auditor 
and oversee the internal and external audits mandated under R.A. No. 11954;

(s) To perform other functions, duties and responsibilities necessary, related and 
incidental to the performance of the above-mentioned powers and functions;

(t) To create, set up, and launch one or more sub-funds within the Fund, each 
of which shall have its specific investment objectives and strategies to be 
determined by the Board of Directors in line with the investment objectives and 
policies of the Fund; and

(u) To create, by resolution, other committees that the Board may deem 
necessary in the management of the Corporation's affairs, or as may be required 
by law or by rules and regulations.

The committees of the Board shall have such powers and functions, and shall 
be composed of members, as shall be provided in a publicly available 
Committee Charter. The Board committees shall be composed of Board 
members or such other persons nominated by the Board. The committees may 
likewise perform such other powers and functions as may be delegated to them 
by the Board. All such committees shall keep a record of their proceedings and 
report the same to the Board whenever required. The Board shall have the 
power to appoint and remove the members of such Board committees.

Section 33. Quorum and Meetings of the Board. The Board of Directors 
shall meet at least once every two (2) weeks, or as often as may be necessary 
upon its constitution.

It may hold special meetings to consider urgent matters upon call of the 
Chairperson or upon initiative of at least two (2) members of the Board of Directors.

In order to constitute a quorum in Board meetings, a majority of the total 
membership of the Board shall be present. The approval by a majority of all 
members of the Board of Directors shall be required to constitute a decision of the 
Board of Directors.

The Board of Directors shall maintain and preserve a complete record of the 
proceedings and deliberations of the Board of Directors, including the minutes, 
transcripts, and records, either in original or digital form. The meetings of the Board 
of Directors may be conducted in person or remotely through teleconferencing, 
video conferencing and other modern technological means.

Section 34. Disqualifications of Directors. A person shall be disqualified 
from being a director, if within five (5) years prior to his appointment as such, the 
person was:

(a) convicted by final judgment of an offense punishable by imprisonment for 
a period exceeding six (6) years;

(b) found administratively liable for any offense involving fraudulent acts;

(c) convicted by final judgment or found liable by a foreign court or equivalent 
foreign regulatory authority for acts, violations, or misconduct similar to those 
enumerated in paragraphs (a) and (b) above; or

(d) has a pending administrative, civil or criminal case relating to fraud, 
plunder, corrupt practices, money laundering, tax evasion, or any similar 
crimes involving misuse of money or breach of trust.

The foregoing grounds are without prejudice to qualifications or other 
disqualifications, which the Board of Directors may impose in its promotion of good 
corporate governance.

Section 35. Prohibited Acts and Transactions. The following shall 
constitute prohibited acts and transactions of the members of the Board of 
Directors, as provided under Section 44, in relation to Sections 20 and 22, of R.A. 
No. 11954:

(a) Financial and material interest. The members of the Board of Directors 
shall not, directly or indirectly, have any financial and/or material interest in 
any transaction requiring the approval of their office. Upon knowledge of a 
potential or actual conflict of interest, the Director shall immediately inform 
the Board of such conflict for its appropriate action. The concerned Director 
shall inhibit himself/herself from the discussion and action on the relevant 
transaction;

(b) Outside employment and other activities related thereto.

(1) Regular and Independent Directors during their incumbency shall 
not own, control, manage or accept employment as officer, employee, 
consultant, counsel, broker, agent, trustee or nominee in any private 
enterprise that has a material transaction with, or whose interest 
directly competes or in conflict with the MIC, unless expressly allowed 
by law;

(2) Regular Directors shall not engage in the private practice of their 
profession unless authorized by the Constitution or law, provided, that

such practice will not conflict or tend to conflict with their official 
functions; and

(3) Regular Directors shall neither recommend any person to any 
position in a private enterprise which has a regular or pending official 
transaction with their office, unless such recommendation or referral 
is mandated by (1) law, or (2) international agreements, commitment, 
and obligation, or part of the functions of his office.

The foregoing prohibitions shall continue to apply for a period of one (1) year 
after resignation, retirement or separation from the MIC, except in the case of 
subparagraph (b) (2) above, but the professional concerned cannot practice his 
profession in connection with any matter before the office that Regular Director 
used to be with, in which case the one (1) year prohibition shall likewise apply.

Section 36. Removal of Members of the Board of Directors. In 
accordance with the requirements of due process, the President of the Philippines 
may motu proprio or upon the recommendation of the Board of Directors remove 
the PCEO, as well as the Regular and Independent Directors, for any of the 
following reasons:

(a) If the Director subsequently possesses the disqualifications under 
Section 20 of RA No. 11954;

(b) If the Director is physically or mentally incapacitated that the Director 
cannot properly discharge his duties and responsibilities and such incapacity 
has lasted for more than six (6) months; or

(c) If the Director is guilty of acts or operations which are of fraudulent or 
illegal character or which are manifestly opposed to the aims and interests 
of the MIC.

Section 37. Duties and Qualifications of the President and Chief 
Executive Officer. The PCEO shall direct and supervise the operations and 
internal administration of the MIC, and shall be charged with the risk management, 
financial performance, human resources, accounting and legal affairs of the MIC. 
The PCEO shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) Provide strategic leadership, vision, and management for the fund's 
overall operations, aiming to maximize return on investment and contribute 
to the long-term economic prosperity of the nation;

(b) Design and execute strategic initiatives that resonate with the fund's 
objectives and align with the country's broader financial and economic 
strategies;

(c) Prepare the agenda for the meetings of the Board of Directors and to 
submit for the consideration of the Board of Directors the policies and 
measures which are necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of 
R.A. No. 11954;

(d) Execute and administer the policies and measures approved by the 
Board of Directors;

(e) Develop the MIC's business prospects by studying economic trends and 
revenue opportunities; projects acquisition and expansion prospects; and 
oversee financial performance and risk profiles while ensuring that all of 
regulatory obligations are met; and

(f) Exercise such other powers as may be vested by the Board of Directors. 
The PCEO, in the discharge of its functions, may delegate administrative 
responsibilities to other officers of the MIC.

The PCEO shall work closely with the executive management and the Board 
and must have: (a) exceptional experience and expertise in corporate 
management, financial planning strategy, strategic planning and vision, market and 
business development, budget development; (b) minimum of ten (10) years 
management 
experience, 
including 
extensive 
commercial 
lending/credit 
administration experience; (c) in-depth understanding of the industry, including risk 
management, compliance, and regulatory requirements; and (d) strategic 
knowledge of cash flow and capital planning management.

The PCEO shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, as 
recommended by the Advisory Body, for a term of three (3) years.

Section 38. Duties and Qualifications of the Chief Investment and 
Operating Officer (CIOO). The CIOO is responsible for regular administration 
duties of all investment files, communicating investment strategy and policies, 
managing and developing a team of financial analysts and investment 
professionals, supervising risk management across portfolios and ensuring sound 
investment policies are followed.

The CIOO shall be appointed by the Board of Directors and shall be 
coterminous with the PCEO.

The CIOO must have a degree in Finance, or a related field and has proven 
expertise in managing a team of financial analysts and investment professionals.

Section 39. Risk Management Committee. The Board shall organize a 
Risk Management Committee composed of five (5) members as follows:

(a) One (1) Independent Director as Chairperson;

(b) One (1) ex-officio member of the Board;

(c) One (1) Regular Director; and

(d) Two (2) senior executives of the MIC, one of whom is the Chief Risk 
Management Officer or officer equivalent in rank.

The Risk Management Committee shall ensure that the MIC is taking the 
appropriate measures to achieve a prudent balance between risk and reward in 
both ongoing and new business activities, taking careful consideration of risk 
identification, measurement and assessment, mitigation, reporting and monitoring. 
The specific functions of the Risk Management Committee shall be determined by 
the Board.

Section 40. Audit Committee. The Board shall organize an Audit 
Committee and prescribe its functions and membership.

Section 41. Advisory Body. An Advisory Body is hereby created which 
shall be composed of the Secretary of the DBM, the Secretary of NEDA, and the 
Treasurer of the Philippines.

(a) Secretariat. The Advisory Body shall be supported by a Secretariat which 
shall provide administrative and technical support.

The Secretariat shall be formed from the existing employees and staff of the 
BTr. Provided, That, whenever the need arises, the Advisory Body may 
create an Ad Hoc Technical Unit which shall come from existing employees 
and staff of the BTr, DBM, NEDA, and other agencies.

(b) Meetings. During the first year of implementation of R.A. No. 11954, the 
Advisory Body shall meet monthly, thereafter, meetings of the Advisory Body 
shall be conducted as may be necessary.

Section 42. Powers and Functions of the Advisory Body. The Advisory 
Body shall exercise the following powers and functions:

(a) Advise and assist the Board of Directors in the formulation of the general 
policies related to investment and risk management, and other matters as 
may be necessary to carry out the provisions and purposes of R.A. No.

(b) Advise and provide guidance on issues pertaining or related to the plans 
and projects of the MIC;

(c) Recommend Regular and Independent Director candidates who shall be 
appointed by the President of the Philippines pursuant to Section 20 of R.A. 
No. 11954; and

(d) Perform other functions, duties and responsibilities, necessary to 
effectively carry out its mandate.

Except as otherwise provided under this Act, the Advisory Body shall not 
take part in the management of the MIC.

RULE VII 
Exemptions and Privilege

Section 43. Applicability of the GOCC Governance Act of 2011. The MIC 
shall be subject to the provisions of Republic Act No. 10149 or the "GOCC 
Governance Act of 2011," except in the following:

(a) Qualifications, selection, and appointment of the PCEO, Regular and 
Independent Directors of the Board;

(b) Determination of organizational structure, staffing pattern and 
compensation structure of the MIC, without prejudice to the power of the 
GCG to conduct a compensation study and to develop a Compensation and 
Position Classification System which shall apply to the officers and 
employees of the MIC, except those determined by the Board as highly 
technical; and

(c) System of performance standards and evaluation for officials and 
employees of the MIC.

Section 44. Applicability of the Government Procurement Reform Act. 
All procurement activities of the MIC shall be subject to, and governed by, the 
provisions of Republic Act No. 9184, otherwise known as the "Government 
Procurement Reform Act" and its implementing rules and regulations, except the 
engagement of professional, or technical services necessary for the selection of 
investments under Section 8 hereof, such experts in fund management, investment 
analysis, advisory and underwriting, law, accounting, tax, human resources, asset 
valuation, securities brokerage and dealership, and capital market and equity 
research analysis: Provided, That, the selection process to be adopted by the MIC 
for the engagement of the foregoing professional and technical services shall be 
open and competitive, and approved by the Board.

RULE VIII 
Transitory Provisions

Section 45. Designation and Secondment. For the first five (5) years of its 
operations, the MIC Board, upon the recommendation of the PCEO, shall authorize 
GFI non-executive personnel to the MIC, as may be necessary, subject to existing 
guidelines on secondment of the Civil Service Commission.

The designation of the respective GFIs' personnel to the MIC involves the 
imposition of additional and/or higher duties to be performed by said personnel for 
the MIC which is temporary and can be terminated anytime at the pleasure of the 
appointing officer/authority. Designated personnel shall continue to receive their 
salaries, benefits, and emoluments from their respective offices or agencies: 
Provided, That, they shall be paid honoraria for the additional and/or higher duties 
to be performed for the MIC.

The secondment of the GFIs' personnel to the MIC involves the movement 
of said personnel from their mother agencies and offices to the MIC, which is 
temporary in nature, which may or may not require the issuance of an appointment, 
and which may or may not involve increase in compensation and benefits. 
Seconded personnel shall receive, in lieu of their respective compensation from 
their respective agencies or offices, the salaries, emoluments and all other benefits 
which their positions are entitled to receive from the MIC.

Section 46. Applicability of R.A. No. 7656. The MIC shall be subject to the 
provisions of Republic Act No. 7656 or "An Act Requiring Government-Owned or -
Controlled Corporations to Declare Dividends under Certain Conditions to the 
National Government, and for Other Purposes."

RULE IX 
Financial Reporting Framework and Audit of Records

Section 47. Financial Reporting Framework. The financial statements and 
reports shall be prepared in accordance with the relevant Financial Reporting 
Standards and Principles.

Section 48. Engagement of an Internal Auditor. The Board shall appoint 
an internal auditor, who shall provide audit reports to the Board of Directors. The 
internal auditor shall be independent from the management of the MIC and shall 
be under the direct control and supervision of the Board of Directors. The PCEO 
shall ensure that the internal auditor, including the staff, shall have access to all 
documents and information pertinent to the audit.

The Board shall determine the qualifications, as well as the duties and 
responsibilities of the internal auditor.

Section 49. Engagement of an External Auditor. The Board shall engage, 
for each accounting period or as soon as practicable after the commencement of 
the relevant accounting period, an internationally recognized auditing firm to be the 
external auditor of the Fund and to audit its financial statements.

The external auditor shall conduct an annual audit, for a maximum 
engagement period of three (3) consecutive years under such terms as may be 
determined by the Board of Directors.

Section 50. Audit by the Commission on Audit. The books and accounts 
of the MIC shall be subject to the examination and audit of the COA pursuant to 
Article IX of the 1987 Philippine Constitution. All financial transactions shall be 
governed by the applicable government laws, rules and regulations. The COA shall 
prescribe the guidelines of the audit of the MIC and the Fund under its 
management in accordance with international best practices. In defining the scope 
of its audit, the COA shall coordinate with the external auditor as provided under 
Section 35 of R.A. No. 11954. The COA shall conduct a special audit every five (5) 
years.

Section 51. Disposal of Investment Assets. Notwithstanding any law, 
rules, regulations, or other issuances to the contrary, the disposal by MIC, pursuant 
to its mandate and functions, of shares, securities, and other interests and 
investments, shall not be covered by existing laws and regulations on disposal of 
government assets.

RULE X 
Reports and Records

Section 52. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee.  There shall be 
created a Maharlika Investment Fund Joint Congressional Oversight Committee 
(MIF-JCOC) to oversee, monitor, and evaluate the implementation of R.A. No. 
11954. The MIF-JCOC shall be composed of seven (7) members each from the 
House of Representatives and the Senate. The MIF-JCOC shall be co-chaired by 
the Chairpersons of the House Committee on Banks and Financial Intermediaries 
and the Senate Committee on Banks, Financial Institutions and Currencies.

The Speaker and Senate President shall designate the other six (6) 
members of the MIF-JCOC of the House and the Senate from among the members 
on the House Committee on Banks and Financial Intermediaries and the Senate 
Committee on Banks, Financial Institutions and Currencies, at least one member 
of which shall be from the Minority.

The MIC shall make a quarterly confidential submission of all investments, 
whether planned or under negotiation by the MIC and on the portfolio of the MIF, 
to the MIF-JCOC.

All audit reports of the internal and external auditors for each accounting 
period shall likewise be submitted to the MIF-JCOC.

Section 53. Right to Freedom of Information of the Public. All documents 
of the MIF and the MIC, shall be open, available, and accessible to the public, as 
may be allowed by law, in both English and Filipino, including but not limited to:

(a) All investments thereof, by the MIC and on the portfolio of the MIF;

(b) The Statement of Assets, Liabilities, and Net Worth (SALNs) of the 
members and officials of the Board of Directors, Risk Management 
Committee, and Advisory Body;

(c)The SALNs of those who appointed and designated the said members 
and officials;

(d) Audit documents from the Commission on Audit (COA); and

(e) Similar documents and information.

Section 54. Provision for Access Rights and Retention Period of 
Records. The records on the MIC pertaining to its investment activities shall be 
secured and maintained pursuant to the rules of the National Archives of the 
Philippines. The relevant disclosure rules under Republic Act No. 8799 or the 
"Securities Regulation Code," Republic Act No. 11232, or the "Revised Corporation 
Code of the Philippines," and other laws, rules and regulations shall apply to the 
MIC. The MIC shall be covered by Executive Order No. 2, s. 2016. All reports of 
the MIC pursuant to the disclosure rules under existing laws shall be published on 
its website that shall be immediately updated and made easily accessible to the 
public.

Section 55. Management of Information Assets.  An information security 
culture shall be established to protect and maintain the confidentiality, integrity, 
and availability of information, from its creation, access, processing, transmission, 
retention, and disposal, in accordance with R.A. No. 10173 or the "Data Privacy 
Act" and other relevant laws, rules, and regulations.

Section 56. Reports of Government Financial Institutions to 
Stakeholders. GFIs with investments in the MIC shall include the performance of 
their investments, a risk assessment of their exposure and strategies to manage 
such risks, and other relevant information in their annual reports.

GFIs with investments in the MIC shall provide the reports under this Section 
in the manner prescribed by the appropriate regulatory body.

Section 57. Compliance with Santiago Principles. The audits required 
under this article shall include an assessment of the implementation of the 
Santiago Principles and recommendations to improve compliance with such 
principles.

The MIC shall maintain and improve, on an ongoing basis, compliance with 
the Santiago Principles. It must always keep up-to-date on the evolving 
requirements of the generally accepted principles and practices to be able to 
develop, review, and strengthen the organization, policies, and investment 
practices.

The internal auditor shall conduct the assessment provided under this 
Section every two (2) years, to be submitted to the Board.

Section 58. Dispute Settlement. The provision of existing laws to the 
contrary notwithstanding, any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating 
to investments entered pursuant to R.A. No. 11954 or the breach, termination or 
invalidity thereof shall be resolved by good faith negotiations between the parties.

In the event that such negotiations do not succeed, any dispute, controversy 
or claim arising out of or relating to investments entered pursuant to R.A. No. 11954 
or the breach, termination or invalidity thereof shall be settled in accordance with 
internationally accepted institutional systems of arbitration of which the Philippines 
is a signatory.

The MIF-JCOC created under Section 38 R.A. No. 11954 shall regularly be 
apprised of the status of any dispute settlement proceeding.

RULE XI 
Offenses and Penalties

Section 59. Violation of Disqualification Provision; Penalties. A director 
or officer who willfully holds office while possessing any of the disqualifications or 
willfully conceals a ground for disqualification as provided for in Section 20 and 
Section 22 of R.A. No. 11954 shall be punished with a fine ranging from Five million 
pesos (଑5,000,000.00) to Seven million pesos (଑7,000,000.00) at the discretion of 
the court, and perpetual disqualification from holding public office. When the 
violation of this provision is injurious or detrimental to the public, the penalty shall 
be a fine ranging from Ten million pesos (଑10,000,000.00) to Fifteen million pesos

Section 60. Violation by an Independent Auditor; Penalties. An 
independent auditor who, knowingly certifies the corporation's financial statements 
despite its gross incompleteness or inaccuracy, its failure to give a fair and 
accurate presentation of the corporation's condition, or despite containing false or 
misleading statements, shall be punished with a fine ranging from Five million

pesos (଑5,000,000.00) to Seven million pesos (଑7,000,000.00), imprisonment of 
six (6) years, and perpetual disqualification from holding public office. When the 
statement or report certified is fraudulent, or had the effect of causing injury to the 
general public, the auditor or responsible officer may be punished with a fine 
ranging from Ten million pesos (଑10,000,000.00) to Fifteen million pesos 
(଑15,000,000.00), imprisonment of six (6) years, and perpetual disqualification 
from holding public office.

Section 61. Acting as Intermediaries for Graft and Corrupt Practices; 
Penalties. Any person, natural or juridical, who allows itself to be used for fraud, 
or for committing or concealing graft and corrupt practices ² by the directors, 
officers, or other employees of the MIC ² as defined under pertinent laws, rules 
and regulations, shall be liable for a fine ranging from One million pesos 
(଑1,000,000.00) to Five million pesos (଑5,000,000.00), imprisonment of six (6) 
years, and perpetual disqualification from holding public office. When there is a 
finding that any of its directors, officers, employees, agents, or representatives are 
engaged in graft and corrupt practices, the Board of Directors' failure to install: (a) 
safeguards for the transparent and lawful delivery of services; and (b) policies, 
code of ethics, and procedures against graft and corruption shall be prima facie 
evidence of corporate liability under this Section.

Section 62. Tolerating Graft and Corrupt Practices; Penalties. A director 
or officer of the MIC who fails to sanction, report, or file the appropriate action with 
proper agencies, allows or tolerates graft and corrupt practices or fraudulent acts 
committed by a director, officer, employee, agent or representative shall be 
punished with a fine ranging from Five million pesos (଑5,000,000.00) to Ten million 
pesos (଑10,000,000.00), imprisonment of twenty (20) years, and perpetual 
disqualification from holding public office.

Section 63. Retaliation Against Whistleblowers. A whistleblower refers to 
any person who provides truthful information relating to the commission or possible 
commission of any offense or violation under R.A. No. 11954. Any person who, 
knowingly and with intent to retaliate, commits acts detrimental to a whistleblower 
such as interfering with the lawful employment or livelihood of the whistleblower, 
shall, at the discretion of the court, be punished with a fine ranging from One million 
pesos (଑1,000,000.00) to Two million pesos (଑2,000,000.00), and imprisonment 
of six (6) years.

Section 64. Separate Liability. Liability for any of the foregoing offenses 
shall be separate from and in addition to any other administrative, civil, or criminal 
liability under other laws, such as, but not limited to:

(a) Act No. 3815 or "The Revised Penal Code," as amended;

(b) Republic Act No. 3019 or the "Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act," as 
amended;

(c) Republic Act No. 6713 or the "Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for 
Public Officials and Employees";

(d) Republic Act No. 1379 or "An Act Declaring Forfeiture in Favor of the 
State any Property Found to have been Unlawfully Acquired by any Public 
Officer or Employee and Providing for the Proceedings Therefor";

(e) Republic Act No. 7080 or "An Act Defining and Penalizing the Crime of 
Plunder";

(f) Republic Act No. 9160 or the "Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2001," as 
amended;

(g) Executive Order 292 or the "Administrative Code of 1987";

(h) Republic Act No. 9184 or the "Government Procurement Reform Act";

(i) Republic Act No. 386 or "The Civil Code of the Philippines," as amended;

(j) Republic Act No. 11232 or the "Revised Corporation Code of the 
Philippines"; and

(k) Other relevant laws, rules, and regulations.

Section 65. Prescription of Crimes/Offenses. The crimes/offenses 
punishable under R.A. No. 11954 shall prescribe in ten (10) years. However, the 
right of the State to recover properties unlawfully acquired by the person involved, 
nominees, or transferees in embezzlement and misappropriation of the funds shall 
not be barred by prescription, laches, or estoppel.

RULE XII 
Miscellaneous Provisions

Section 66. Appropriations. A portion of the National Government capital 
contribution, either through subscription of common shares or of preferred shares, 
under Section 6 of R.A. No 11954 shall be sourced from the following:

(a) Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) Dividends. For the first and second 
fiscal years upon the effectivity of R.A. No. 11954, One hundred percent 
(100%) of the BSP's actual total declared dividends, as computed under 
Republic Act No. 7653, also known as the "New Central Bank Act," as 
amended by Republic Act No. 11211, shall be remitted to the National 
Government for the capitalization of the MIC, in the amount not exceeding 
the Fifty billion pesos (଑50,000,000,000.00) initial subscription of the 
National Government to the capitalization of the MIC under this Section: 
Provided, That, the Monetary Board may recommend to the President of the

Philippines the reduction of BSP's dividend contribution to the MIC whenever 
economic conditions may warrant; thereafter, the dividends of the BSP shall 
be remitted to the National Government to fund the increase in the 
capitalization of the BSP in accordance with Section 2 of Republic Act No. 
7653, as amended by Republic Act No. 11211;

(b) Government share in PAGCOR, and revenue from other 
government-owned gaming operators and/or regulators. Ten percent 
(10%) of the National Government's share from the income of the PAGCOR, 
as provided for in Presidential Decree No. 1869, as amended; Provided, 
That, the share earmarked for the Universal Health Care Act under Sec. 37 
(b) of Republic Act No. 11223 shall not in any manner be diminished; 
Provided, further, That, the above funding from PAGCOR will be for a period 
of five (5) years. Accordingly, other government-owned gaming operators 
and/or regulators shall also contribute Ten percent (10%) of their revenues 
from gaming operations for a period of Five (5) years;

(c) DOF-PMO Proceeds from the privatization of government assets, 
the amount of which shall be determined by the Privatization Council, subject 
to budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules, and regulations subject 
to the conditions provided under Section 6 of R.A. No. 11954; and

(d) Other sources, such as royalties and/or special assessments, subject 
to budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules, and regulations.

The amount of contribution provided in Section 6 of R.A. No 11954, as 
certified by the BTr, as may be applicable, shall be remitted to the National 
Treasury as a special account in the General Fund and are hereby appropriated 
solely for the payment of the MIC's capitalization subscribed by the National 
Government which shall not exceed Fifty-one percent (51%) of the authorized 
capital stock. Thereafter, all funds collected under Section 6 of R.A. No 11954 shall 
be deposited to the National Treasury under the General Fund to support the 
national budget.

Section 67. Statutory Counsel. The Office of the Government Corporate 
Counsel (OGCC) shall be the statutory counsel of the MIC.

The MIC may maintain an in-house Legal Counsel and Legal Department 
of the OGCC as mandated by Executive Order No. 292, s. 1987 or the 
"Administrative Code of 1987." The OGCC, however, may delegate to the Legal 
Department the handling of cases and review of certain legal matters and contracts 
in line with the terms and conditions that the OGCC and the MIC may agree upon 
to ensure expediency and the protection of MIC's interests.