THE IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC ACT 11596
or “AN ACT PROHIBITING THE PRACTICE OF CHILD MARRIAGE AND IMPOSING
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF”

Section 1. Title. — These rules and regulations shall be known and cited as “The
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11596
otherwise known as “An Act Prohibiting the Practice of Child Marriage and
Imposing Penalties for Violations Thereof”.

Section 2. Declaration of State Policy. — Consistent with Section 13, Article I!
of the 1987 Philippine Constitution, the State recognizes the vital role of the youth
in nation-building and promotes and protects their physical, moral, spiritual,
intellectual, and social well-being. In pursuit of this policy, the State shall abolish
all traditional and cultural practices and structures that perpetuate discrimination,
abuse, and exploitation of children such as the practice of child marriage.

Further, the State recognizes the role of women in nation-building and shall
therefore protect and promote their empowerment. This entails the abolition of
unequal structures and practices that perpetuate discrimination and inequality.

The State affirms the human rights of children consistent with its obligations under
(1) International Conventions to which the Philippines is a State Party, including,
but not limited to the (a) Universal Declaration of Human Rights; (b) Convention
on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriages;
(c) UN Convention on the Rights of the Child; (d) Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW); and (e) Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography; and

(2) Domestic Laws such as (a) Republic Act No. 7610 (R.A. 7610), otherwise
known as the “Special Protection of Children Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and
Discrimination Act’, (b) R.A. 9710, otherwise known as “An Act Providing for the
Magna Carta of Women”, (c) R.A. 9262, otherwise known as the “Anti-Violence
Against Women and Their Children Act”, (d) R.A. 11930, otherwise known as “The
Anti-Child Sexual Abuse or Exploitation of Children (OSAEC) and Anti-Child
Sexual Abuse or Exploitation Materials (CSAEM) Act”, (e) R.A. 9208, otherwise
known as “Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act of 2003, as amended by R.A. 10364,
Expanded Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act of 2012, and as further amended by R.A.
11862, Expanded Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act of 2022, and (f) R.A. 11648,
otherwise known as “An Act Providing for Stronger Protection Against Rape and
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, Increasing the Age for Determining the
Commission of Statutory Rape”, amending for the Purpose Act No. 3815 as
amended, otherwise known As “The Revised Penal Code,” R.A. 8353, also known
as “The Anti-Rape Law of 1997,” and R.A. 7610, as amended, otherwise known
as the “Special Protection of Children Against Abuse, Exploitation and
Discrimination Act”

The State affirms that a marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full
consent of capacitated parties, and that child betrothal and marriage shall have no
legal effect.

Pursuant to these policies, the State views child marriage as a practice constituting
child abuse because it debases, degrades, and demeans the intrinsic worth and
dignity of children.

Section 3. Purpose and Objectives. — These rules and regulations are hereby
promulgated to institutionalize the mechanism for the implementation of Republic

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

Act No. 11596 in order to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the objectives
thereof which includes the following:

(a) Ensure that child marriages, as well as cohabitations outside of wedlock
between children and/or between children and adults, their facilitations and/or
solemnizations be eradicated and the perpetrators be penalized:

(b) Create an enabling social environment which discourages the practice of child
marriage;

(c) Prevent further victimization of the child;

(d) Support and guarantee the implementation of government programs and
services that will empower and aid children and their families, and provide strategic
interventions to influence and empower the parents and community leaders to
discourage and eradicate the practice of child marriage;

(e) Support and encourage non-government and civil society organizations to
develop and implement complementary programs and services for the protection
of the rights of children and their families involved in child marriage;

(f) Adopt a “whole of society approach” in providing comprehensive, age- and
culturally-appropriate, disability-inclusive, and gender-responsive programs and
services for the victim-survivors of child marriage, including their offspring;

(g) Monitor the implementation of the Act by strengthening data collection and
analysis towards informed and evidence-based decisions and through the
assessment of the Act’s impact to the family of the child subjected to child
marriage;

(h) Guarantee the meaningful participation of children and youth, as well as non-
government organizations and civil society organizations, in every step of the
implementing agencies’ decision-making process;

(i) Ensure and strengthen the bridging roles of all duty bearers particularly on the
vulnerable sectors;

(j) Prevention of the criminalization of children involved in prohibited child
marriages, whether the child bride or the bridegroom, by treating them as victim-
survivors and not as offenders; and

(k) Strengthen the monitoring roles of all relevant government agencies in cases
of child marriage and other related unlawful practices that violate the rights of
children.

Section 4. Definition of Terms. — For purposes of this Implementing Rules and
Regulations, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

(a) “Act” refers to the R.A. No. 11596;

(b) “Advocacy Activities” refers to a broad range of activities, including but not
limited to research, public education and lobbying, public dissemination of
provisions of the Act, dialogues with key affected population (children and youth),
direct engagements with national government agencies and local government unit
implementers on the effective implementation of the law;

(c) “Child” refers to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or any person
eighteen (18) years of age or over but who is unable to fully take care and protect

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

oneself from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation or discrimination because of a
physical or mental disability or condition;

(d) “Child Marriage” refers to any marriage entered into where one or both parties
are children as defined in the paragraph above, and solemnized in civil or church
proceedings, or in any recognized traditional, cultural or customary manner. It shall
include an informal union or cohabitation outside of wedlock between an adult and
a child or between children for purposes of the Act;

e
(e) “Cohabitation of an adult with a child outside wedlock” is defined as the
act of living in or dwelling together in an informal union between an adult and a
child outside wedlock.

e.1. “Cohabitation” refers to the act of dwelling together, in the manner of
husband and wife, as couples, or as partners, regardless of sexual orientation or
gender identity or expression, for some period of time, as distinguished from
occasional, transient intervals for unlawful intercourse;

(f) “Facilitation of Child Marriage” refers to the act of causing, fixing, facilitating
or arranging the child marriage of contracting parties that leads to their marriage
and cohabitation.

(g) “Guardians” refers to relatives or individuals taking custody of a child in the
absence of the parents or anyone to whom a child is given or left for care or
custody, whether permanent or temporary including but not limited to foster
parents, or persons judicially appointed by a competent court as guardians:

g.1. “Foster Parents” refers to persons duly licensed by the Department
of Social Welfare and Development to provide foster care to a child
or children.

(h) “Indigenous Cultural Communities/Indigenous Peoples” (ICCs/IPs) refers
to a group of people or homogenous societies identified by self-ascription and
ascription by others, who have continuously lived as an organized community on
communally bounded and defined territory, and who have, under claims of
ownership since time immemorial, occupied, possessed and utilized such
territories, sharing common bonds of language, customs, traditions and other
distinctive cultural traits, or who have, through resistance to political, social and
cultural inroads of colonization, non-indigenous religions and cultures, became
historically differentiated from the majority of Filipinos. ICCs/IPs shall likewise
include peoples who are regarded as indigenous on account of their descent from
the populations which inhabited the country, at the time of conquest or
colonization, or at the time of inroads of non-indigenous religions and cultures, or
the establishment of present state boundaries, who retain some or all of their own
social, economic, cultural and political institutions, but who may have been
displaced from their traditional domains or who may have resettled outside their
ancestral domains;

(i) “Muslim Filipinos” refers to the Filipino population in the Philippines who follow
the religion of Islam which is an Arabic word that closely translates as “submission
to the will of Allah (God)’. Similar to the Muslim nations in the neighboring
Southeast Asian countries, the national identity of the Muslim Filipinos was shaped
by their faith and further transformed in the course of their fearless yet heroic
struggle against western colonialism in the Philippines. They possessed the oldest
political history referred to as the “sultanate institution” and pride themselves with
their perpetual and bountiful cultural, artistic, and traditional heritage that played a
major historical development in Philippine history. They are composed of various
Muslim ethnic groups, namely: Maranao, Maguindanao, Iranun, Tausug, Yakan,
Sama, Sangil, Kaagan, Kolibugan, Badjao, Jama Mapun, Panimusan (in Palawan

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

Islands), and the Molbog. The Muslim Filipinos also include a good number of
Muslim reverts otherwise known as “Balik-Islam” all over the country.

(j) “Parents” refers to biological and adoptive parents;

j.1. “Biological Parents” refers to the child's mother and father by nature,
or the mother alone if the child is an unacknowledged non-marital child;

j.2. “Adoptive Parents” refers to the child’s mother andefather by legal
adoption;

(k) “Perpetrator” is an adult who commits any of the acts prohibited and
considered as unlawful under Section 4 of the Act;

(I) “Social and Behavioral Change Communications (SBCC)” encompasses
any set of strategies and interventions, including but not limited to, information
dissemination, motivation, problem solving and planning, that influence drivers of
change and supports local action to empower individuals and communities, and
lower structural barriers that hinder people from adopting positive practices and
behavior, and societies from becoming more equitable, inclusive, cohesive, and
peaceful.

(m) “Solemnization of Child Marriage” refers to the act of performing or
officiating a ceremony, in accordance with the prescribed forms or religious rites,
which leads to child marriage and/or cohabitation of contracting parties, within the
purview of the Act.

{n) “Solemnizing Officer” refers to any person authorized to officiate a marriage
under- Executive Order No. 209, otherwise known as The Family Code of the
Philippines; Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government
Code of 1991; Presidential Decree No. 1083 (Under Article 18); and all other
customary laws or practices.

Section 5. Unlawful Acts. — The following are declared unlawful and prohibited
acts:

(a) Facilitation of Child Marriage — any person who causes, fixes, facilitates or
arranges a child marriage shall suffer the penalty of prision mayor in its medium
period and a fine of not less than Forty Thousand Pesos (P40,000.00):
Provided, however, that should the perpetrator be an ascendant, parent, adoptive
parent, step parent or guardian of the child, the penalty shall be prision mayor in
its maximum period, a fine of not less than Fifty Thousand Pesos
(P50,000.00) and perpetual loss of parental authority: Provided further, that any
person who produces, prints, issues and/distributes fraudulent or tampered
document such as birth certificates, affidavits of delayed registration of birth and/or
foundling certificates for the purpose of misrepresenting the age of a child to
facilitate child marriage or evade liability under this Act shall be liable under this
section without prejudice to liability under other laws: Provided, finally, that if the
perpetrator is a public officer, he or she shall be dismissed from the service and
may be perpetually disqualified from holding office as may be finally adjudged by
a court.

(b) Solemnization of Child Marriage — any person who performs or officiates a
child marriage shall suffer the penalty of prision mayor in its maximum period
and a fine of not less than Fifty Thousand Pesos (P50,000.00) provided,
however that if the perpetrator is a public officer, he or she shall be dismissed from
the service and may be perpetually disqualified from holding office, at the
discretion of the courts; provided that, solemnizing officers should conduct due
diligence before they solemnize a marriage.

v

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

(c) Cohabitation of an adult with a child outside wedlock — An adult partner
who cohabits with a child outside wedlock shall suffer the penalty of prision mayor
in its maximum period and a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos
(P50,000.00): provided, however, that if the perpetrator is a public officer, he or
she shall likewise be dismissed from the service and may be perpetually
disqualified from holding office at the discretion of the courts: Provided finally, that
this shall be without prejudice to higher penalties that may be imposed in the
Revised Penal Code and other special laws.

Section 6. Public Crimes. — The foregoing unlawful and prohibited acts are
deemed public crimes and their prosecution may be initiated by any concerned
individual.

Section 7. Legal Effect of a Child Marriage. — Child marriage is void ab initio
and the action or defense for the declaration of absolute nullity of a child marriage
shall not prescribe in accordance with Articles 35 and 39 of the Family Code of the
Philippines. Articles 50 to 54 of the Family Code of the Philippines shall govern on
matters of support, property relations, and custody of children after the termination
of the child marriage.

Section 8. Enabling Social Environment. — To prevent and prohibit child
marriage, and to reinforce positive social norms that increase protective behavior
for children, the government, with concerned national government agencies
(NGAs), shall create an enabling social environment where the practice of child
marriage shall not thrive. For this purpose, the following policies shall be
implemented particularly for girls including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Empowerment of children through the provision and co-creation of information,
skills and support networks including the delivery of social and behavior change
communication strategies, as defined;

(b) Enhancement of children’s access to and completion of quality education;
(c) Provision of economic support and incentives to children and their families; and

(d) Application of strategic interventions to influence and empower parents and
community leaders and ensure a comprehensive, gender-responsive, age-
appropriate, disability-inclusive and holistic approach to discourage, prevent and
eradicate the practice of child marriage by advocating and implementing social and
behavior change communication campaigns that will help communities adapt to
the new law, and strong collaboration across different sectors including
engagement with families, communities, schools, traditional, religious and cultural
leaders.

In all actions concerning children, their best interest shall be of paramount
consideration and the ‘do no harm’ principle shall be applied at all times.

The Department of Social Welfare and Development as the lead implementing
agency shall formulate comprehensive as well as age-and-development-
appropriate, culturally-sensitive, disability-inclusive and gender-responsive
programs, in coordination with other duty bearers such as other NGAs, multi-
sectoral partners, and with CSOs and NGOs as identified in Sections 8 and 9 of
the Act.

Section 9. Institutional Arrangements. — The provisions of the Act shall be fully
and promptly implemented by the following government departments and agencies
within their respective jurisdictions. All duty bearers are mandated to report cases
of child marriage and issue memoranda relative to child marriage.

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

(a) Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) - shall take the
lead in the implementation of the Act; create programs that will address the
prevalence of child marriage; and provide appropriate services including, but not
limited to, legal services, health services, psychosocial services, counseling,
educational, livelihood and skills development, temporary shelter and all other
assistance necessary to protect victim-survivors of child marriage and their
offspring. It shall include awareness campaigns on the negative effects of child
marriage;

(b) Commission on Human Rights (CHR) - shall monitor the implementation of
the Act as Gender Ombud and through its Child Rights Center;

(c) Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC) - shall work closely with the
DSWD in formulating, strengthening, and implementing various policies,
programs, and activities to prohibit and end child marriage pursuant to the
Philippine Plan of Action to End Violence Against Children (PPAEVAC), and to
ensure the implementation of this Act;

(d) Department of Education (DepEd) - shall include culturally-sensitive and age-
and-development-appropriate modules and discussions on the impact and effects
of the child marriage in its comprehensive sexuality education curriculum;

(e) Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) - shall institute a
systematic information and prevention campaign against child marriage through
barangay-level education programs and initiatives that are culturally-sensitive and
child-centered. The DILG shall also mandate local government units (LGUs) to
provide basic interventions for the rescue, recovery, rehabilitation and support of
victim-survivors of child marriage and their offspring; and establish a system of
reporting cases of child marriage;

(f) Department of Health (DOH) - shall conduct health promotion and advocacy
activities using school and community platforms to raise the awareness of the
general public particularly the parents and children on the effects of child marriage
on health and welfare of children, families and communities and the quality of
future generation in general.

(g) Department of Justice (DOJ) - shall ensure that the penal provisions of this
Act are carried out and provide access to justice and legal services to victim-
survivors through the Public Attorney's Office (PAO) or the Integrated Bar of the
Philippines (IBP), as well as with non-government organizations and volunteer
legal groups.

(h) National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) - shall include in its
program of action awareness-raising campaigns within ICCs/IPs on the impact and
effects of child marriage in the overall health and development of children, monitor
and report cases of child marriages in communities under its jurisdiction, and
ensure the faithful implementation of this act and its interpretation in the best
interests of the child.

(i) National Commission on Muslim Filipinos (NCMF) - shall include in its
program of action awareness-raising campaigns within Muslim communities on the
impact and effects of child marriage in the overall health and development of
children, monitor and report cases of child marriages in communities under its
jurisdiction, ensure the faithful implementation of this Act and its interpretation in
the best interests of the child;

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

(j) Philippine Commission on Women (PCW) - shall integrate dissemination of
the provisions of this Act in programs on public awareness and behavior-change
communications and;

(k) Supreme Court of the Philippines - shall develop and regularly provide
comprehensive, holistic, and multi-disciplinary training and workshop programs to
the members of the Judiciary designed to improve their competencies in
adjudicating and managing cases of child marriage. In preparing the training
frameworks, the Supreme Court, through the Philippine Judicial Academy, shall
ensure that they shall have (a) a thorough understanding of the provisions of R.A.
No. 11596 and other related laws; (b) a heightened awareness and sensitivity in
the treatment of the victim-survivors, observing the “best interest of the child’ and
“do no harm” principles; and (c) an enhanced knowledge of the programs and
services available to the victim-survivors, their offspring, and their families and the
skill to refer them to the proper agencies which could provide such services.

The Committee on Family Courts and Juvenile Concerns (CFCJC) shall serve as
the national liaison among Family Court judges, the Supreme Court Social
Services Counseling Division (SSCD), international agencies, and non-
governmental agencies involving issues centered on the family, women, and
children, and for such purpose, organize national and regional summits, and/or
initiate any other fora for the discussion and exchange of information, best
practices, or any other concerns falling within the scope of Republic Act (R.A.) No.
8369, otherwise known as the Family Courts Act of 1997.

Section 10. Programs and Services of the National Government. — The
following are the programs and services that will be provided by the different
national government agencies in addressing the concern of child marriage:

The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), as the lead
agency in the implementation of the Act, shall provide different preventive,
rehabilitative, and developmental programs and services in order to prevent child
marriage, rehabilitate victim-survivors of child marriage, and strengthen capacities
of victim-survivors of child marriage, the community, and other stakeholders such
as: (a) development of an effective and efficient reporting and referral mechanism
for cases of child marriage; (b) utilization of an Electronic Case Management
System for reportorial and monitoring of cases of child marriage; (c) formulation
of a new Social Technology relative to child marriage and its inclusion in the Social
Technology Agenda; (d) provision of psychosocial, financial, capacity-building and
livelihood support services to victim-survivors of child marriage; (e) conduct of
awareness campaigns, capacity-building activities, and technical assistance for
vital stakeholders; (f) utilization of Social Media and provision of IEC Materials for
information dissemination; (g) conduct of consultation with PSA and other
agencies on the issue of child marriage; and (h) provision of other services
necessary and incidental to the above-mentioned as may be determined by the
DSWD.

The Department, as the lead agency, shall assist in the preparation of the
implementing guidelines and conduct periodic reporting in the implementation of
the Act in accordance with the institutional arrangements of the government
departments, agencies, and duty bearers and shall monitor their compliance
therewith.

The Department of Health (DOH) shall ensure access to mental, emotional, and
physical health services to victim-survivors of child marriage and appropriate
health services for their offspring, if any. To this end, the DOH, in coordination with
local health systems, and in collaboration with other NGAs and local development
partners, shall: (a) provide non-discriminatory, comprehensive, and appropriate
sexual and reproductive health care, information, services, and contraceptives for

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

victim-survivors of child marriage; (b) disseminate information to children, parents,
legal guardians, household members, community, and school personnel about
adolescent health and development and the mental health aspects of reproductive
health, including the available health services; (c) coordinate with the local
government units, partner organizations, and other concerned stakeholders to
enhance the competencies of non-specialists and primary care providers in the
community, particularly in providing Psychological First Aid and basic psychosocial
services to the victim-survivors of child marriage; (d) integrate and update existing
health training modules on topics relating to the risks and effects of child marriage,
gender-based violence, violence against women and children and sexual and
reproductive health rights; and (e) accelerate sexual health and reproductive rights
education and services especially in areas where there is demonstrable evidence
of increased and disproportionate risks of child marriage due to but not limited to:
(1) natural hazards and human-induced disasters, such as armed conflict; (2)
persistent poverty; and (3) high incidence of child marriage, gender-based
violence, and violence against women and children.

Towards this end, the DOH and the DSWD and other relevant agencies shall use
the National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR) and
other government measures of identifying marginalization to primarily consider the
priority needs of women, children, and other underprivileged sectors.

Women, children, and other underprivileged sectors and marginalized groups,
including Indigenous Peoples’ communities, shall be guaranteed access to free
sexual and reproductive health care, information, services, and contraceptives in
public primary care facilities.

The Commission on Human Rights (CHR) shall (a) conduct promotion and
advocacy activities including the production of IEC materials on the Act and the
adverse effects of child marriage on children; (b) ensure the participation of
children in the development of programs and activities in relation to the Act and
monitor government agencies’ compliance with the Act’s requirements on child
participation; (c) provide guidelines and mechanisms that will facilitate access to
legal remedies for children who may be involved in child marriages; (d) assist in
the filing of cases against individuals, agencies, institutions, or establishments that
violate the provisions of the Act; (e) monitor the implementation of the Act through
the results of the data gathering and reporting from children, community, CSOs
and government agencies; (f) issue policy advisories and recommendations on the
matter in accordance with the CHR‘s mandate as Gender Ombud and mandates
of the Child Rights Center; and (g) adopt operational guidelines on the monitoring
of the implementation of this Act.

The Council for the Welfare Children (CWC) shall work closely and support the
programs and policies of the DSWD including the crafting of the SBCC plan. In
addition thereat, the CWC shall incorporate in its list of programs, activities, or
projects ways to assist in the prevention or the eventual elimination of the practice
of engaging in child marriages such as creation of programs and/or activities during
the National Children’s Month and Girl-Child Week Celebration addressing issues
pertaining to the prevention of child marriages (e.g. Webinars, Audio visual
presentations through its Social Media); distribution and production of updated IEC
materials to partner National Government Agencies, Partner Civil Society
Organizations, Child Rights Network, Legislators, and the general public; together
with PCW, NCMF, NCIP, and DILG, the CWC shall provide capacity building
among high-risk local government units’ officials, child and youth leaders on the
preventions of child marriage; conduct children’s consultations consistently with
children from all sectors in order to apprise them of the implementation of this Act
and gather their inputs and/or recommendations to improve this measure; and
continuously assist in the monitoring of the implementation of this Act and propose
or recommend, and advocate for possible future amendments to the said Act.

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

The Department of Education (DepEd) shall (1) integrate into its curriculum
complete, accurate and relevant age- and development-appropriate information on
child marriage, respectful of culture and religious convictions, and all subjects on
key areas, such as: a) rights of the child, b) child health and nutrition, c) child and
adolescent development, d) gender and development, e) age-appropriate
sexuality education, f) child marriage and family, and g) recognition and elimination
of gender-based violence; (2) institute regular monitoring and reporting on the
integration of child marriage in the formal, non-formal, community-based education
and indigenous learning systems; and (3) conduct capacity building for both
teaching and non-teaching personnel on the issue of child marriage in reference
to DepEd’s Child Protection Policy.

The Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) shall issue
Memorandum Circulars/Advisories to City, Municipal, and Provincial Local
Government Units enjoining the implementation of the following actions through
their respective Social Welfare and Development Officers, in keeping with Section
17(a) and (e) and Section 25(a) of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the
Local Government Code, and the Principles of General Supervision and Local
Autonomy under the 1987 Constitution: (a) Devise information education
campaigns (IECs) to spread awareness against child marriage; (b) Create a
protection protocol for victim-survivors of child marriage and those who will report
cases of child marriage, based on the standard guidance and protocols of the
DSWD; (c) Facilitate the conduct of regular parenting/counseling sessions relative
to the matter of child marriages; (d) Coordinate with Barangay and Local Councils
for the Protection of Children, and Violence Against Women and Children Desks
in handling reports or cases of child marriage; (e) Take reference on the reporting
and referral mechanism that will be developed by the DSWD; and (f) Maintain a
database for cases of child marriage.

The Department of Justice (DOJ) shall ensure that the penal provisions of the
Act are carried out by prosecuting persons accused for violation of the Act; ensure
access to justice and legal services to victim-survivors with the Public Attorney’s
Office (PAO); establish a mechanism for free legal assistance for victim-survivors
of child marriage in coordination with the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (IBP),
other non-government organizations, and volunteer legal groups; conduct training
and continuing education program on investigation and prosecution of child
marriage; and review and recommend policies and measures to enhance the
protection of victim-survivors of child marriage.

The National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) shall ensure that
there will be extensive and continuous IECs through its Regional, Provincial, and
Community Service Centers. NCIP shall also ensure that the NCIP officials and
employees are capacitated so they may conduct IECs to their respective areas of
jurisdictions.

The NCIP shall conduct the following activities among others: (a) conduct of IECs
during: (1) Ancestral Domain Visitations, (2) Social Preparation during the
Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan (ADSDPP)
Formulation, (3) Capacity Building of Indigenous Peoples Mandatory
Representatives (IPMRs)/ IP Leaders/ Elders or Council of Elders (COELs), (4)
Paralegal Trainings, (5) Community Assemblies, IP youth Assemblies, IPMR
Assemblies, (6) Orientation of Educational Assistance Program (EAP) Grantees,
(7) Healing and Reconciliation Activities, and (8) Gender and Development
Activities; (b) dissemination of information through distribution of materials
translated in local dialect the ICCs/IPs can understand, posting on conspicuous
places within Ancestral Domains/Lands, and posting of materials/infographics in
ail NCIP Central, Regional, Provincial, and Community Service Center, Social
Media pages/accounts; (c) Orientation of solemnizing officers; (d) take reference

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

on the reporting and referral mechanism that will be developed by the DSWD; and
(e) convince IPMRs to pass a resolution expressing support of the law and/or pass
resolution.

The National Commission on Muslim Filipinos (NCMF) shall (1) conduct
awareness campaigns nationwide with focus on the following: (a) health hazards
of early pregnancy and other risks of child marriage; (b) criminal liability under the
Act; (c) legal effects of violation of the Act; (d) role of different agencies in relation
to the Act; (e) other activities/programs in furtherance of its mandate to raise
awareness on the Act; and (2) take reference on the reporting and referral
mechanism that will be developed by the DSWD.

In the discharge of its above-stated responsibilities, the NCMF shall coordinate
with the other co-implementing agencies when necessary.

The Philippine Commission on Women (PCW) shall (a) Ensure the inclusion of
the issue of child marriage in its advocacy campaigns for the elimination of violence
against women and children, such as during the observance of the National
Women’s Month Celebration, and the 18-Day Campaign to End VAW, among
others;; (b) Enjoin concerned government agencies to allocate funds using the
GAD budget for the conduct of gender and development (GAD) programs,
projects, and activities to implement the provisions of the Act and advocate for its
inclusion in the annual GAD plans and budgets of agencies as aligned with their
respective agency mandates; (c) Provide referral assistance to victim-survivors of
child marriage and undertake monitoring of the cases received through the Inter-
Agency Council on Violence Against Women and their Children (IACVAWC)
Secretariat;; and (d) Integrate child marriage concerns in relevant periodic
assessment reports prepared by the Commission.

The Supreme Court of the Philippines shall ensure that Family Courts will apply
A.M. No. 22-04-06-SC or the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the
Social Aspects of R.A No. 8369 to govern the relevant proceedings of cases that
fall within their exclusive original jurisdiction. As such, the Court Social Worker
Officers (CSWO) assigned to Family Courts, may upon order of the court: (a)
Coordinate with the first responders, such as but not limited to, law enforcement
agents, DSWD/Local Social Welfare and Development Office (LSWDO),
physicians, psychiatrists/psychologists, and barangay officials, to prepare the
victim-survivor's profile, utilizing the initial information already available to prevent
re-traumatization through repetitive questioning and ensure confidentiality in the
performance of the services above-mentioned; (b) Recommend the referral of the
victim-survivor to the proper agencies or authorities that can provide support
services and assistance, such as, but not limited, to the Philippine General
Hospital, the National Center for Mental Health, DSWD, LSWDO, and LGUs; (c)
Conduct case studies, interviews or home visitations and recommend to the Judge
the support services or assistance that the victim-survivor needs, such as but not
limited to, temporary shelter, medical surgical treatment, psychological and
psychiatric evaluation, treatment, counseling and/or therapy, legal assistance,
financial and educational assistance, protection and security provisions, skills
training, and livelihood development services or conduct of parental assessment
capability in cases involving minors; (d) Coordinate the delivery of resources,
needed assistance, and special services to the victim-survivor; (e) Provide
psychosocial counseling to the victim-survivor and his/her family and assist them
in coping with the emotional effects of the crime; and (f) Exercise other necessary
relevant functions, duties and responsibilities as may be directed by the Court
taking into consideration the best interests of the child and as may be provided by
law and/or other relevant rules.

Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

Whenever necessary, the Court may request the assignment of a social worker to
perform the above functions, duties and responsibilities of the CSWOs, including
but not limited to those under the DSWD or the local government units.

All implementing agencies shall issue the necessary policies and guidelines to
implement the Act.

Section 11. Participation of Women, Girls, Youth Organizations and Civil
Society Organizations. — Pursuant to the SBCC plan, implementing government
agencies shall ensure meaningful participation and continuing consultations with
women, girls, and youth organizations as well as CSOs whose full and active

participation shall be guaranteed in every step and stage of the decision-making
process.

Section 12. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry out the initial
implementation of the Act shall be sourced from the current appropriations of the
NGAs. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continuous
implementation of the Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations
Act under the respective budgets of the NGAs.

Section 13. Amendments. — Amendments to this IRR shall be jointly
promulgated by the relevant NGAs.

Section 14. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part of this IRR is
declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not
affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 15. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive orders, issuances,
rules and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of the Act
and this IRR are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 16. Effectivity. — This IRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

This IRR shall be registered with the Office of the National Administrative Register

at the University of the Philippines Law Center, University of the Philippines
Diliman, Quezon City.

APPROVED: December 7, 2022

Went up there

Atty. ANGELO M. TAPALES
Children

/_ ess -

Atty. BENJAMIN C. ABALOS, JR.
Secretary of the Interior and Local
Government

Executive Director, Council for the Welfare of

,

- Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 11596

Seen Brother

S Z. DUTERTE .
Vice President of the Republic of the Philippines ALL
Secretary of the Department of Education Co

Dr. MARIA ROSARIO SINGH-VERGEIRE DALISAY N. MACADAWAN
Officer-in-Charge] Department of Health Commissioner of National Commission
( on Muslim Filipinos

LAN Atty. KRISTI
CHAVEZ

eo Executive Director, Philippine

Commission on Wom

Atty. JESUS CRISPIN REMUL
Secretary of Justic: