MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 40

PROVIDING THE MISSION, FUNCTIONS AND ORGANIZATION OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ADVISER ON MILITARY AFFAIRS

In view of the redesignation of the Office of the Presidential Consultant on Military Affairs (OPCMA) as the Office of the Presidential Adviser on Military Affairs (OPAMA) pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 13, series of 1998, and to give substance on the dual role of the Military Adviser as in-house Assistant and Adviser of the President, the new office shall have the following mission, functions and organization:

A. Mission – The mission of OPAMA is to provide military staff assistance within the Office of the President in order to facilitate policy formulation and decision making on national security concerns and military affairs.

B. Functions – In order to attain its mission, OPAMA shall perform the following functions:

1. To provide the President timely and accurate information, recommendations and advice concerning defense matters;

2. To assist the Executive Secretary in National Security Council matters;

3. To act as a point of coordination for all military concerns other than those pertaining to the office of Senior Aide-de-Camp to the President and other military offices that may hereinafter be organized or created;

4. To monitor implementation of military plans, policies and regulations, and initiate revisions or formulation of new ones, if necessary, to improve the AFP’s administration and operational capability;

5. To handle and secure classified military matters; and,

6. To perform such other duties as the President/Executive Secretary may direct.

C. Organization – The organizational structure of OPAMA shall be as indicated in the attached organizational chart. The staff shall be selected by the Military Adviser from the senior officers of the major services of the Armed Forces of the Philippines on the basis of their professional qualifications and integrity. Other military and civilian personnel for the technical requirements of the office shall be assigned by appropriate orders of GHQ, AFP and/or the Executive Secretary.

The mission and functions assumed by OPAMA from OPCMA as set forth by Memorandum Order No. 9, series of 1986, are hereby rescinded.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B ZAMORA Executive Secretary

NOV 25 1998

Source: CDAsia