MALACAÑANG MANILA

Memorandum Order No. 1

PROVIDING FOR THE FLOW OF DOCUMENTS PROCESSED BY THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, documents received by the Office of the President generally require processing by concerned OP offices or staff units prior to final action by the President;

WHEREAS, there is need to clarify the flow of documents in the OP to avoid confusion and ensure prompt and effective action on these documents;

WHEREAS, Chapter 9 Title III of the Revised Administrative Code provides for the functions of the different offices in the OP proper, as follows: Private Offices, Executive Office, Presidential Advisers/Assistants System, and Common Staff Support System (composed of the Presidential Management Staff, General Government Administration Staff, and the Internal Administrative Staff);

WHEREAS, Sec. 31 Chapter 10 Title III of the Revised Administrative Code provides for the continuing authority of the President to reorganize his office;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Documents Received by the Office of the President. Documents sent to the President may be received by any of the following offices:

1. Office of the Executive Secretary

2. Office of the President Records Office

3. The Office of the President (TOP)

4. Presidential Management Staff

SEC 2. Processing of Documents. Documents which require action from the President may be processed by the Office of the Executive Secretary, Presidential Management Staff, or other units in the Office of the President.

SEC 3. Submission to the President. As a general rule, documents to be submitted to the President after staff action by concerned units in the Office of the President shall be coursed through the Executive Secretary.

1. The following documents processed by the Presidential Management Staff or any other unit in the Office of the President shall be submitted to the President through the Executive Secretary:

a) Request for funding from the President’s Contingent Fund, Calamity Fund, OP-DBM Reserves, Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR), and Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office (PCSO);

b) Request for Executive Issuances (Proclamations, Executive Orders, Administrative Orders, Memorandum Orders, Memorandum Circulars);

c) Approval of Contracts;

d) Submission of program/project proposals/concept papers;

e) Request for facilitation of action by departments/agencies;

f) Request for issue-resolution (e.g. inter-agency issues, land conflict);

g) Creation of Government-Owned-and-Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) and other GOCC matters;

h) Request for exemptions from government policies (e.g. from austerity measures, tax and duty-free importation, land conversion, among others);

i) Complaints from the public;

j) Request for executive position on legislative measures;

k) Request for information or official position on an issue from the Office of the President; and

l) Matters related to special programs under the Office of the Executive Secretary, such as the President’s Bridge Program and the ZOPAD Social Fund, among others.

2. The following documents initiated mainly by the Presidential Management Staff shall be submitted direct to the President:

a) Presidential visit papers, including invitations for the President to inaugurate projects, hold dialogues in the provinces, etc.;

b) Cabinet and Cabinet Cluster meeting papers involving the President;

c) Documents pertaining to all the official meetings of the President;

d) President’s Social Fund proposals;

e) Monitoring/development reports;

f) Presidential speeches; and

g) Other assignments as may be given by the President to the Presidential Management Staff.

SEC 4. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia