MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 47

STRENGTHENING THE OPERATIONALIZATION AND LOCALIZATION OF PHILIPPINE AGENDA 21 AND MONITORING ITS IMPLEMENTATION

WHEREAS , the Philippine Government formally adopted the principles of sustainable development embodied in the Rio Declaration adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992.

WHEREAS , the Philippine Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD) was created by virtue of Executive Order (EO) No. 15 s. 1992 to initiate the formulation of Philippine Agenda (PA) 21 and was further mandated to catalyze the formation and institutionalization of local councils for sustainable development through EO No. 370 s. 1996;

WHEREAS , the PA 21 was formulated after an extensive and intensive process of coordination, cooperation, counterparting and consensus-building among the various stakeholders of society to provide the overall direction and serve as enabling mechanism to achieve sustainable development;

WHEREAS , the localization and adaptation of PA 21 is deemed the appropriate mechanism to address area-specific concerns pertaining to sustainable development;

WHEREAS , cognizant of the role of the Local Government Units (LGUs) in the localization process, there is a need for them to formulate sustainable integrated area development plans for PA 21;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. Strengthening the Localization of PA 21. The LGUs are hereby directed to formulate and implement their respective sustainable integrated area development plans or Local Agenda 21 using existing structures and mechanisms. In this regard, the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), the Office of the Presidential Assistant on Poverty Eradication, the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), and other concerned government agencies are directed to assist the LGUs in the formulation of the said plans. LGUs are also directed to coordinate closely with Nongovernmental Organizations and People’s Organizations in the formulation of the Local Agenda 21.

Section 2. Overall Monitoring . The PCSD shall continue to oversee and monitor the overall operationalization of PA 21. Pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 399, s. 1996, the DILG shall monitor the localization of PA 21 and shall provide the coordinating and monitoring mechanisms for its implementation. As such, it shall mobilize coordinating bodies including the Regional Development Councils, the local councils for sustainable development, and other similar existing units organized and managed by other agencies and institutions.

Section 3. Funding . The DILG, in coordination with the Department of Finance, Department of Budget and Management, PCSD, and NEDA, shall assist, where appropriate, the LGUs in developing a local government budgeting framework that will ensure support to Local Agenda 21 plans and in identifying funding sources for the localization of PA 21.

Section 4. Reporting System . The LGUs shall submit semestral reports to the DILG on their activities and accomplishments relative to their Local Agenda 21. The DILG shall submit a consolidated report on the status of LGU formulation and implementation of Local Agenda 21 to the PCSD.

Section 5. Separability Clause . If any of the provisions of this Order shall be declared unconstitutional, the other provisions of this Order shall remain valid.

Section 6. Effectivity . This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 28 th day of January in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia