Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 115

ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT OFFICE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE “TULAY NI ERAP SA BARANGAY” PROJECT UNDER THE PRESIDENT’S BRIDGE PROGRAM

Pursuant to the President’s directive to fast-track the implementation of “Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay” Project and the mandate of the Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program (OCPBP), Chaired by the Executive Secretary as GOP signatory to the supply contract, the “Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay” Project Special Program Management Office is hereby established comprising of the following personnel:

In close coordination with and approval of the Oversight Committee on the PBP, the Executive Director with the Deputy Executive Director shall organize the implementing unit of the PBP-Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay Project. Mr. Tedorico T. Haresco and Atty. Edward P. Martinez are hereby designated as Senior Program Adviser and Legal Adviser of the project, respectively.

With the approval of the PBP-TWG Chairman, the SPMO – Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay Project shall execute the following functions:

(1) Undertake the substructure design, construction, and superstructure erection of 402 modular steel bridges, with twenty (20) bridges completed by March 30, 2001;

(2) Manage the various components of the project covering the financial and physical activities, including the acceptance of the supply of goods and services subject to the prior clearance of the Head of PBP-TWG;

(3) Maintain a separate book of accounts of the project funds, disbursements of which should comply with existing government accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

(4) Establish an SPMO – Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay Project Office outside DILG to house both project staff and M&J engineers. The Office shall be functionally under the OCPBP with its seconded personnel administratively under its mother agencies;

(5) Hire and designate project personnel necessary for the successful implementation of the project provided that remuneration are part of the project budget;

(6) Together with PBP-TWG, ensure that the selection of bridges will be done with utmost consideration for optimum benefits focusing on the disadvantaged communities and with the participation of the various Regional Development Councils and LGUs taking into consideration the convergence of efforts and activities among the agencies concerned both at the regional and national levels.

(7) Submission of regular progress reports to the President through the Chairman of the Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program, and other national agencies as may be required; and

(8) Undertake other functions as may be directed by the President or Chairman of the Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program.

The SPMO – Tulay ni Erap sa Barangay Project shall draw operating funds from the project, including the above named personnel entitled to allowances and other benefits allowable, under existing rules and regulations.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

25 September 2000

Source: CDAsia