MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 24

Creation of a Board Committee on Bids in NAPOCOR

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order as follows:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Board Committee on Bids in NAPOCOR

There is hereby created a Board Committee on Bids in NAPOCOR which shall oversee, review, and make final recommendations to the Board on all bidding awards for major contracts and transactions subject to Board approval under Section 10 of Republic Act No. 6395, as amended. Henceforth, the Board shall approve only such bidding awards as are subject of a final recommendation from the Board Committee on Bids.

SECTION 2. Composition. — The Committee shall be composed of a Chairman and two (2) members who shall be members of the Board.

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions. — The Committee shall have the following powers and functions:

1. Review and approve all tender offers and terms of bidding before issuance to the public;

2. Review and approve the Bidding Committee’s evaluation of all bids;

3. Make final recommendations to the Board on all awards;

4. In case no satisfactory bid is received, the Committee may proceed to rebid or, with the approval of the Board, make a final determination to do the work by administration;

5. Make final recommendation for approval of the Board on any work of an emergency nature to be undertaken by administration or contract;

6. Exercise such powers and functions as may be necessary or implied in the discharge of the above-enumerated powers and functions.

SECTION 4. Construction of Power Projects. — No construction for power projects, as defined in the first paragraph of Sec. 9 of R.A. 6395, shall be approved by the Board without the final recommendation of the Committee, which for this purpose shall act with the powers and functions of a consulting committee of the Board.

SECTION 5. Final Decision. — The Committee shall reach decisions by consensus. In case no consensus is reached, the Chairman of the Committee shall have the authority to make the final decision.

SECTION 6. Revision of Bidding Rules. — The Board shall revise the existing bidding rules and procedures in NAPOCOR to accommodate the provisions of this Memorandum Order.

SECTION 7. Consultants. – – The Committee may hire and appoint consultants to assist the Committee in discharging the powers and functions provided herein.

SECTION 8. Funding. – – The Committee shall operate on an annual budget to be submitted to the Board for approval.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia