Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 107

Constituting the Office of the President Chorale (OP CHORALE)

Pursuant to Special Order No. 522, dated August 20, 1999, as amended by Special Order No. 758-A dated December 10, 1999, creating the OP Cultural Affairs Committee (OPCAC) and mandating said committee to organize and plan a program of cultural activities in the Office of the President (OP Proper) for calendar year and every year thereafter, as an effective means towards enhancing cultural awareness and inculcating the sense of nationalism and patriotism, a Chorale is hereby created composed of selected personnel from the different primary units in OP Proper.

The Chorale shall be the Official Choir of the Office of the President (OP Proper) and, with the approval of the Chairperson of OPCAC, shall play vital roles and represent OP in various events and special occasions within the Office especially during official functions of the President, the First Family, and other OP officials in Malacañang or in any place requiring their participation, by providing musical entertainment. It shall likewise represent the Office of the President in other activities/events within or outside of OP where chorale presentation are involved, as may be requested by, or upon prior approval of the OPCAC.

In order to effectively carry out its goals and objectives, the Chorale shall hold at least two practice sessions every week (Tuesdays and Thursdays) with each session lasting for at least two (2) hours (12:00 nn to 2:00 pm), and extra rehearsals shall be determined ahead of time as the need arises. The Social Hall of the Mabini Building shall be the official venue for rehearsals, meetings and other related activities of the chorale.

The Office of the President shall provide necessary funds for the acquisition of costumes and other chorale paraphernalia, transportation and refreshments during rehearsals and special activities. Expenses to be incurred by the Chorale shall be chargeable against the Office of the President Trust Fund and/or the President’s Contingent Fund, intended for the purpose, subject to its availability, accounting and auditing requirements.

For engagements, with prior approval of the Chairperson of OPCAC, members of the chorale shall be entitled to travel expenses and allowances.

Heads of the Primary Units in OP are hereby enjoined to give their full support to the Chorale and to all its activities.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

June 20, 2000

Source: CDAsia