Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 93

DIRECTING THE CREATION OF SUB-COMMITTEES TO ASSIST THE GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE

Pursuant to Executive Order No. 165 entitled “Directing the Formulation of an Institutional Strengthening and Streamlining Program for the Executive Branch”, dated 19 October 1999, which constituted the Presidential Committee on Effective Governance (otherwise known as the Governance Committee), the following Sub-Committees are hereby organized to assist the Governance Committee in carrying out its functions:

Sub-Committee on Service Delivery

Sub-Committee on Organizational Structuring and Staffing

Sub-Committee on Financial Management

Sub-Committee on Personnel Management

Sub-Committee on Change Management

Sub-Committee on Information Technology

The Sub-Committees shall undertake the following functions:

1. Review existing government policies, structure, operations and programs; and identify counter-productive, unresponsive and irrelevant systems and practices in government operations;

2. Review and endorse the reforms pertaining to their respective areas which are contained in the Public Sector Institutional Strengthening and Streamlining Agenda prior to its wide dissemination;

3. Review and endorse the prioritization of specific strategies to pursue the institutional strengthening and streamlining reforms that concern their respective areas;

4. Provide inputs to the Governance Committee in the preparation of the Integrated Administrative Reform Plan; and

5. Perform other related functions as may be directed by the President or the Governance Committee.

The Sub-Committees shall convene immediately to review their respective areas of concern under the Public Sector Institutional Strengthening and Streamlining Agenda and submit their recommendations to the Governance Committee within thirty (30) days upon issuance of this Memorandum Order.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary and Chair, Governance Committee

Manila, 10 March 2000.

Source: CDAsia