Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 8

RECONSTITUTING THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT) COMMITTEE

The Information Technology (IT) Committee created under Memorandum Order No. 403 dated October 17, 1991, as amended by Memorandum Order No. 114, dated April 3, 1993, is hereby reconstituted as follows:

The IT Committee shall perform the following:

1. Undertake periodic inventory and assessment of condition of all computer and communications hardware and related peripheral equipment and software currently in use in the Executive Office and in the offices and operating units under the supervision of the Executive Secretary;

2. Study and determine the information technology and communications requirements of the Office of the Executive Secretary and of the office and operating units under its supervision;

3. Recommend measures to improve the information and communications flow to and from the Office of the Executive Secretary;

4. Recommend a viable plan for the upgrade of existing computer, IT and communication facilities and software including the requisition of new hardware and support peripheral equipment and software as may be necessary to promote and maintain efficiency in the decision making support services and operations;

5. Interface with and secure technical assistance and advice from appropriate government and private institutions in the exercise of its functions and responsibilities;

6. Implement efficient and flexible database and information management systems in support of policy formulation and decision-making needs of the Executive Secretary and other ranking officials;

7. To perform such other related functions and activities as may be assigned/directed by the Executive Secretary.

All recommendations of the IT Committee shall be submitted to the Executive Secretary, through the Office of the Assistant Executive Secretary Antonio E. Nery, for approval. The Office of AES Antonio E. Nery shall provide technical and secretariat support to the IT Committee.

All offices concerned are hereby enjoined to extend the necessary support and cooperation to the IT Committee.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

AUG 03 1998

Source: CDAsia