Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 90

Pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 69 dated 26 July 1999 establishing the Oversight Committee on President’s Bridge Program (PBP) and Memorandum Order No. 84 dated 4 January 2000 creating a Special Inspectorate Team (SIT) tasked at ensuring the efficient monitoring and program integrity of Tulay ni Erap-Salam (Peace) Bridge Project, the following are hereby designated as team leader of the SIT and members/representatives of PBP-OP to the SIT, as follows:

As the Office of the President is signatory to the supply contract, the PBP-OP representatives to SIT are directed to inspect and certify as to the quantity and quality of the bridging materials/equipment and services supplied under Tulay ni Erap-Salam (Peace) Bridge Project. The acceptance of goods and services shall be consistent with the supply contact and shall strictly observe procedures and documentation in the acceptance of goods and services, as follows:

(1) Billing statement is submitted by the UK supplier to PBP-OP as contracting party;

(2) Billing statement is forwarded by OP to Salam SPMO-DPWH-ARMM, for review and recommendation;

(3) Salam SPMO-DPWH-ARMM recommends/seeks clearance for PBP-OP to issue acceptance certificate;

(4) PBP-OP issues clearance; and

(5) Authorized accepting officer of Salam SPMO-DPWH-ARMM issues acceptance certificate to the UK supplier.

In the performance of the aforementioned tasks, the named Team Leader of SIT and PBP-OP members/representatives to SIT are hereby authorized to charge their travel expenses and allowances to the Tulay ni Erap-Salam (Peace) Bridge Project, including other benefits allowable under the existing rules and regulations. The PBP-OP representation to SIT shall be terminated sixty (60) days after the final acceptance of all goods and services supplied to the Salam (Peace) Bridge Project.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Manila, 08 February 2000.

Source: CDAsia