Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 72

ESTABLISHING THE SALAM ‘PEACE’ BRIDGES PROJECT SPECIAL PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OFFICE/DPWH-ARMM UNDER THE PRESIDENT’S BRIDGE PROGRAM

Pursuant to the President’s directive to fast track the implementation of the President’s Bridge Program and in line with Memorandum Order No 69, S. 1999 creating the Oversight Committee of the President’s Bridge Program, the Salam ‘Peace’ Bridge Project Special Program Management Office (SPMO)/DPWH-ARMM is hereby established comprised of the following personnel:

The SPMO on the President’s Bridge Program – Salam (Peace) Bridging Project shall undertake the overall implementation of the President’s Bridge Program – Salam ‘Peace’ Bridges Project component. Specifically, it shall:

a. undertake the sub-structure design and construction and super-structure erection of 163 modular steel bridges, with ten (10) bridges completed within December 1999;

b. manage the various components of the project covering the financial and physical activities, including the acceptance of the supply of goods and services subject to the prior clearance of the Head, TWG.

c. maintain a separate book of accounts of the project funds, disbursements of which should comply with existing government accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

d. hire and designate project personnel necessary for the successful implementation of the project provided that remuneration are part of the project budget;

e. submission of regular progress reports to the President through the Chairman of the Presidential Task Force on Bridges, and other national agencies as may be required; and,

f. undertake other functions as may be directed by the President or Chairman of the Bridge Program through the Technical Working Group.

The SPMO shall draw its operating funds from the Salam (Peace) Bridges Project with the above named personnel entitled to allowances and other benefits allowable under existing government rules and regulations. It shall cease to exist ninety (90) days upon the commissioning of the final SALAM bridge unless it is necessary that its services be continued.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RAMON B. CARDENAS Acting Executive Secretary

September 6, 1999

Source: CDAsia