MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 110

DIRECTING THE PHILIPPINE COUNCIL FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (PCSD) TO MAKE NECESSARY PREPARATIONS FOR AND EFFECTIVE PARTICIPATION IN THE TEN-YEAR REVIEW OF THE 1992 UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (UNCED) COMMITMENTS

Wheareas, the Philippine Government formally adopted the principles of sustainable development embodied in the Rio Declaration adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992;

Wheareas , on June 28, 1997, the General Assembly of the United Nations passed Resolution No. A/RES/S-19/2 scheduling the next comprehensive review of progress achieved in the implementation of Agenda 21 by the General Assembly in the year 2002;

Wheareas , on May 4, 2000, the Eighth session of the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (UNCSD) stressed the importance of early and effective preparations for the 2002 review and assessment of progress achieved in the implementation of Agenda 21 and further invited all government to undertake national review processes as early as possible;

Wheareas , the PCSD was created by virtue of Executive Order (EO) 15 s. 1992 to initiate the formulation of Philippine Agenda 21 (PA 21) and was further mandated to review and ensure the implementation of the commitments made by the Philippines in the light of the UNCED and PA21 through EO No. 370, s. 1996;

Wheareas , the LGUs were directed to formulate and implement sustainable integrated area development plans and Local Agenda 21 by virtue of Memorandum Order (MO) No. 47, s. 1999.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. Preparations for and Participation in the Earth Summit + 10. The PCSD is hereby directed to make all necessary preparations for the upcoming 10-year review of the Rio Declaration adopted by the UNCED and effectively participate in the Earth Summit +10. It shall:

a. review the progress of national implementation of the UNCED commitments made in 1992, specifically the implementation of the Action Agenda of PA 21;

b. review the status of national implementation of all relevant international agreements related to sustainable development;

c. in all aspects of the review, adopt a multi-stakeholder consultation process where government, business, labor and civil society shall participate. National government shall lead the review at the national and regional levels. Each sector is encouraged to conduct their respective sectoral reviews in preparation for the national and regional multi-stakeholder review. Local government units in coordination with the business, labor and civil society are encouraged to lead the conduct of the review at the community or grassroots level;

d. coordinate the drafting of a report documenting the results of the review process and a revised Action Agenda for the period 2002-2007 in time for the ten-year review of the UNCED Agreement in 2002;

e. participate, wherever possible, in preparatory meetings and events leading up to and including the Earth Summit + 10;

f. take the lead in the drafting of a country statement for the Earth Summit + 10;

g. call on any and all government agencies, resource persons and other groups, as necessary, in the preparations for and participation in the Earth Summit + 10 and perform such other acts which are necessary to carry out its mandated functions and responsibilities.

Section 2. Collaborating Agencies. All relevant government agencies, departments and instrumentalities are directed to participate in the review of the PA 21 Action Agenda and the formulation of a revised Action Agenda consistent with the principles, parameters and strategies of PA21. NEDA, as Chair of the PCSD, shall coordinate the over-all review process to ensure synergy and internal consistency. Moreover, as Chair of the Committee on Social and Economic Dimensions, it shall coordinate the review and revision of the action agenda across ecosystems. Furthermore, it shall call on the following agencies to lead in specific aspects of the review process:

a. the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, as Chair of the PCSD-Committee on the Conservation and Management on Natural Resources shall take the lead in the review and revision of the action agenda related to environment and natural resources;

b. the Department of the Interior and Local Government, as chair of the Committee on Strengthening the Role of Major Groups, to lead the review of the integration of sustainable development in governance;

c. the Department of Science and Technology, as chair of the Committee on the Means of Implementation, to lead the review of the institutional capacities in implementing PA21; and

d. the Philippine Information Agency, to lead in developing and implementing a Communication and Advocacy Campaign in support of the Earth Summit +10 process. It shall seek the assistance of such other sectors as civil society (including mass media and academe) business and labor in advocating public acceptance of and support for the Earth Summit +10 process, and disseminating relevant information to as wide and varied an audience as possible.

Section 3. Role of the Department of Foreign Affairs. The Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) shall coordinate with the PCSD on all matters connected with the Earth Summit + 10 process. It shall facilitate the conduct of multistakeholder consultative workshops to review the implementation of international commitments related to sustainable development. It shall also endeavor, where possible, to include civil society and business representatives endorsed by the PCSD in official delegations to the United Nations in connection with the Earth Summit + 10 process.

Section 4. Role of Civil Society, Business and Labor Sectors. The PCSD shall coordinate with civil society, business and the labor sectors in the review process. The Civil Society Counterpart Council for Sustainable Development is hereby enjoined to take the lead in coordinating the participation of civil society sectors in the review process of PA 21, preparation for and participation in the Earth Summit + 10. Efforts shall also be exerted to encourage business and labor organizations such as the Management Association of the Philippines and the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines to take the lead in coordinating the participation of their respective sectors.

Section 5. Funding. Subject to prescribed budgetary guidelines, all government agency-members of the PCSD are directed to include in their FY 2001 Budget Appropriation an allocation to cover the operational requirements in compliance with this Order. LGUs are also directed to provide funds to cover their participation in the review process. The PCSD shall identify other funding sources for the purpose of this Order. Civil society and the business sector are, likewise, enjoined to contribute funds for activities related thereto in their respective sectors.

Section 6. Separability Clause. If any of the provisions of this Order shall be declared unconstitutional, the other provisions of this order shall remain valid.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of August in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RAMON B. CARDENAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia