MALACAÑANG MANILA

Memorandum Order No. 134

Instituting the General Guidelines and Procedures and Related Arrangements for the Management of the President’s Social Fund and such Other Special Funds

Pursuant to Section 3 of the Executive Order dated 08 January 2001 placing the President’s Social Fund (PSF) directly under the President and the Memorandum Order dated 08 January 2001 to Presidential Executive Assistant Ramon Cardenas, delineating his functions, duties and responsibilities, among which is for PEA Cardenas to directly assist the President in his charitable, humanitarian and welfare activities, and in connection therewith assist the President in managing the PSF and other trust funds, following shall be the guidelines, procedures and related arrangements to be complied with by the Presidential Management Staff (PMS) and the Office of the PEA:

1. The PMS shall continue to provide all the resources (manpower, operating budgets, supplies and materials, facilities and equipment) required in the management of the PSF and such other special funds of the President presently lodged with the PMS.

The PMS, in coordination with PEA Cardenas, shall therefore continue to program in its budget under the General Appropriations Act, all resource requirements for said purpose.

2. The PSF and such other special funds of the President which are in the books of PMS shall remain lodged with PMS-Administrative Management Office (ADMO) under their respective existing accounts, but the administration of such Funds by PMS-ADMO shall be under the direct management and supervision of the PEA.

3. The Office for Special Projects (OSP), the unit in PMS directly tasked to administer and manage the PSF and other special funds of the President, shall continue to be an integral part of the organization of PMS, but shall report directly to the PEA who shall exercise direct supervision over the unit and the performance of its tasks.

3.1 OSP shall retain its present manpower complement and other such organizational provisions, services and facilities, including all physical and financial/budgetary arrangements for the efficient and effective performance of its functions.

3.2 OSP staff as listed in Annex A of this Memorandum Order are hereby detailed to the Office of PEA Cardenas but may continue to physically hold office at PMS (5 th Floor, PMS Building) except the OSP/PMS personnel, listed in Annex B of this Memorandum Order, who shall join PEA Cardenas in his office at the Office of the President. Any changes in the physical place of assignment of these personnel named in Annex A & B herein may be so effected by order of PEA Cardenas with appropriate notice to PMS.

4. All other units/staff in PMS, in coordination with OSP, shall continue to provide necessary assistance and support to PSF related matters, specifically, but not limited to the following PMS units:

4.1 Office for Regional Concerns (ORC) and Regional Field Units (RFUs) for the provision of assistance to PSF related matters during Presidential visits, and in the conduct of validation/inspection, monitoring and performance/financial audit of PSF assisted projects, among others;

4.2 Social Policy Office (SPO) for the coordination of PSF concerns related to the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office (PCSO) programs and other activities related to the provision of charitable, humanitarian and welfare assistance;

4.3 Legal Office for legal review, comments, recommendations and actions related to PSF matters.

5. The Deputy Head, PMS on behalf of the PMS Head, shall ensure the strict adherence of all concerned PMS units/staff to the guidelines and procedures outlined herein regarding PMS support to all matters related to PSF and other special funds of the President.

6. Any additional funding required for the operationalization of the above arrangements shall be sourced from the P41.218 million PSF assistance provided by the President to PMS per approval dated 24 August 2000.

7. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

For compliance.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

JAN 12 2001

Source: CDAsia