MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 34

CREATING TASK FORCE MALMARSS

WHEREAS, the Malitubog-Maridagao (MALMAR) Irrigation Project is a flagship project of this administration designed to irrigate about 10,000 hectares of farmlands in the municipalities of Carmen and Pikit in North Cotabato, and Pagalungan in Maguindanao;

WHEREAS, the implementation of the MALMAR project has been delayed for some time, and it is necessary that it be resumed so that its benefits can be enjoyed by the people in the area;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that not only national government officials but also local officials as well should participate in arriving at solutions to problems and issues affecting the MALMAR project;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, PRESIDENT JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order:

Section 1. Task Force MALMAR . — There is hereby created Task Force MALMAR, hereinafter referred to as Task Force, to oversee the implementation of the MALMAR project. It shall be chaired by the Chairman of the Presidential Committee on Flagship Programs and Projects, with the Governor of the Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao as Vice Chair, and the following as members: Secretary of Agriculture, Administrator of the National Irrigation Administration, Governor of the provinces of North Cotabato and Maguindanao, and the mayors of the municipalities of Carmen and Pikit (North Cotabato) and Pagalungan (Maguindanao).

Section 2. Functions . — The Task Force shall have, among others, the following functions:

a. Assist the project implementor and contractors in the implementation of the project by providing a forum for resolving issues and concerns relative to the project;

b. Monitor and evaluate government commitments in the implementation of the project;

c. Assist in the mobilization of funds for the completion of the project as originally planned;

d. Review and recommend the necessary allocation of works to competent and qualified contractors; and

e. Recommend remedial measures to assist the farmers in the affected areas in making their farmlands productive.

Section 3. Secretariat . — The National Irrigation Administration (NIA) shall provide technical, secretariat and administrative support to the Task Force.

Section 4. Report . — The Task Force shall provide regular reports to the President on the progress of the project.

Section 5. Budget . — There is no additional budget outlay appropriated on account of the creation of this Task Force. The member agencies shall perform their respective activities as part of their regular and relevant functions without additional compensation for their designated representatives.

Section 6. Effectivity . — This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 5 day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia