Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 84

Pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 69 dated 26 July 1999 establishing the President’s Bridge Program (PBP) and to ensure efficient monitoring and program integrity of the SALAM (Peace) Bridges Project, there is hereby constituted a Special Inspectorate Team (SIT) of the Salam Bridges Project – “Tulay ni Erap”, composed of the following:

The SIT is tasked to inspect and certify as to the quantity of bridging materials/equipment and services provided under the PBP Salam Bridges Project supply contract and shall serve as the basis for acceptance of goods/services. The SIT shall submit a quarterly report on the delivery and utilization of inspected goods/services to the Chairman of the PBP through the SIT.

As the Office of the President is the signatory to the supply contract, the following process shall be strictly observed in the acceptance of goods/services:

(1) Billing statement is submitted by the UK supplier to OP as contracting party.

(2) Billing statement is forwarded by OP to Salam SPMO-DPWH-ARMM for review recommendation.

(3) Salam SPMO recommends/seeks clearance from OP to issue acceptance certificate.

(4) PBP OP/TWG issues clearance.

(5) Authorized accepting officer of Salam SPMO issues acceptance certificate to the UK supplier.

All expenses incurred through the loan under the Salam Bridges Project without prior knowledge/clearance from OP through the TWG shall be considered invalid and will not be accepted. It is further emphasized that all project expenses should strictly observe existing government rules and regulations.

In the performance of such functions, the above named SIT representatives are hereby authorized to charge their travel expenses and allowances to the Salam Project including other benefits allowable under the existing government rules and regulations. The SIT shall cease to exist 60 days upon acceptance of the final goods/services under the Salam Bridges project.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RAMON B. CARDENAS Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, 04 January 2000.

Source: CDAsia