MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 79

CREATING A NATIONAL FORESTRY COUNCIL

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need for the proper conservation and management of the forest resources of the country and for the reforestation of critical areas of barren watersheds; and

WHEREAS, to solve effectively the problem of forest conservation and reforestation, there is need of an advisory body on the matter;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Forestry Council whose chief function is to advise the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources in bringing about the orderly utilization and proper conservation of our forest resources, including the reforestation of strategic barren areas. The Council shall be composed of the following:

The Executive Chairman and the representatives of the Philippine Lumber Producers’ Association and the Society of Filipino Foresters shall serve for a period of two years. All shall serve without compensation.

The Council shall have the following specific functions:

1. To advise the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources on the implementation of the forest conservation and reforestation program;

2. To present to the Department of the problems affecting forestry and to make suggestions for their solution; and

3. To advise the Department on the formulation of practical ways and means of financing the program.

In the performance of its functions, the Council is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such information, professional consultation and assistance as it may need.

The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources is authorized to organize a Provincial Forestry Council in each province where it is needed, the members of which shall be the following:

The District Forester The Provincial Commander, Provincial Constabulary The Provincial Fiscal The Division Superintendent of Schools A representative of a civic organization to be appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources A representative of the Provincial Governor A forestry licensee to be appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources

The Chairman shall be chosen by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources from among the members of the Council.

The Provincial Forestry Council shall have the following functions:

(1) To implement and coordinate the action program of forest conservation and reforestation in the province; and

(2) To advise the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources on the problems affecting forest conservation and reforestation and to make suggestions for their solution.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-153]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.