MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 130

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO SCREEN DESERVING SQUATTERS AND TO AID NEW SETTLERS IN MINDORO OCCIDENTAL

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I , Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a committee for the purpose of screening the squatters in Mindoro Occidental to determine those who are deserving of assistance in the allocation of public land lots within the subdivision projects of the Bureau of Lands and also for the purpose of assisting new settlers, arriving in that province. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Committee shall assist in the allocation of public lands to the landless. For this purpose, it shall take a census of squatters in Mindoro Occidental and of new settlers who have not been able to locate lands for their occupation. The Committee shall also keep an up-to-date list of available public lands in the different parts of the province. To facilitate the allocation of lots to deserving squatters and new settlers, the Provincial Land Officer of Mindoro Occidental shall give preference to persons recommended by the Committee.

The Committee may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for assistance in the accomplishment of its mission.

The Committee shall render periodic reports of its activities to the President of the Philippines.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARIANO YENKO, JR. Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Executive Order No. 130 : Creating a Committee to screen deserving squatters and to aid new settlers in Mindoro Occidental. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 51 (10), 4904-4905.