MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 24

CREATING THE CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL OF STUDENTS

For the purpose of enabling students to deliberate upon and discuss national problems, participate actively in the conduct of public affairs, promote their interest in civic welfare, stimulate their initiative in youth development programs and in order to bring youth and student problems directly to the immediate attention of the Government, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby create the Consultative Council of Students.

1. The Consultative Council of Students shall be composed of a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman and seventeen members to be designated be the President for specified terms from, recognized leaders in student and youth organizations. The Chairman shall serve as Technical Assistant on Youth and Student Affairs.

2. The Council shall have the following duties and functions:

a. To study and recommend to the President ways and means of encouraging student activity with a view to developing useful skills, civic habits and manly virtues in every young Filipino during the formative years;

b. To study and recommend to the President ways and means of fitting youth and student action into the government program of barrio development and community improvement;

c. To study and recommend to the President ways and means of counteracting subversive activities designed to unduly influence the youth and student population against the established government and democratic way of life;

d. To select undergraduate or graduate students aptitude and qualifications for specialization in particular fields of learning and to recommend them for scholarships; and

c. To study and discuss such other problems concerning youth and student affairs as the President may assign to it and to recommend appropriate solution therefor.

3. The Council shall maintain a Secretariat, under the Chairman, which shall be responsible for the administration of the affairs of the Council,

4. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, shall extend such necessary assistance and cooperation as may be requested by the Council through its Chairman.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.