MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMPLAINT AND ACTION COMMISSION UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

For the purpose of expecting actions on all complaints against the manner the various officials and personnel of the different Executive Departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, instrumentalities and government-owned or controlled corporations are performing the duties entrusted them by law and on complaints against the acts, conduct or behaviour of any official or employee thereof, and to encourage public participation in malting Government service mere responsive’ to the needs of the people, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, by virtue of, the powers vested in me by law, hereby create the Complaint and Action Commission in the Office of the President.

1. The .Complaint and Action Commission shall be directly under and responsible solely to the President of the Philippines.

2. The Complaint and Action Commission shall be headed by a Technical Assistant to be designated by the President, who shall be known as Commissioner, and shall be composed of personnel who may be assigned or detailed to the Commission from other departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities of the government upon the recommendation of the Commissioner.

3. The Presidential Complaint and Action Commission shall have the following duties and functions:

a. To conduct fact-finding investigations of complaints against the manner the various executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, instrumentalities, and government-owned or controlled corporations are performing the duties entrusted to them by law, or complaints against the acts, conduct or behavior of any officer or employee thereof;

b. To recommend promptly appropriate action on all such complaints as may be received by the President or by the Commission to the end that justice, economy, efficiency and a high standard of morality may be observed and effected in the various branches, departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including government-owned or corporations;

c. To keep the President of the Philippines informed on the implementation of government measures designed to improve the public service and the efficiency of government personnel;

d. To make and submit from time to time appropriate recommendations for the improvement of the administration of the government and its essential services and operations; and,

e. To perform such other duties and related functions as the President of the Philippines may from time to time assign to the Commission.

4.The Commissioner of the Presidential Complaint and Action Commission is hereby authorized to utilize and allow the use of any form of transportation or means of conveyance in his official travels or those of the Commission personnel.

5. The Commissioner or his representative may summon witnesses by subpoena and subpoena duces tecum, administer oaths and take testimony relevant to the fact-finding investigation conducted by them.

6. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including the government-owned and controlled corporations, are enjoined to extend full assistance and cooperation to the Commissioner of the Presidential Complaint and Action Commission or his representative. To facilitate this arrangement, the heads of all executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including the government-owned and controlled corporations, shall designate an official whose services shall be made available to the Presidential Complaint and Action Commission whenever such services are required on matters pertaining to their respective departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or entities,

Done at the City of Manila, Philippines, this 30th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1953). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-100] . Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.

All content is in the public domain unless otherwise stated.

Contact numbers/Trunk lines:8733-36-30 | 8734-56-11 Local 401

Learn more about the Philippine government, its structure, how government works and the people behind it.

Managed by ICT Division of the Presidential Communications Office (PCO)