MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 136

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE APPOINTMENT IN THE REGULAR FORCE, PHILIPPINE AIR FORCE, OF RESERVE OFFICER PILOTS WHO ARE GRADUATES OF THE PHILIPPINE AIR FORCE OR UNITED STATES AIR FORCE FLYING SCHOOLS

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 1231 empowers the President to appoint in the Regular Force, Philippine Air Force, in grades higher than second lieutenants, reserve officer pilots, not exceeding thirty in number, who are graduates of the Philippine Air Force or United States Air Force Flying Schools and who, upon their graduation from said schools, were qualified for appointment as second lieutenants in the Regular Force under the provisions of Republic Act No. 291, and to prescribe the rules and regulations therefor; and

WHEREAS, it is for the best interest of the military service that appointments and commissions under Republic Act No. 1231 be made on a fair and equitable basis, with due regard to the demonstrated fitness of reserve officer pilots to hold commissions in the Regular Force, as well as to the necessity of affording reasonable security to officers now in the Regular Force;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority vested in me by Republic Act No. 1231, do hereby prescribe the following rules and regulations:

SECTION 1. To be eligible for appointment and commission in the Regular Force pursuant to Republic Act No. 1231, the reserve officer pilot must:

( a ) Be a graduate of the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School.

( b ) Be a natural-born citizen of the Philippines, of good moral character, physically fit for general military service, and not more than twenty-six years of age on the date of his graduation from the Flying School.

( c ) Have rendered at least two years of active commissioned service as of June 7, 1955.

( d ) Have been on active commissioned status as of June 7, 1955.

SEC. 2. All officers who shall be appointed in the Regular Force pursuant to Republic Act No. 1231 and this Order shall be placed in the Philippine Air Force promotion list for regular officers, as follows:

( a ) Among officers who did not graduate together from the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School, the officers with the longer length of active commissioned service shall be senior: Provided, That any period of active commissioned service prior to appointment as aviation cadet shall not be credited for purposes of this Order.

( b ) Officers who graduated together from either the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School shall be inserted as a group according to their class standing upon graduation in the promotion list existing at the time of their appointment, such that the least ranking in that group shall be immediately above the most senior officer of the promotion list who graduated from the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School later than the group being inserted: Provided, That any officer of such group who was not immediately commissioned in the Reserve Force upon graduation from the Flying School or who has not been on continuous active commissioned service since graduation from the Flying School shall be inserted in the promotion list immediately above the group of officers appointed pursuant to this Order whose length of active commissioned service is less than or equal to his active commissioned service: Provided, further, That officers appointed under the provisions of this Order shall not be inserted above any officer who graduated ahead of them from the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School unless such officer was deferred for promotion by a selection board.

( c ) An officer shall be appointed in the grade for which he is eligible and qualified on the date of his appointment in accordance with promotional policies for regular officers in effect on June 7, 1955: Provided, That such grade shall not be higher than the grade of the officer immediately below whom he is inserted nor lower than the grade of the officer immediately above whom he is inserted.

SEC. 3. This Order shall take effect immediately and shall continue in operation until the expiration of the two-year period provided for in Republic Act No. 1231.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Executive Order No. 136 : Prescribing rules and regulations for the appointment in the Regular Force, Philippine Air Force, of reserve officer pilots who are graduates of the Philippine Air Force or United States Air Force Flying Schools. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 51 (10), 4910-4911.