MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 98

ANNEXING A PORTION OF THE TERRITORY OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF CATIGBIAN, PROVINCE OF BOHOL, TO THE MUNICIPALITY OF TUBIGON, SAME PROVINCE

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code and public welfare so requiring, that portion of the present territory of the municipality of Catigbian, Bohol, in the north which adjoins the municipality of Tubigon is hereby segregated from the said municipality and annexed to the municipality of Tubigon, same province. The boundary line between the two municipalities, as a result of this annexation, shall be as follows:

From a point where the old boundary between the municipalities of Clarin and Tubigon intersects the present north boundary of the municipality of Catigbian somewhere northeast of the poblacion of the barrio of Buenos Aires, and northwest of the poblacion of the barrio of Calangahan, as shown in the map of the municipality of San Jacinto and its barrios and their respective mother municipalities, province of Bohol, surveyed by E. Graciosa , plotted by E, Torres and checked by J. T. Clarin, Assistant Civil Engineer, District Engineer’s Office, scale 1 to 50,000 and hearing date of May, 1952, running roughly southwesterly along the Catigbian-Tubigon old boundary, to its Intersection with the straight imaginary line running from the top of Mount Guise, marked in the map as Pt . 5, to the point on a hill, marked in the map as Hill No. 2; thence, roughly westward in a straight line to the said Hill No, 2; thence, following approximately the same direction in a straight line to its intersection with the Catigbian-Tubigon old boundary; thence, roughly westward following the same Catigbian-Tubigon old boundary to a point of intersection of said boundary with the Calape-Tubigon old boundary line somewhere in the vicinity and southwest of the poblacion of the barrio of Cabanugan in the municipality of Tubigon. (The boundary herein desoribed is shown in blue pencil line on the map mentioned herein.)

The changes herein made take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1955). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-153]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.