MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 119

PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REORGANIZATION PLAN NO. 10, ON ECONOMIC PLANNING

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act Number Nine hundred and ninety-seven, as amended by Republic Act Number One thousand two hundred and forty-one, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, do hereby direct and order:

Organization of the National Economic Council

SECTION 1. The organization, functions, and operation of the National Economic Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, shall be in accordance with the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 10 and this Executive Order; provided, however, that the Chairman of the Council, with the approval of the Council and the President, may, subject to the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 10, make minor changes in the organization, functions, and operations of the Council.

SEC. 2. The Council organization, as indicated in the following organization chart, shall consist of the Council proper, the Office of the Chairman and three staff offices consisting of the Office of National Planning, the Office of Foreign Aid Coordination, and the Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards. The Office of the Chairman shall have three staff services, namely, Legal Counsel, Public Relations, and Administrative Services. The Office of National Planning shall have six branches consisting of the Agricultural Resources Branch, Industrial Resources Branch, Services (Utilities) Branch, Finance Branch, Trade and Commerce Branch, and Social Development Branch. The Office of Foreign Aid Coordination shall have two branches, namely, the Coordination of Program Planning Branch and the Coordination of Program Execution Branch. The Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards shall have two branches, namely, the Planning and Coordination Branch and the Standards and Review Branch.

[ Figure 1 – ORGANIZATIONAL CHART NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL ]

Personnel of the Council

SEC. 3. The Council shall, in accordance with the provisions of section 13 ( n ) of Reorganization Plan No. 10, utilize to the fullest extent practicable the services of other government agencies in the formulation and implementation of its policies, plans, and programs. Accordingly, the Council and its offices shall maintain a relatively small staff of highly competent economists and technicians who shall rely upon other government agencies to do the detailed work incident to the formulation and implementation of its policies, plans, and programs. Under no circumstances may the Council or its offices build up a large staff of personnel to engage in detailed work that duplicates work being carried out by other government agencies or in detailed work that could be more expeditiously performed by other government agencies.

SEC. 4. The Council shall prepare the plantilla which shall constitute the initial staff of the Council; provided, however, that this plantilla shall be within the limits of appropriations for personal services of the abolished National Economic Council and the Philippine Council for United States Aid; and provided, further, that the salary rates shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 28 of this Executive Order.

SEC. 5. The Directors, Assistant Directors, and the Chiefs of the various branches of the Office of National Planning, the Office of Foreign Aid Coordination, and the Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards shall be in the unclassified civil service.

SEC. 6. All other personnel comprising the staff of the Council shall be in the classified civil service.

SEC. 7. All qualified and competent personnel transferred to the Council, under the provisions of section 3 of Reorganization Plan No. 10, shall be employed by the Council before consideration is given to the employment of other persons.

SEC. 8. The Chairman of the Council and the Secretary of Finance are authorized to separate officers and employees from the government service, in accordance with the provisions of section 11 of Republic Act Nine hundred ninety-seven, as amended, Reorganization Plan No. 10 and this Executive Order, whose services are not necessary respectively to the Council or to the Department of Finance.

Functions of the Council

SEC. 9. In addition to the functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Council enumerated in section 13 of Reorganization Plan No. 10, the Council shall have the following functions in accordance with section 3 of the Plan:

( a ) Provide the President with information and advice with respect to entering into foreign trade agreements as provided by section 5 of Republic Act Number One thousand one hundred and eighty-nine.

( b ) Recommend to the President whenever necessary increases and reductions in the rates of import duties as provided for in section 18-A of Republic Act Number Nine hundred and eleven, as amended by Republic Act Number One thousand one hundred ninety-six.

Functions of the Chairman

SEC. 10. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Chairman of the Council shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Preside over the meetings of the Council.

( b ) Prepare the agenda for the meetings of the Council and submit for the Council’s consideration proposals setting forth policies and measures and economic and social programs, plans, and projects.

( c ) Coordinate the work assigned to permanent, special, and temporary committees which may be formed by the Council.

( d ) Transmit to the President the policies and measures and economic and social programs, plans, and projects approved by the Council.

( e ) Serve as the chief executive officer of the Council; direct and supervise the operations and internal administration of the Council, and delegate administrative responsibilities as necessary or desirable.

( f ) Follow up on the implementation and execution of such phases of the economic development program, plans, and projects as are under the jurisdiction of the different entities of the government and prepare for the President such directives as may be necessary.

( g ) Prepare for consideration by the Council necessary directives requiring services and reports from other government agencies as may be needed in the formulation and implementation of the policies, plans, and programs of the Council.

( h ) Submit periodic reports to the Council for its approval and subsequent transmission to Congress and to the President indicating, among other things, the state of progress made by other entities in the implementation of approved economic plans, programs, and projects, and current needs for legislation and changes in administrative policies, objectives, and practices.

( i ) Employ, with the approval of the Council, such counsel and such officers and employees as may be necessary to perform the work of the Council.

Functions of Legal Counsel

SEC. 11. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Legal Counsel shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Give legal advice and counsel.

( b ) Take charge of all legal matters affecting the Council.

( c ) Prepare and draft bills for presentation to the Council and for submission to Congress through the President.

Functions of Public Relations Staff

SEC. 12. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Public Relations staff shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Develop an extensive public relations program that is designed to obtain widespread understanding and support for whatever policies, plans, and programs for economic and social development that may be formulated by the Council.

( b ) Gather and prepare for dissemination by means of the press, radio, and other media, popularized informative materials regarding the workings of the Council.

( c ) Provide such other services and assistance as the Chairman may require in promoting the public relations of the Council.

Functions of Administrative Services

SEC. 13. The functions, powers, duties and responsibilities of the Administrative Services staff in the Office of the Chairman shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Provide all administrative and auxiliary services needed by the Council proper, including keeping the minutes and other records of the Council.

( b ) Provide all administrative and auxiliary services required by the various offices under the Council with respect, among others, to secretarial and steno-typing services; budgeting and finance services; requisitions, property, and supplies; personnel and records management; cash and disbursements; messenger and janitorial services; preparation and reproduction of reports; and the main­tenance and operation of library facilities and services.

SEC. 14. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Administrative Officer shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Supervise and assume responsibility for the performance of all administrative and auxiliary services needed by the Council proper and by the various offices comprising the organization of the Council.

( b ) Supervise and direct the following staff activities: budget, finance, and property; records and library; personnel; and general services.

( c ) Supervise and assume responsibility for the recording of the deliberations and proceedings of the Council.

( d ) Supervise and assume responsibility for keeping the minutes and other records of the Council.

( e ) Notify the members of the Council of all regular and special meetings that may be called by the Chairman.

( f ) Prepare, in consultation with the Chairman, the agenda and the materials for consideration in the meetings of the Council.

( g ) Process correspondence and memoranda for the Council and its members and provide necessary secretarial and administrative services.

Functions of the Office of National Planning

SEC. 15. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Office of National Planning shall consist of those specifically enumerated in section 15 of Reorganization Plan No. 10, and those delegated to the Office by the Chairman.

SEC. 16. The functions, power, duties, and responsibilities of the Agricultural Resources Branch shall include, among others, the following;

( a ) Formulate for consideration by the Council definite and consistent broad economic policies and plans for agricultural and related natural resources development.

( b ) Prepare and keep current sound, flexible, and long-range national plans, programs, projects, and measures for agricultural and related natural resources development, integrated as component parts of the overall economic development program.

( c ) Maintain liaison with the entities of government concerned with agricultural and related natural resources development

( d ) Follow up and report on the progress of the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects, and measures for agricultural and related natural resources development.

( e ) Initiate studies and research work on matters related to agricultural and related natural resources development and attend to the evaluation of the results, as well as to the present available facts and data on agricultural and related natural resources, so that broad policies and sound plans, programs, projects, and measures for agricultural and related natural resources development can accordingly be formulated on an intelligent basis.

( f ) Prepare and make periodic reports to the Council indicating, among other things, the state of progress in agricultural and related natural resources development; progress made by other entities in the implementation of approved plans; programs, projects, and measures for agricultural and related natural resources development; and current needs for legislation and changes in policy, objectives, and practices as these pertain to agricultural and related natural resources.

SEC. 17. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Industrial Resources Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Formulate for consideration by the Council definite and consistent broad economic policies and plans for industrial and mineral resources development.

( b ) Prepare and keep current sound, flexible, and long-range national plans, programs, projects, and measures for the development of the industrial and mineral resources of the country, integrated as component parts of the overall economic development program.

( c ) Maintain liaison with the entities of government concerned with industrial and mineral resources development.

( d ) Follow up and report on the progress of the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects, and measures for industrial and mineral resources development.

( e ) Initiate studies and research work on matters related to industrial and mineral resources development and attend to the evaluation of the results, as well as of the present available facts and data on industrial and mineral resources, so that broad policies and sound plans, programs, projects, and measures for industrial and mineral resources development can accordingly be formulated on an intelligent basis.

( f ) Prepare and make periodic reports to the Council indicating, among other things, the state of progress made by other entities in the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects, and measures for industrial and mineral resources development; and current needs for legislation and changes in policy, objectives and practices as these relate to industrial and mineral resources.

SEC. 18. The functions, powers, duties and responsibilities of the Services (Utilities) Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Formulate for consideration by the Council definite and consistent broad economic policies and plans on the development of personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications.

( b ) Prepare and keep current sound, flexible, and long-range national plans, programs, projects and measures for the development of personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications, integrated as component parts of the overall economic development program.

( c ) Maintain liaison with the entities of government concerned with personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications.

( d ) Follow up and report on the progress of the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects and measures for the development of personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications.

( e ) Initiate studies and research work on matters related to the development of personal and consumer service, industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications, and attend to the evaluation of the results, as well as of the present available facts and data on personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications, so that broad policies and sound plans and programs for the development of personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications can accordingly be formulated on an intelligent basis.

( f ) Prepare and make periodic reports to the Council indicating, among other things, the state of progress in the development of personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications; the progress made by other entities in the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects, and measures for the development of personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications; and current needs for legislation and changes in policies, objectives, and practices as these relate to the development of personal and consumer service industries, power, public works, transportation, and communications.

SEC. 19. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Finance Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Prepare for consideration by the Council definite and consistent broad economic policies on fiscal and monetary matters as follows:

(1) Formulate broad measures for the coordination of fiscal and monetary policies.

(2) Formulate policy recommendations on desirable levels of government revenues and expenditures, and relate public works expenditures to the overall program for economic development.

(3) Study and define consistent policies and broad criteria that shall be the basis for the granting of tax exemption privileges and other incentives to investment.

(4) Study and define consistent policies and broad criteria that shall be the basis for the prescription of priorities in the allocation of foreign exchange that shall lend support to the overall program for economic development.

(5) Study and evaluate savings practices, capital accumulation and investment, domestic bond and security markets, banking, credit, and taxation; and formulate financial policies and measures to encourage private saving, investment, and productive enterprise.

(6) Study and evaluate the problems of inflation that grow out of monetary and credit policies, budgetary deficits, savings, and consumption patterns and retardation in productivity.

( b ) Study available financial resources and devise and keep current sound, flexible, and long-range national plans, projects, and measures for financing development programs in the light of current credit and monetary policies, integrated as component parts of the overall economic development program.

( c ) Maintain liaison with the entities of government concerned with the financial and fiscal activities of the government.

( d ) Follow up and report on the progress and status of the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects and measures for marshaling available financial resources to finance approved programs for economic development.

( e ) Initiate studies and research work on fiscal and monetary matters, and attend to the systematic evaluation of the results thereof, as well as of present available facts and data thereon, so that broad financial policies and sound plans, programs, projects, and measures for financing the overall program for economic development can accordingly be formulated on an intelligent basis.

( f ) Prepare and make periodic reports to the Council indicating, among other things, the state of progress in fiscal and monetary activities in relation to their effects upon the overall program for economic development; the progress made by financial and fiscal agencies in the implementation of approved plans, programs, and measures for financing approved economic development projects; and current needs for legislation and changes in policy, objectives and practices on fiscal and monetary affairs.

SEC. 20. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Trade and Commerce Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Formulate for consideration by the Council definite and consistent broad economic policies and plans on domestic and foreign trade and commerce.

( b ) Initiate and make continuing evaluative studies of the tariff structure and commercial relationships of the nation and recommend changes, considering that tariff and foreign trade are instruments of national policy in the solution of balance of payments problems and in achieving a broader and more stable pattern of domestic production.

( c ) Prepare and keep current sound, flexible, and long-range national plans, programs, projects, and measures for the development of domestic and foreign trade and commerce that will meet both the immediate and long-run demands of the overall program for economic development.

( d ) Maintain liaison with the entities of government concerned with trade and commerce.

( e ) Follow up and report on the progress and status of the implementation of policies and programs for the development of foreign and domestic commerce in the light of their effects upon the overall program for economic development.

( f ) Initiate studies and research work on matters relating to the development of the domestic and foreign trade and commerce of the nation and attend to the broad accumulation and systematic evaluation of the results thereof, as well as of present available facts and data thereon, so that broad policies and sound plans and programs for domestic and foreign trade that would lend effective support to the overall program for economic development can accordingly be formulated on an intelligent basis.

( g ) Prepare and make periodic reports to the Council indicating, among other things, the state of progress in the development of foreign and domestic trade and commerce in relation to their effects on the overall program for economic development, and current needs for legislation and changes in policies, objectives, and practices in foreign and domestic trade and commerce.

SEC. 21. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Social Development Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Formulate for consideration by the Council definite and consistent broad policies and plans on social development, including, among others, the fields of education, health, labor, social welfare (including housing), and public administration; formulate, likewise, definite and consistent broad economic and social policies that will foster full employment and maximum utilization of the manpower resources of the country.

( b ) Prepare and keep current sound, flexible and long-range national plans on education, health, labor, and social welfare (including housing), integrated as component parts of the overall program for economic and social development and on public administration, designed to support the overall economic development program by way of promoting institutional progress, increasing the administrative capacity of both public and private institutions and enhancing better educational and training programs to increase the availability of needed managerial, technical, and labor skills, and the efficiency, morale, and productivity of workers.

( c ) Inventory the country’s manpower resources and devise and keep current sound, flexible, and long-range national plans, programs, and measures to marshal available manpower resources to meet both the immediate and long-run demands of the economic development program.

( d ) Maintain liaison with the entities of government concerned with labor and social development.

( e ) Follow up and report on the progress of the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects, and measures for education, health, labor, social welfare, and public administration; and those for full employment and maximum utilization of manpower resources.

( f ) Initiate studies and research work on matters related to labor and social development, and attend to the systematic evaluation of the results, as well as of the present available facts and data on education, health, labor, social welfare, public administration, employment, and manpower utilization, so that broad policies and sound plans and programs for social development, for institutional progress and for marshaling manpower resources can accordingly be formulated on an intelligent basis.

( g ) Prepare and make periodic reports to the Council indicating, among other things, the state of progress in labor and social development, public administration, and employment and manpower utilization; the progress made by other entities in the implementation of approved plans, programs, projects, and measures in education, health, labor, welfare, public administration, employment, labor relations, and manpower utilization; and current needs for legislation and changes in policy, objectives, and practices relative to social development, public administration, employment, labor relations, and manpower utilization.

Functions of the Office of Foreign Aid Coordination

SEC. 22. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Office of Foreign Aid Coordination shall consist of those specifically enumerated in section 16 of Reorganization Plan No. 10.

SEC. 23. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Coordination of Program Planning Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) In collaboration with foreign government agencies, assist the various agencies of the Philippine government in the preparation of proposals for economic and social development projects that are to receive foreign aid or reparations.

( b ) Evaluate the proposals for development projects that are to receive foreign aid or reparations to determine whether they are in conformity with approved economic plans and policies.

( c ) Assist the various government agencies upon their request in surveying and investigating the conditions under which approved or proposed economic and social development projects are to be undertaken.

( d ) Cause the development by various government agencies of proposals for economic and social development projects that are to receive foreign aid or reparations.

SEC. 24. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Coordination of Program Execution Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Follow up on the implementation of approved economic and social development projects under foreign aid programs and reparations to see if agreements are being carried out and that projects are otherwise being administered properly.

( b ) Recommend necessary remedial measures when projects receiving foreign aid are not being administered in accordance with terms of project agreements.

( c ) Review and make periodic reports on the progress of projects receiving foreign aid or reparations.

Functions of the Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards

SEC. 25. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards shall consist of those specifically enumerated in section 17 of Reorganization Plan No. 10, which shall be interpreted to include the following:

( a ) Serve as liaison between statistical entities and as a central point to which organizations, private, governmental, or international, can address inquiries or from which they can ask for assistance on statistical questions.

SEC. 26. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Planning and Coordination Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Develop and maintain an efficient division of labor among statistical agencies by the orderly allocation of statistical activities.

( b ) Review and appraise the annual appropriation requests of entities for statistical activities and present appropriate recommendations to the Budget Commission and the President.

( c ) Develop and apply a comprehensive and progressive program of statistical production, including the initiation and enforcement of a general schedule of priorities for the pursuit and/or expansion of statistical activities.

( d ) Conduct periodic surveys of the statistical services of the government in order to determine their needs and problems and to recommend to the Council the measures necessary for their remedy.

SEC. 27. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Standards and Review Branch shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Review and approve statistical questionnaires and administrative forms from which statistical data are derived, for the use of statistical entities:

( b ) Develop and prescribe standards for uniform reporting and publication of statistics.

( c ) Establish standard definitions, classification systems, techniques and procedures for adoption by the entities engaged in statistical operation.

Maximum Salary Rates

SEC. 28. All salaries provided for in the plantilla prepared under the provisions of section 4 of this Executive Order shall be in accordance with civil service requirements, except that the Council may adopt salary schedules for the principal executive, professional and technical personnel which shall not exceed the following standard rates:

Transitory Provisions: National Economic Council

SEC. 29. The Industrial Development Center is attached temporarily for general supervision and administration purposes to the Office of the Chairman of the Council.

SEC. 30. The budgeting and procurement activities performed by the abolished Philippine Council for United States Aid shall be conducted by the Office of Foreign Aid Coordination, pending the adoption of other Reorganization Plans and Implementing Details. The appropriations and personnel of the Office of the Accounting Officer and the Office of the Auditor shall continue to be under the control of the Budget Commission and General Auditing Office respectively.

SEC. 31. Pending the adoption of other Reorganization Plans and Implementing Details and the establishment of appropriate positions in other entities, the Chairman of the Council shall confer with the Commissioner of the Budget and the heads of appropriate government entities and arrange for detailing to these entities qualified and competent, professional and technical personnel, especially those engaged in the formulation and implementation of economic and social development programs. These persons shall not exceed 20.

Transitory Provisions: Tariff Division

SEC. 32. Pending the adoption of other Reorganization Plans and Implementing Details relating to tariffs, there is created in the Department of Finance a Tariff Division to which the non-policy determining functions and the personnel, appropriations, property, equipment, and records of the abolished Tariff Commission are transferred.

SEC. 33. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Tariff Division shall be those set forth in Republic Act No. 911 for the Tariff Commission, except that matters of tariff policy are vested in the Council.

SEC. 34. The Tariff Division shall be organized into two sections, namely, the Investigation and Inspection Section and the Research Section.

SEC. 35. The functions, powers, duties and responsibilities of the Investigation and Inspection Section shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Investigate and obtain data on the production, processing, marketing, and distribution of commodities covered by the tariff laws of the Philippines.

( b ) Ascertain conversion costs, cost of production, producers’ selling prices, and other facts on selected domestic commodities which will show differences or affect competition between domestic and foreign industries.

( c ) Conduct inspection of domestic establishments or representative growers or producers to verify or gather data on production costs, sales, prices, industrial practices, financial standing, etc.

( d ) Undertake investigation and verification of financial reports submitted by domestic growers, manufacturers and producers.

( e ) Ascertain and analyze unit costs, including invoice costs, import costs, estimated factory costs, estimated profit and expenses of selected imported articles.

( f ) Secure invoices and compile records of imports.

( g ) Make investigations and inspections for the Research Section and for the National Economic Council.

SEC. 36. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Research Section shall include, among others, the following:

( a ) Conduct research on the administration and operation of Philippine Tariff laws, including their fiscal and industrial effects.

( b ) Conduct research on tariff relations between the Philippines and foreign countries, commercial treaties, preferential provisions of economic alliances, the effect of export bounties and preferential transportation rates, and the conditions, causes and effects of competition of foreign and domestic industries.

( c ) Upon request draft, new and amendatory legislation relating to tariffs and study proposed tariff legislation.

( d ) Conduct specific research for the National Economic Council and submit appropriate findings and recommendations.

( e ) Propose investigations relating to domestic and international trade, prices, conditions of competition of specific domestic and foreign industries, and to such other matters in connection with its research work.

SEC. 37. The temporary plantilla for the Tariff Division shall be as follows:

TARIFF DIVISION

Investigation and Inspection

Research

Timing of Administrative Actions

SEC. 38. Administrative actions required by Reorganization Plan No. 10 and by this Executive Order shall be effected within 120 days from the date of effectivity of this Order.

SEC. 39. This Order shall take effect on July 1, 1955.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of July, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARIANO YENKO, JR. Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Executive Order No. 119 : Providing for the Implementing Details for Reorganization Plan No. 10, on Economic Planning. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 51 (7), 3301-3314.