MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 37

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 500, DATED MAY 2, 1952, RELATIVE TO THE TRANSFER OF UNDERVICEABLE GOVERNMENT PROPERTY TO THE NATIONAL SHIPYARDS AND STEEL CORPORATION

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. All unserviceable property of the Government, its branches, agencies and instrumentalities, which is beyond economical repair and no longer needed, from which scrap iron, steel, brass, copper, lead and other metals may be delivered, shall be transferred, in accordance with Section 641 of the Revised Administrative Code, without cost to the National Shipyards and Steel Corporation.

2. All accountable officers shall from time to time report to the National Shipyards and Steel Corporation, through the director or chief of the bureau of the office concerned and the Auditor General or his duly authorized representative, the existence of unserviceable property mentioned in the preceding paragraph hereof. Upon being advised of such report, the Department Head concerned shall authorize the National Shipyards and Steel Corporations to take the necessary steps towards the possession and control of said property.

3. In the case of unserviceable property, as defined in paragraph 1 hereof, which was originally acquired from the defunct Surplus Property Commission pursuant to Republic Act No. 33 and Executive Order No. 27, dated November 18, 1946, as amended, the report of the accountable officers shall be coursed, through the director or chief of the bureau or office concerned, to the Board of Liquidators for disposal in accordance herewith. Should the Board of Liquidators fin that the property, or any part of parts thereof, is beyond economical repairs, the Board shall authorize the National Shipyards and Steel Corporation to take the necessary steps towards the possession and control of said property, or any part or parts thereof, and, and upon presentation of proper invoices and/or receipts of delivery of said property to the National Shipyards and Steel Corporation, release the surrendering of office or agency from its accountability thereof. But should the Board of Liquidators fin that the property, or any parts or parts thereof, is not beyond economical repairs, it may sell or otherwise dispose of such property, or any part or parts thereof, in accordance with existing law and regulations.

4. The transfer to the National Shipyards and Steel Corporation of unserviceable property as above defined, acquired under Military Assistance Agreements between the Philippines and the United States, shall be subject to the existing arrangements and procedures mutually agreed upon between the two Governments.

5. Executive Order No. 500, dated May 2, 1952, and all other executive order, rules and regulations which are in conflict herewith are hereby amended accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.