MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 126

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CLAVER IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Pursuant to the provisions of section Sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao a municipality to be known as the municipality of Claver to consist of the barrios of Claver, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Nuevo Campo Inferior, Panatao, Urbiztondo, and Taganito, with their sitios namely: Cagdayanao, Cabugo, Jayanggabon, Pangabihon, Dinangdangan, Tinamulawan, Sicosico, Carrubon, Agpot, Wanqui, Cambalilig, Lapinigan, Osok, Pamoyanon, Doyong, Bacoyod, Ladgaron, Tayaga, Tayohong, Bocbocan, Pangi, Daywan, Tabwan, Tayawod, Doyao-doyao, Maaslom, Canmintay, Boyognon, Baybay, Cayangag, Maibay, Pulahan, Walog, Pongtod, and Sodlon, all of the municipality of Gigaquit, same province.

The municipality of Gigaquit shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof comprised in the barrios and sitios included in the municipality or Claver. The municipality of Claver shall begin to exist after-November 8, 1955, upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof, and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Gigaquit, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios and sitios comprised in the municipality of Claver, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Executive Order No. 126 : Creating the Municipality of claver in the Province of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (9), 4414-4415.