MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 31

REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR OTHER MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION FOR OFFICIAL PURPOSES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations to govern the use of motor vehicles or other means of transportation by officials and employees of the Government, effective May 1, 1954:

1. Provincial boards and city boards or councils may authorize, subject to the approval of the Department Secretaries concerned, those officials whose duties make it necessary or advisable for them to use special means of transportation for the purpose of supervision, inspection, or investigation, to utilize their privately-owned motor vehicles for official purposes and to receive reimbursement for the same at the rate of twenty centavos (P0.20) for each kilometer of travel in the case of automobiles and fifteen centavos (P0.15) for each kilometer of travel in the case of jeeps, on official business: Provided, That the maximum allowances to be paid during any month shall not exceed those given in the following schedules:

(A) For provinces and cities having 350 or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city –

(B) For provinces and cities having 200 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city but less than 350 kilometers –

(C) For provinces and cities having 150 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city but less than 200 kilometers –

(D) For provinces and cities having 75 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city but less than 150 kilometers –

(E) For provinces and cities having less than 75 kilometers of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city –

As above used, the terms provincial treasurers, provincial auditors, division superintendents of schools, and district health officers shall be construed to embrace the officials of a chartered city corresponding to these positions

For the purpose of determining the amount of transportation allowances of the officials of a particular province or city, the District or City Engineer thereof, as the case may be, shall certify the number of kilometers of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital or city, before an allowance for a privately-owned motor vehicle (automobile or jeep) is granted.

The above rates of maximum transportation allowances shall also apply to government-owned automobiles and jeeps exclusively assigned to an official.

2. Employees of the National Government and of provincial and city governments who perform field duties nay be given monthly allowances for providing other private means of transportation for official purposes when properly authorized, with the approval of the Department Secretary concerned, as follows:

(a) For motorcycles, P08 per kilometer, or a maximum, of P40.00 per month.

(b) For horses, P0.10 per kilometer, or a maximum of P20.00 per month.

(c) For bicycles, P0.02 per kilometer, or a maximum of P10.00 per month.

3. All motor vehicles owned by a province or chartered city for common use shall be kept in a central garage to be operated by the District or City Engineer who shall rent such vehicle to officials making designated trips for official purposes in the order in which applications are received and after taking into consideration the relative urgency of the proposed trip.

Motor vehicles purchased from the read and bridge fund or streets and bridges fund for the official use of the District or City Engineer and his assistants and those purchased from other provincial or city funds exclusively assigned for the use of one office shall not be operated for common use, unless the official concerned for whom the motor vehicle has been exclusively reserved will allow the renting of the same to others on official business at the rate of P0.20 per kilometer of travel in the case of automobiles and P0.15 per kilometer of travel in the case of jeeps. The rent so paid shall be refunded to the transportation expenses of the office concerned.

4. In view of the nature of their duties and responsibilities and their official and social standing in their communities, the chiefs of offices – provincial governors, provincial treasurers, provincial auditors, division superintendents of schools, district health officers, district engineers, and others of equal rank -shall be entitled to government transportation from residence to office and vice-versa and in connection with civic and semi-official activities beneficial to the public interest, such as the conduct of drives for voluntary contributions for charitable purposes, attendance at public social functions, and others of similar nature.

5. All orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.