MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 214

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CARMEN IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotobato and pursuant to the provisions, of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as the municipality of Carmen to consist of the following barrios and sitios:

all of the municipality of Kabacan, some province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Carmen. The municipality of Carmen as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at a point on Mt. Piapayungan on the Cotabato-Lanao boundary; thence, following the said boundary to a point on the Lanao-Bukidnon and Cotobato Provinces meet; thence, following the Cotabato-Bukidnon boundary line in a southerly direction till it meets the Mulita River; thence, following the Mulita River to the junction of Pulangi River; thence, following the Pulangi River or Rio Grande to Carmen Ferry; thence, following the Sayre Highway northward to the center line of the bridge No. 383.82 on Sanubun Creek onthe said Highway; thence, going northwest to the junction of Maridagao and Malitubog Rivers; thence, following the old boundary line of Kabacan and Pikit and Midsayap boundary meet; thence, following the old boundary line of Kabacan and Midsayap in a northerly direction to Mt. Piapayungan on the Cotabato-Lanao boundary, the point of Behinning.” (This description is based on the data shown in the sketch of the proposed municipality of Carmen, Scale 1: 250,000, prepared and submitted by the Highway District Engineer of Cotabato)

The Municipality of Kabacan shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Carmen, as delimited above.

The municipality of Carmen shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Kabacan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Carmen, con still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all statutory and contractual obligations and provide for essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 220]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.