MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 239

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LIARGAO IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Liargao, Camp 4 , Camp 5, Camp 6, Pasingkalan, Bambong, Malating, Wakat, Lower Sambulewan, Sinaging, Gapasan, Balaran, Bakahan, Midsalip, Timbaboy, Canipay, Caniangan, Laperian, Katipunan, Bobongan, Bambong Diut, Sominot and Anding, all of the municipality of Aurora, province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and constituted into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Liargao with the seat of government at the barrio of Liargao.

The municipality of Aurora shall have the same territory minus that comprised in the municipality of Liargao.

The municipality of Liargao shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Low and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Aurora, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Liargao, con still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

This supersedes Executive Order No. 222, dated December 28, 1956.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1957). [Executive Order Nos. : 221 – 300]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.