ANNEXES OF STATUTORY PROVISIONS REFERRED TO IN THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES CONCERNING TRADE AND RELATED MATTERS DURING A TRANSITIONAL PERIOD FOLLOWING THE INSTITUTION OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE.

ANNEX I

Sugar  act of 1937 of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

Section 101. For the purposes of this Act, except Title IV-

“ (e) The term “direct-consumption sugar” means any sugars which are principally of crystalline structure and which are not to be further refined or otherwise improved in quality.” (50 stat.) Pt. 1 (903, Ch. 898.)

ANNEX II

Tariff Act of 1930 of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“Par. 1622. All binding twine manufactured from New Zealand hemp, hehequen, Manila, istle or tampico fibre, sisalgrass, or sunn, or a mixture of any two or more of them, of single ply and measuring not exceeding seven hundred and fifty feet to the pound.” (46 Stat,) Pt.. 1 (675, Ch. 497.)

ANNEX III

Tariff Act of 1930 of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“Par. 602. The term “wrapper tobacco” as used in  this title means that quality of leaf tobacco which has the requisite color, texture, and burn, and is of sufficient size for cigar wrappers, and the term “filler tobacco” means all other tobacco…..”  (46 Stat. ) Pt. 1 (631.Ch. 497.)

ANNEX IV

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

Chapter 16-Oleomargarine, adulterated butter, and process of renovated butter.

“SEC. 2300 Oleomargarine defined.

“For the purpose of this chapter, and of sections 3200 and 3201 certain manufactured substances, certain extracts, and certain mixtures and compounds, including such mixtures and compounds with butter, shall be known and designated as “oleomargarine,” namely; All substances known prior to August 2, 1886, as oleomargarine, oleo, oleomargarine oil, butterine, lardine, suine, and neutral; all mixtures and compounds of oleomargarine, oleo, oleomargarine oil, butterine, lardine, suine, and neutral; all lard extracts and tallow extracts; and all mixtures and compounds of tallow, beef fat, suet, lard, lard oil, fish oil or fish fat, vegetable oil,, annatto, and other coloring matter, intestinal fat, and offal fat;-if  (1) made in imitation or semblance of butter, or (2) calculated or intended to be sold as butter or for butter, or (3) churned, emulsified or mixed in cream, milk, water or other liquid, and containing moisture in excess of one per centum or common salt. This section shall not apply to puff-pastry shortening not churned or emulsified in milk, or cream, and having a melting point of one hundred and eighteen degrees Fahrenheit or more, nor to any of the following containing condiments and spices: salad dressings, mayonnaise dressings or mayonnaise products nor to liquid emulsion, pharmaceutical preparations, oil meals liquid preservatives, illuminating oils, cleansing oils, cleansing compounds, or flavoring compounds.”  (53 Stat. 247 and 248.)

ANNEX V

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“SEC. 2306. Importation.

“All oleomargarine imported from foreign countries shall, in addition to any import duty imposed on the same, pay an internal revenue tax of fifteen cents per pound, such tax to be represented by coupon stamps as in the case of oleomargarine manufactured in the United States . . .”

“SEC. 2320. Definitions.

“ (a) Butter.- For the purpose of this chapter and sections 3206 and 3207, the word ‘butter ‘ shall be understood to mean the food product usually known as butter, and which is made exclusively from milk or cream, or both, with or without common salt and with or without additional coloring matter.

“ (b) Adulterated butter.- ‘Adulterated butter’ is defined to mean a grade of butter produced by mixing, reworking, rechurning in milk or cream, refining, or in any way producing a uniform, purified, or improved product from different lots or parcels of melted or unmelted butter or butter fat, in which any acid, alkali, chemical, or any substance whatever is introduced or used for the purpose with the effect of deodorizing or removing therefrom rancidity, or any butter or butter fat with which there is mixed any substance foreign to butter as defined in subsection (a) , with intent or effect of cheapening in cost the product, any butter in the manufacture or manipulation of which any process or material is used with intent or effect of causing the absorption of abnormal quantities of water, milk, or cream.”  (53 Stat. 252 and 253.)

“SEC. 2327. Other laws applicable.

“ (a) Oleomargarine.- The provisions of sections 2301 (c) (2), 2305 to 2311, inclusive (except subsections (a), (b) and (h) of section 2308), and section 3791 (a) (1), shall apply to the manufacturers of adulterated butter to an extent necessary to enforce the marking, branding, identification, and regulation of the exportation, and regulation of the exportation and importation of adulterated butter.” (53 Stat. 255. [53 Stat.] Pt. 1 (247, 250, 252, 253, and 255, Ch.2.)

ANNEX VI

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“SEC. 2350. Definitions.

“For  the purpose of this chapter and sections 3210 and 3211-

“ (a) Cheese- The word ‘cheese’ shall be understood to mean the food product known as cheese, and which is made from milk or cream and without rhe addition of butter, or any animal, vegetable, or other oils or fats foreign to such milk or cream, or with or without additional coloring matter.

“ (b) Filled cheese.- Certain substances and compounds shall be known and designated as ‘filled cheese,’ namely: all substances made of milk or skimmed milk, with the admixture of butter, animal oils or fats, vegetable or any other oils, or compounds foreign to such milk, and made in imitation or semblance of cheese. Substances and compounds, consisting principally  of cheese with added edible oils, which are not sold as cheese or as substitutes for cheese but are primarily useful for imparting a natural cheese flavor to other foods shall not be considered ‘filled cheese’ within the meaning of this chapter.” (53 Stat. 256.)

“SEC. 2356. Importation.

“All filled cheese as defined in section 2350 (b) imported from foreign countries shall, in addition to any import  duty imposed on the same, pay and internal revenue tax of 8 cents per pound, such tax to be represented by coupon stamps; and such imported filled cheese and the packages containing the same shall be stamped, marked, and branded, as in the case of filled cheese manufactured in the United States.” (53 Stat. 258. [53 Stat.] Pt. 1 256 and 258, Ch. 2.

ANNEX VII

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“SEC. 2470. Tax.

“ (a) Rate.

“(1) In general.- There shall be imposed upon the first domestic processing of coconut oil, palm oil, palm-kernel oil, fatty acids derived from any of the foregoing oils, salts of any of the foregoing (whether or not such oils, fatty acids, or salts have been refined, sulphonated, sulphated, hydrogenated, or otherwise processed), or any combination or mixture containing a substantial quantity of any one or more of such oils, fatty acids, or salts, tax of three cents per pound to be paid by the processor.

“(2) Additional rate on coconut oil.- There shall be imposed (in addition to the tax imposed by the preceding paragraph) a tax of two cents per pound, to be paid by the processor, upon the first domestic processing of coconut oil or of any combination or mixture containing a substantial quantity of coconut oil with respect to which oil there has been no previous first domestic processing, except that the tax imposed by this sentence shall not apply when it is established, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Commissioner with the approval of the Secretary, that such coconut oil (whether or not contained in such a combination or mixture), (A) is wholly the production of the Philippine Islands or any possession of the United States, or (B) was produced wholly from materials the growth or production of the Philippine Islands or any possession of the United States, or (C) was brought into the United States on or before June 9, 1934, or produced from materials brought into the United States on or before June 9, 1934, or (D) was purchased under a bona fide contract entered into prior to April 26, 1934, or produced from materials purchased under a bona fide contract entered into prior to April 26, 1934. The tax imposed by this paragraph shall not apply to any domestic processing after July 3, 1974.

“ ( b)      Exemption,- The tax under subsection (a) shall not apply (1) with respect to any fatty acid or salt resulting from a previous first domestic processing taxed under this section or upon which an import tax has been paid under chapter 22, or  (2) with respect to any combination or mixture by reason of its containing an oil, fatty acid, or salt with respect to which there has been a previous first domestic processing or upon which an import tax has been paid under Chapter 22.

“ (a) Importation prior to August 21, 1936.- Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the first domestic processing of sunflower oil or sesame oil (or any combination or mixture containing a substantial quantity of sunflower oil or sesame oil), if such oil or such combination or mixture  or such oil contained therein was imported prior to August 21, 1936, shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of section 6021/2 of the Revenue Act of 1934, 48 Stat. 763, in force on June22, 1936. 53 Stat. 264.” (53 Stat.) Pt. 1 (264 and 265, Ch. 2; Pub. Law 371-79 th Cong.)

AN ACT OF THE UNITED STATES TO SUSPEND IN PART THE PROCESSING TAX ON COCONUT OIL, AS AMENDED TO MAY 1, 1946.

“ BE IT ENACTED BY THE Senate and the House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled. That section 2470 (a) (2) of the Internal Revenue Code is hereby suspended: Provided, That if the President after receipt by him of a request from the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands that the suspension of section 2470 (a) (2) be terminated, shall find that adequate supplies of copra, coconut oil, or both, the product of the Philippine Islands, are readily available for processing in the United States, he shall so proclaim; and thirty days after such proclamation, the suspension of section 2470 (a) (2) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall terminate.

“SEC. 2.         This Act shall become effective the day following its enactment, and shall terminate on May 30, 1946.” (56 Stat.) Pt. 1 (752 and 753. Ch. 560); (58 Stat.) Pt. 1 (647, Ch. 332.)

ANNEX VIII

Act of March 14, 1934 of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“SEC. 8. (a) Effective upon the  acceptance of this Act by concurrent resolution of the Philippine Legislature or by a convention called for that purpose, as provided in section 17-

“(1)      For the purposes of the Immigration Act of 1917, the Immigration Act of 1924 [except section 13 (c) , this section], and all other laws of the United States relating to the immigration, exclusion or expulsion of aliens, citizens of the Philippine Islands who are not citizens of the United States shall be considered as if they were aliens. For such purposes the Philippine Islands shall be considered as a separate country and shall have for each fiscal year a quota of fifty. This paragraph shall not apply to a person coming or seeking to come to the Territory of Hawaii who does not apply for and secure an immigration or passport visa, but such immigration shall be determined by the Department of the Interior on the basis of the needs of industries in the Territory of Hawaii. 48 Stat. 462.” (48 Stat.) Pt. (462, Ch. 84)

ANNEX IX

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“SEC. 2490. Imposition of tax.

“In addition to any other tax or duty imposed by law, there shall be imposed upon the following articles imported into the United States , unless treaty provisions of the United States otherwise provide, a tax at the rates set forth in section 2491, to be paid by the importer. 53 Stat. 267.”

“SEC. 2491 Rate of tax.

“ (c) Any article, merchandise, or combination (except oils specified in section 2470), 10 per centum or more of the quantity by weight of which consists of, or is derived directly or indirectly from, one or more of the products specified above  in this paragraph or of the oils, fatty acids, or salts specified in section 2470, a tax at the rate or rates per pound equal to that proportion of the rate or rates prescribed in this paragraph or such section 2470 in respect of such product or products which the quantity by weight of the imported article, merchandise, or combination; consisting of or derived from such produce or products, bears to the total weight of the imported article, merchandise, or combination; but there shall not be taxable under this subparagraph any article, merchandise, or combination (other than an oil, fat, or grease, and other than products resulting from processing seeds without full commercial extraction of the oil content), by reason of the presence therein of an oil, fat, or grease. 53 Stat. 267 and 268.”  (53 Stat.) Pt. 1 (267 and 268, Ch.2.)

ANNEX X

Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended to May 1, 1946.

“CHAPTER 32. Sugar.

“SEC. 3500. Rate of tax.

“ In addition to any other tax or duty imposed by law, there shall be imposed, under such regulations as the Commissioner of Customs shall prescribe, with the approval of the Secretary, a tax upon articles imported or brought into the United States as follows:

“(1)      On all manufactured sugar testing by the polariscope ninety-two sugar degrees 0.465 cent per pound , and for each additional sugar degrees shown by the polariscopic test, 0.00875 cent per pound additional, and fraction of a degree in proportion.

“(2)     On all manufactured sugar testing by the polariscope less than ninety-two sugar degrees 0.5144 cent per pound of the total sugars therein;

“(3)      On all articles composed in chief value of manufactured sugar 0.5144 cent per pound of the total sugars therein. 53 Stat. 428.”

“SEC. 3507. Definitions.

“ (b)      Manufactured sugar- The term ‘manufactured sugar’ means any sugar derived from sugar beets or sugar cane, which is not to be, and which shall not, further  refine or otherwise improved in quality; except sugar in liquid from which contain nonsugar solids (excluding any foreign substance that may have been added) equal to more than 6 per centum of the total soluble solids, and except also syrup of cane juice produced from sugar cane grown in continental United States.

“ The grades or types of sugar within tha meaning of this definition shall include, but shall be limited to, granulated sugar, lump sugar, cube sugar, powdered sugar, sugar in the form of blocks, cones, or molded shapes, confectioner’s sugar, washed sugar, centrifugal sugar, clarified sugar, turbinado sugar, plantation white sugar, moscovado sugar, refoners’ soft sugar, invert sugar mush, raw sugar, sirups, molasses, and sugar mixture.

“ (c) Total sugars.- The term ‘ total sugars’ means the total amountof the sucrose (clerget) and of the reducing or invert sugars. The total sugars contained in any grade or type of manufactured sugar shall be ascertained in the manner prescribed in paragraph 758, 759, 762, and 763 of the United States Customs Regulations (1931 edition). 53 Stat. 428 and 429.” (53 Stat.) Pt. 1 (426, 428, and 429, Ch. 2).

ANNEX XI

Constitution of the Philippines as amended to May 1, 1946.

“ARTICLE I.- THE NATIONAL TERRITORY.

“SECTION 1. The Philippines comprises all the territory ceded to the United States by the Treaty of Paris concluded between the United States and Spain on the tenth day of December, eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, the limits of which are set forth in Article III of said treaty, together with all the Islands embraced in the treaty concluded at Washington, between the United States and Spain on the seventh day of November, nineteen hundred, and in the treaty concluded between the United States and Great Britain on the second day of January, nineteen and thirty, and all territory over which the present Government of the Philippine Islands exercises jurisdiction.”

Whereas the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Philippines and the Ambassador of the United States of America to the Republic of the Philippines have exchanged notes making certain clarifying amendments to the said Agreement which notes are in words and figures as follows:

(The United States Ambassador  to the Secretary)

EMBASSY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

October 22, 1946

EXCELLENCY:

I have the honor to make the following statement of my Government’s understanding of recent conversations held at Manila relative to the correction of certain typographical errors in the Agreement between the United States of America and the Republic of the Philippines concerning Trade and Related Matters during a transitional Period following the Institution of Philippine Independence, signed at Manila on July 4, 1946, and in the Protocol and the Annexes to that Agreement, and relative to the making of certain clarifying amendments therein.

1.         In Article II, paragraph 3, second sentence, ( a) the phrase “unrefined sugar specified in item A” shall be changed to read “unrefined sugars specified in item A,” (b) the phrase “refined sugar specified in in Item A-1” shall be changed to read “refined sugars specified in item A-1,” and (c) the phrase “be alloted annually by the Philippines” shall be changed to read “shall be allocated annually by the Philippines.”

2.         The column headings of the schedule to the Article II and items A and A-1 of such schedule shall be changed to read as follows:

“Items                                             Classes of Articles                        Amounts

A                         Sugars ……………………………….  952,000 short tons

A-1                    of which not to exceed …………………    56,000 short tons

maybe refined sugars, meaning

‘direct-consumption sugar’ as de-

in section 101 of the Sugar Act of

1937 of the United States which is

set forth in part as Annex I to this

Agreement.”

3.         In item B of the schedule of Article II the phrase “including binding twines described” shall be changed to read “including binding twine described,” and the word “Manila” shall be changed to “manila.”

4.         In item G of the schedule to Article II the word “Buttoms should be changed to read “Buttons.”

5.         In Article III, paragraph 1 the word “and” shall be inserted after the semicolon at the end of indented subparagraph (a).

6.         Article III; paragraph 2 shall be changed to read as follows:

“2. If the President of the United States finds that the allocation of any quota established pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article is necessary to make the application of the quota just and reasonable between the United States and the Philippines, the United States shall have the right to provide the basis for the allocation of such quota, and, if the United States exercises such right, the Philippines will promptly put and keep in effect, on the basis provided by the United States, the allocation of such quota.”

7.        In the last sentence of Article IV, paragraph 2 the word “Sections” shall be changed to read “Section.”

8.         In Article IV, paragraph 5 the word “Manila” shall be changed to read “manila.”

9.         In Article V the phrase “into the United States dollars” shall be changed to read “into United States dollars.”

10.       In clause (b) of the first sentence of Article VIII, paragraph 1 the phrase “and continue in effect” shall be changed to read “and continue in effect.”

11.       At the end of Article X, paragraph 2 the phrase “six months’ notice,” shall be changed to read “six months written notice.”

12.       In clause (5) of subparagraph (d) of paragraph 1 of the Protocol the phrase “weight or which consists of” shall be changed to read “weight of which consists of.”

13.       In Annex II the word “Manila” shall be changed to read “manila.”

14.       In the last sentence of Annex IV, section 2300 delete the commas after the word “milk.”

15.       In Annex V, section 2320, subsection (b) the phrase “used for the purpose with the effect of” shall be changed to read “used for the purpose or with the effect of.”

16.       At the end of Annex VII the date “May 30, 1946.” Shall be changed to read “June 30, 1946.”

17.       In Annex X, section 3507, subsection (b) the phrase “sugar beets or sugar case” shall be changed to “sugar beets or sugarcane.”

Since this note includes the matter covered by the notes exchanged on July 5, 1046 and July 16, 1946 relative to the correction of two typographical errors in said Agreement of July 4, 1946, the present exchange of notes shall supersede such earlier exchange of notes.

If the above provisions are acceptable to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines this note and the reply signifying assent thereto shall, if agreeable to that Government, be regarded as amending the said Agreement of July 4, 1946, and the Protocol and Annexes thereto, and as constituting an integral part thereof.

Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my most distinguished consideration.

PAUL V. Mc NUTT

His Excellency

ELPIDIO QUIRINO

Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the

Republic of the Philippines

(The Secretary of the United States Ambassador)

MANILA, October 22, 1946

EXCELLENCY:

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s note of today’s date recording your Government’s understanding of recent conversations held at Manila relative to the correction of certain typographical errors in the Agreement between the United States of America and the Republic of the Philippines concerning trade and related matters during a transitional period following the institution of Philippine independence, signed at Manila on July 4, 1946, and in the Protocol and the Annexes to that Agreement and relative to the making of certain clarifying amendments therein.

I have the honor to confirm your Excellency’s statement with regard to this matter and to state that my Government is agreeable that your note and this reply signifying assent thereto shall be regarded as amending the said Agreement of July 4, 1946, and the Protocol and the Annexes thereto, and as constituting an integral part thereof.

Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my most distinguished consideration.

Vice President and concurrently

Secretary of Foreign Affairs

His Excellency

American Ambassador to the Philippines

WHEREAS Article X of the said Agreement provides that it shall not take effect unless and until the Congress of the Philippines accepts it by law and except as otherwise expressly provided in the Agreement has enacted such legislation as may be necessary to bring into effect the provisions of the Agreement as laws of the Philippines, and that the Agreement shall then be proclaimed by the President of the Philippines and by the President of the United States of America; and

WHEREAS sections 2, 3, and 4 of the said Commonwealth Act No. 733 constitute such legislation as is required by said Article X of the Agreement;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it known that I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, do proclaim the said Agreement and the said notes to the end that the same and every part thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the Republic of the Philippines, the citizens of the Republic of the Philippines and all other persons subject to the jurisdiction thereof.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila this first day of January, in the year of Our Lord one thousand nine hundred and forty-seven, and of the Republic of the Philippines, the first.

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary of Foreign Affairs