MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 3 DESIGNATING FOUR DAYS OF SOLEMN MEMORIAL SERVICES, BEGINNING JULY 27, 1946, AND THURSDAY, AUGUST 1, 1946 AS THE DAY OF THE INTERMENT OF THE PRESIDENT MANUEL L. QUEZON.

On August 1, 1946, two years will have passed since the tragic death of Manuel L. Quezon, hero of his people and paladin of the Philippine forces of freedom.

During those two years the mortal remains of the late great President have rested in foreign soil, but soil which was the scene of his glorious efforts to bring the succor of liberation to his suffering countrymen. For that cause, and in that land, the United States, he gave up his life. As surely as the humble soldier who died in heroic struggle on the battlefield, President Quezon’s life was offered on the alter of national redemption, that his people might realize in magnificent freedom the full independence the true nationhood for which he had fought and worked from his earliest years.

On July 27, 1946, the body of Manuel L. Quezon will return here. Reverently borne by friendly hands from its temporary resting place in the great burial ground of American patriots, the National Arlington Memorial Cemetery, the earthly remains of the great Filipino hero will arrive in Manila on board an American aircraft carrier, the U.S.S. Princeton, on the morning of the twenty-seventh day of July. It is fitting that the naval arm of the nation with whose cause Manuel L. Quezon identified his people should now solemnly bear his body to these shores.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, do hereby appoint four days of solemn state memorial services, beginning on July 27, 1946, and do further, appoint Thursday, August 1, 1946, as the day of interment of the deceased President. On that day the body of our immortal hero will lie in the earth of his ancestors. I have separate proclamation provided suitable observances and proclaimed a period of mourning for this Nation.

During the four days of memorial services, and during the entire period of mourning, let us direct our prayers to the Almighty that He may give comfort and surcease to the beloved widow and children of our great President, and that He may in His goodness bless our people with the courage and nobility so immortally exemplified in the spirit of the leader, who having given on distant soil his life for his land, is now coming home to find his last resting place.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 25th day of July, the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS

By the President: (Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source: Presidential Museum and Library