PROCLAMATION NO. 48

CALLING ALL YOUNG MEN, CITIZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES, WHO SHALL ATTAIN THE AGE OF 20 YEARS IN A CALENDAR YEAR TO REGISTER FOR MILITARY INSTRUCTION.

I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power conferred upon me by sections fifty-four and fifty-five of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, entitled “The National Defense Act,” do hereby call upon all young men, citizens of the Philippines, who shall attain the age of twenty years in a calendar year to register for military instruction in the city, municipality, or municipal district in which they reside.

The following rules and regulations shall be followed in the registration and selection of trainees for military service.

1.         All male citizens of the Philippines who have attained or shall attain    the age of twenty years in a calendar year shall register for military service.

2.         Registration shall take place in suitable registration places to be prescribed by the city, municipality, or municipal district government in which the registrants reside, during regular office hours, between eight o’clock a.m., April first, and eight o’clock p.m., on April seventh.

3.         Those unable to visit registration places because of illness, or for any other reason, shall be registered by their parents or legal guardians.

4.         No person convicted of a crime against the Government or of an offense involving moral turpitude shall be permitted to register for military service unless he shall have been previously pardoned by the President.

5.         The following persons are exempted from registration:

(a) Members of the Army of the United States, the Philippine Constabulary, and the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

( b) Young men, citizens of the Philippines, who are residing abroad. These persons shall register within five days after their return to the Philippines in order to determine their obligation for military training.

If under thirty years of age on their return, they shall be liable for military instruction, and shall submit thereto if drawn at the next national drawing following their return.

(c) Persons who, because of incarceration awaiting trial or undergoing sentence of a court of law, are prevented from registering. They shall, upon their release from custody, register for military instruction with the mayor of the municipality or township in which they reside. If under thirty years of age at the time of release, they shall be liable for trainee instruction; if over that age, they shall be exempted.

6.         In cities, municipalities, and municipal districts, the municipal secretaries, acting under the immediate supervision of the respective municipal mayors, are hereby designated as registering officers. In outlaying barrios, the municipal councils shall designate government officers or employees who shall act as deputy registering officers of those barrios. In the cities of Manila, Baguio, Dagupan, Quezon, Rizal, San Pablo, Cavite, Lipa, Iloilo, Cebu, Ormoc, Davao, Zamboanga and such other cities as may from time to time be designated by the secretary of National Defense, the chiefs of police thereof shall designate responsible officers of the police department to act as registering officers and deputy registering officers.

7.         In each city, municipality, or municipal district, the municipal secretary, or other official designated as registering officers, shall keep a military register as a part of the permanent record of his office.

8.         The name of registrants shall be entered serially in the military register in the order that they report.

9.         Each registrant shall be required to furnish the following information:

(a) Name

(b) Address

(c) Date and place of birth.

(d) Civil status (single, married, or widower).

(e) Name of each dependent and degrees of dependency.

(f) Employment, nature of the same, and the name of employer.

(g) Educational attainment, special aptitudes or qualifications.

(h) Preference for branch of service, that is, Infantry, Cavalry, Artillery,

(i) Engineers, Air Corps, Medical service, Ordnance service, etc.

10.       On completion of registration formalities each registrant shall be issued a registration card bearing a serial number corresponding to his number in the military register of the city, municipality, or municipal district in which he resides.

11.       Any change of address of a registrant subsequent to registration shall be promptly reported to the registering officer who shall make appropriate notation in the military register and on the registration card, and if the change of address involves a domicile in another registration district, he shall immediately report the facts to the Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines.

12.       Upon termination of the registration period in each calendar year, the registering officer shall immediately prepare copies in triplicate from the military register, of the number and description of registrants for that year, one copy of which shall be forwarded to the corresponding acceptance board as prescribed in Military Service Regulations, one copy to the provincial governor or city mayor and another copy to the Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines. The registering officer shall also prepare the cards for drawing by lot and submit same to the provincial governor or city mayor at the same time as the military register.

13.       The Area Commander and Provincial Governor or City Mayor or their duly appointed assistants shall supervise the recruitment of manpower in their respective areas, provinces, or cities. They shall have access at all times to the records pertaining to registration and selection of trainees, shall give necessary instruction as to the proper manner of making entries in the military register. And shall report all irregularities coming to their attention to the Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines.

14.       Detailed instructions governing the method and procedure of registration, examination, classification, and the selection of trainees for military service are prescribed in the Military Service Regulations.

15.       Registration cards shall be carefully preserved by the registrants. Each card shall constitute a certificate that the holder has carried out his first military obligation to the State.

16.       All provisions of Proclamation No. 23, dated January 11, 1936, inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked, or amended accordingly.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 30 th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Acting Chief of the Executive Office