PROCLAMATION NO. 2

DECLARING A PERIOD OF NATIONAL MOURNING AND OTHER OBSERVANCES

WHEREAS the mortal remains of the late President Manuel L. Quezon will be received in the Philippines on July 27, 1946, for proper burial in his native soil, giving opportunity to his grateful countrymen to express their sorrow and gratitude for his heroic death and historic services;

NOW, THERFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, do ordain and provide the following national observance of mourning for our beloved leader:

1. The period of national mourning shall begin on the twenty-seventh day of July and shall continue until the anniversary of the birth of Manuel L. Quezon on the nineteenth day of August. During this period, flags on all government buildings and installations throughout the Philippines shall be flown at half-mast and other proper observances of national mourning shall be manifested.

2. All government offices and agencies are authorized to fulfill only essential functions on the morning of the twenty-seventh day of July, granting to dispensable government employees the opportunity to attend the cortege from the Manila Bay front to Malacañan Palace.

3. At high noon on the first day of August, I enjoin the people of the Philippines to gather in their respective places of worship to pray for the repose of the soul of Manuel L. Quezon. I request the three minutes of silent prayer be observed by all the people of the Philippines beginning at that hour, when the casket of the late President Quezon will be placed in its grave.

4. On the morning of the first day of August, government offices and agencies are authorized to fulfill only essential functions, granting to dispensable employees the opportunity to attend the funeral services of the late President.

IN WITNESS THEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 25 th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President: