Unofficial translation of the Official Gazette, for the purpose of disseminating information to a wider audience.

S. No. 2817 H. No. 93

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Fifteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Began and held in Metro Manila on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand and twelve.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10353]

AN ACT DEFINING AND PENALIZING ENFORCED OR INVOLUNTARY DISAPPEARANCE

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. – This Act shall be known as the ”Anti-Enforced or Involuntary Disappearance Act of 2012.”

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. – The State values the dignity of every human person and guarantees full respect for human rights which shall be given the highest priority in the formulation of procedures for the improvement of the right of all persons to human dignity, the prohibition of secret detention places, solitary confinement, incommunicado, or other similar forms of detention, the provision for penal and civil sanctions for such violations, and reparation and rehabilitation for the victims and their families, particularly in relation to the use of torture, force, violence, threats, intimidation or other means which impair the free will of persons taken, arrested, detained, disappeared, or otherwise deprived of effective protection by the law.

Further, the State adheres to the principles and standards of absolute condemnation of human rights violations enshrined in the 1987 Constitution and various international instruments such as, but not limited to, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), to which the Philippines is a State.

SEC. 3. Definitions. – For purposes of this Act, by direct provision of law, popular election or designation by competent authority shall participate in the performance of public functions in the government, or exercise public functions in the government or in any of its branches as an employee, agent or subordinate official, or any rank or grade.

(a) State agents refer to persons who, by direct provision of law, by popular election or designation by competent authority shall participate in the performance of public functions in the government, or exercise public functions in the government or in any of its branches as an employee, agent or subordinate official, or any rank or grade.

(b) Enforced or involuntary disappearance refers to the arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of deprivation of liberty carried out by agents of the State or by persons or groups of persons acting with the authorization, support or acquiescence of the State, followed by a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation of liberty or of the fate or whereabouts of the disappeared person, which places that person outside the protection of the law.

(c) Order of Battle refers to a document created by the military, police or any law enforcement agency of the government listing the names of persons and organizations considered by it as legitimate targets as adversaries it may confront through means permitted by national and international laws.

(d) Victim refers to a person who is disappeared or any individual who has suffered harm as a direct result of an enforced or involuntary disappearance as defined in paragraph (b) of Section 3.

SEC. 4. Non-Derogable Right Against Enforced or Involuntary Disappearance. – The right against enforced or involuntary disappearance and the fundamental guarantees to prevent it shall not be derogated from under any circumstances including political instability, threat of war, state of war, or other public emergencies.

SEC. 5. “Order of Battle” or Any Order of Similar Nature, Illegal Basis for Enforced or Involuntary Disappearance. – “Order of Battle” or any order of similar nature, whether official or not, from a high-ranking official or a public authority constituting the basis for the commission of enforced or involuntary disappearance is unlawful and shall not be used as justification or permissive condition. Any person receiving such order has the right to refuse to comply.

SEC. 6. Right to Access to Communication. – It is the absolute right of any person deprived of liberty to have immediate access to any form of communication available to him/her to inform his/her family, relatives, friends, lawyer, or any human rights organization of his/her whereabouts and condition.

SEC. 7. Duty to Report Victims of Enforced or Involuntary Disappearance. – Any person, not being the principal perpetrator, accomplice or accessory, who has information on a case of enforced or involuntary disappearance or who becomes aware of such information, or that a person is a victim of enforced or involuntary disappearance, shall immediately report in writing the facts and whereabouts of the victim to any office, detachment or division of the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), Department of National Defense (DND), Philippine National Police (PNP), Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), the City or Provincial Prosecutor, Commission on Human Rights (CHR), or any human rights organizations and, if known, to the family, relatives, or lawyer of the victim.

SEC. 8. Duty to Furnish in Writing the Results of Investigation on Reported Whereabouts of Disappeared Person. – In case of a family member, relative, lawyer, representative of a human rights organization or a member of the media inquiring from a member or official of any police or military detention center, of the PNP or any of its agencies, of the AFP or any of its agencies, of the NBI or any other agency or instrumentality of the government, as well as any hospital or morgue, public or private, regarding the presence or whereabouts of a reported victim of enforced or involuntary disappearance, said member or official shall immediately issue a certification in writing for the person or entity inquiring regarding the presence or absence and/or information regarding the whereabouts of said disappeared person, stating, among others, in a clear and unambiguous manner the date and time of the inquiry, the details of the inquiry, and the response to the inquiry.

SEC. 9. Duty of Investigating Public Prosecutor or Any Judicial or Quasi-Judicial Official or Personnel. – Any investigation or inquiry by a public prosecutor, or any judicial or quasi-judicial official or personnel who ascertains that the person brought in for investigation or preliminary investigation or for any judicial process is a victim of enforced or involuntary disappearance shall have the duty to immediately inform the whereabouts of the victim to his/her nearest relatives, kin, lawyer, or a human rights organization in the most expeditious manner.

SEC. 10. Official Timely Registry of All Persons Deprived of Liberty. – All persons deprived of liberty shall be placed only in officially recognized and controlled detention or confinement places where an official timely registry of such persons shall be maintained. Relatives, lawyers, judges, official representatives and all persons having legitimate interest in the whereabouts and condition of persons deprived of liberty shall have free access to the registry.

The following details, among others, shall be recorded in the registry:

(a) The identity or name, description, and address of the person deprived of liberty;

(b) The date, time, and place where the person was deprived of liberty and the identity of the person who deprived him/her of liberty;

(c) The authority that ordered the deprivation of liberty and the reasons for the deprivation of liberty or the crime or offense committed;

(d) The authority controlling the deprivation of liberty;

(e) The place of deprivation of liberty, the date and time of entry into the place of deprivation of liberty, and the authority responsible for the place of deprivation of liberty;

(f) Records of the physical, mental, psychological condition of the person deprived of liberty before and after the deprivation of liberty and the name and address of the doctor who examined his/her physical, mental, and medical condition;

(g) The date and time of release or transfer of the person deprived of liberty to another detention place, the destination, and the authority responsible for such transfer;

(h) The date and time of each removal of the person deprived of liberty from his/her cell, the reason or purpose of such removal, and the date and time of his/her return to his/her cell;

(i) A summary of the physical, mental, and medical condition of the person deprived of liberty after each interrogation;

(j) The names and addresses of persons who visited the person deprived of liberty, and the date and time of such visits and the date and time of each departure;

(k) In case of death while under deprivation of liberty, the identity, the circumstances and cause of death of the victim, as well as the destination of the remains; and

(l) All other relevant incidents pertaining to, and all relevant details, the treatment of the person deprived of liberty.

Provided, That the details required under paragraphs (a) through (f) shall be immediately entered into the registry upon arrest and/or detention.

All information contained in the registry shall be reported regularly to, or upon request by, the CHR or any other government agency tasked to monitor and protect human rights and shall be made accessible to the public.

SEC. 11. Submission of List of Government Detention Facilities. – Within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act and upon request of the CHR thereafter, all concerned government agencies shall submit an updated inventory or list of all officially recognized and controlled detention or confinement facilities, and the list of persons detained or deprived of liberty under their respective jurisdictions to the CHR.

SEC. 12. Prompt Issuance and Compliance with Writs of Habeas Corpus, Amparo and Habeas Data. – All petitions for the issuance of writs of habeas corpus, amparo and habeas data shall be promptly issued. Accordingly, all courts and other concerned government agencies shall give priority to such petitions.

Furthermore, any order issued or adopted in accordance with such writs or their respective petitions shall be implemented and promptly complied with.

SEC. 13. Visits/Inspections of Detention and Confinement Places. – The CHR or its duly authorized representatives are hereby mandated and empowered to conduct regular, unannounced, spontaneous, and unrestricted visits or inspections of all detention and confinement places.

SEC. 14. Accountability of the Commanding Officer or Superior. – The nearest commanding officer of the concerned unit of the AFP or the nearest ranking officer of the PNP and other law enforcement agencies shall have primary accountability for the crime of enforced or involuntary disappearance for acts he/she has directed, induced, encouraged or tolerated, directly or indirectly, in the commission thereof by his/her subordinates. If said commanding officer had knowledge of, or in the circumstances of the time, should have had knowledge that an enforced or involuntary disappearance was being committed, or was being committed by his/her subordinates or other persons under his/her responsibility, and despite such knowledge, he/she failed to prevent or investigate such allegations of enforced or involuntary disappearance, whether intentionally or through negligence, shall also have primary accountability.

SEC. 15. Penal Provisions. – (a) The penalty of reclusion perpetua and all its accessory penalties shall be imposed upon the following:

(1) Those who directly committed the enforced or involuntary disappearance;

(2) Those who directly ordered, instigated, induced or encouraged others to commit enforced or involuntary disappearance;

(3) Those who collaborated in the commission of enforced or involuntary disappearance by performing acts which, if not done, would not have been carried out;

(4) Officials who consented to the commission or assisted in the perpetration of enforced or involuntary disappearance when it was within their power to prevent or expose its commission;

and

(5) Those who collaborated in the commission of enforced or involuntary disappearance through antecedent or contemporaneous acts.

(b) The penalty of reclusion temporal and all its accessory penalties shall be imposed upon those who attempted to commit enforced or involuntary disappearance in accordance with the provisions and definitions under Article 6 of the Revised Penal Code.

(c) The penalty of reclusion temporal and all its accessory penalties shall be imposed upon persons who had knowledge of the commission of enforced or involuntary disappearance and did not participate therein as a principal or accomplice, but subsequently participated therein in any of the following ways:

(1) By profiting from or assisting the offender to benefit from the effects of the enforced or involuntary disappearance;

(2) By concealing the act of enforced or involuntary disappearance and/or destroying the instruments or tools used therein to prevent its discovery;

 or

(3) By harboring, concealing, or helping to escape the principal persons involved in the commission of enforced or involuntary disappearance, provided that such acts of complicity were committed with abuse of official functions.

(d) The penalty of prision correctional and all its accessory penalties shall be imposed against persons who opposed, disregarded, or unduly delayed compliance with any order issued or promulgated in accordance with writs of habeas corpus, amparo and habeas data, or their respective petitions.

(e) The penalty of arresto mayor and all its accessory penalties shall be imposed against any person who violates the provisions of Sections 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of this Act.

SEC. 16. Preventive Suspension/Immediate Dismissal. – Government officials and personnel found to have committed or participated in any manner in the commission of enforced or involuntary disappearance as a result of a preliminary investigation conducted for that purpose shall be placed under preventive suspension or immediately dismissed from the service, depending on the strength of the evidence presented and gathered in said preliminary investigation or as recommended by the investigating authority.

SEC. 17. Civil Liability. – The commission of enforced or involuntary disappearance shall give rise to civil liability on the part of those who committed it and the State agencies that arranged, authorized or allowed such disappearance under civil law.

SEC. 18. Separate Liability. – The criminal liability of the offender under this Act is separate and independent from the prosecution and conviction of said offender for any violation of Republic Act No. 7438, otherwise known as “An Act Defining Certain Rights of Persons Arrested, Detained or Committed to Custodial Investigation, as well as the Duties of the Arresting, Detaining and Investigating Officers, and Providing Penalties for Violations Thereof”; Republic Act No. 9745, otherwise known as “An Act Penalizing Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and Providing for Penalties Therefor”; and applicable provisions of the Revised Penal Code.

SEC. 19. Non-Exclusivity or Double Jeopardy under International Law. – Any investigation, prosecution, and decision of any court in the Philippines, or body for any violation of this Act shall not be considered in any investigation, prosecution, decision, or other legal or administrative proceedings before any appropriate international tribunal or agency under applicable international human rights law and humanitarian law.

SEC. 20. Immunity from Prosecution. – Any offender who provides information that leads to the discovery of the victim of enforced or involuntary disappearance or the prosecution of the offenders without exposing the victim shall be immune from any criminal and/or civil liability under this Act: Provided, That said offender is not the most guilty.

SEC. 21. Continuing Violation. – The act constituting enforced or involuntary disappearance shall be considered a continuing violation as long as those committing it continue to conceal the fate and whereabouts of the disappeared persons and such conditions are not determined with certainty.

SEC. 22. Exception to Statute of Limitations. – The prosecution of persons responsible for enforced or involuntary disappearance shall not prescribe except when the life of the victim is extinguished. Accordingly, the prescriptive period shall be twenty-five (25) years from the date of such reappearance.

SEC. 23. Exclusion of Law on Special Amnesty. – Persons convicted and/or who committed enforced or involuntary disappearance shall not be eligible for any law on special amnesty or other similar executive clemency that may exempt them from any prosecution or penal sanction.

SEC. 24. State Protection. – The State, through its appropriate agencies, shall ensure the safety of all persons involved in the search, investigation, and prosecution of enforced or involuntary disappearance including, but not limited to, the victims, their families, complainants, witnesses, legal counsel and representatives of human rights organizations and the media. They shall also be protected from any intimidation or retaliation.

SEC. 25. Applicability of Non-Refoulement. – No person shall be removed, returned or deported to another State where there are substantial grounds to believe that such person would be in danger of being subjected to enforced or involuntary disappearance. For the purpose of determining whether such grounds exist, the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) and the Secretary of the Department of Justice (DOJ), in consultation with the Chairperson of the CHR, shall consider relevant considerations including but not limited to the existence in the requesting State of a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant, and widespread violations of human rights.

SEC. 26. Restitution and Reparation to Victims of Enforced or Involuntary Disappearance and/or Their Nearest Relatives. – Victims of enforced or involuntary disappearance who surfaced alive shall be granted monetary compensation, rehabilitation, and restitution of dignity and reputation. Such restitution of dignity and reputation shall involve the immediate removal or rectification of any derogatory record, information or public declaration/statement concerning his/her person, personal circumstances, status, and/or affiliations by appropriate government or private agencies or agencies involved.

The nearest relatives of a victim of enforced or involuntary disappearance, up to the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity, may also seek compensation in accordance with Republic Act No. 7309 known as “An Act Creating a Board of Claims under the Department of Justice for Victims of Unjust Imprisonment or Detention and Victims of Violent Crimes and for Other Purposes,” and other government assistance programs.

The granted compensation to both the victims and the nearest relatives up to the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity shall be without prejudice to other legal remedies they may pursue.

SEC. 27. Rehabilitation of Victims and/or Their Nearest Relatives, and Perpetrators. – In order to effectively reintegrate victims of enforced or involuntary disappearance who surfaced alive and/or their nearest relatives up to the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity into the mainstream of society and the development process, the State, through the CHR, in coordination with the Department of Health, the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), and concerned non-governmental organizations, shall provide them with appropriate medical and rehabilitation services free of charge.

Towards the achievement of restorative justice, a parallel rehabilitation program for persons who committed enforced or involuntary disappearance shall also be implemented free of charge for said perpetrators.

SEC. 28. Implementing Rules and Regulations. – Within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DOJ, DSWD, CHR, Families of Victims of Involuntary Disappearance (FIND), and the Families of Desaparecidos for Justice ( Desaparecidos ), in coordination with other human rights organizations, shall jointly promulgate the rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act and shall ensure its full dissemination to the public.

SEC. 29. Suppletory Application. – The applicable provisions of the Revised Penal Code shall have suppletory application insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 30. Appropriations. – The amount of ten million pesos (PHP10,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated for the initial implementation of this Act by the CHR. Subsequent amounts for the continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the respective budgets of the CHR and the DOJ in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 31. Separability Clause. — If any section or provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions thereof which are not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 32. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 33. Effectivity Clause. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation or in the Official Gazette, not exceeding seven (7) days after such publication.

Approved,

(Signed) FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Signed) JUAN PONCE ENRILE President of the Senate

This Act, which consolidates House Bill No. 2817 and House Bill No. 98, was passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on October 16, 2012.

(Signed) MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP Secretary General House of Representatives

(Signed) EMMA LIRIO-REYES Secretary of the Senate

Approved: 21 DIS 2012

(Signed) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines