Translation of the Official Gazette for informational purposes. This is not the official translation of the law. 

Read in English

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Fifteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Began and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third of July, two thousand and twelve.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10533]

AN ACT ENHANCING THE PHILIPPINE BASIC EDUCATION SYSTEM BY STRENGTHENING ITS CURRICULUM AND INCREASING THE YEARS OF BASIC EDUCATION, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. – This Act shall be known as the “Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013.”

SEC. 2. Policy Declaration. – The State shall establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education which shall provide the needs of the people, the country, and the broader society.

It is likewise declared the policy of the State that every graduate of basic education shall be an empowered and competent individual, through a program that is rooted in sound educational principles and focused on excellence, of the foundational skills of lifelong learning, of the ability to seek gainful employment and be productive, of the capability to live in a productive and engaging community, both local and global, of the ability to participate in autonomous, creative, and critical thinking, and of the capacity and willingness to transform oneself and others.

For this purpose, the State shall create a functional basic education system that will mold productive and responsible citizens equipped with the essential skills, competencies, and values for lifelong learning and employment. To achieve this, the State shall:

(a) Provide every student with the opportunity to receive quality education commensurate with global standards based on a curriculum that is relevant and responsive to the needs of the learners and the demands of the labor market;

(b) Expand the objectives of high school education to prepare students for college, career opportunities in vocational and technical fields, as well as in the creative arts, sports, and entrepreneurship in a rapidly changing and increasingly globalized world; and

(c) Make education learner-centered, responsive to the needs, cognitive and cultural backgrounds, circumstances, and diversity of learners, schools, and communities through appropriate language of teaching and learning, including mother tongue as a medium of instruction.

SEC. 3. Basic Education. – Basic education is intended to meet the basic learning needs of the learner that provide the foundation for subsequent learning. It shall consist of kindergarten, elementary, and high school, as well as alternative learning systems for out-of-school learners and those with special needs.

SEC. 4. Enhanced Basic Education Program. – The enhanced basic education program shall consist of at least one (1) year of kindergarten education, six (6) years of elementary education, and six (6) years of secondary education, in that sequence. Secondary education shall include four (4) years of junior high school and two (2) years of senior high school.

Kindergarten education shall refer to one (1) year of preparatory education for children who are at least five (5) years old as a prerequisite for Grade I.

Elementary education shall define the second stage of compulsory basic education consisting of six (6) years. The age of entry into this level is generally six (6) years.

Secondary education shall define the third stage of compulsory basic education consisting of four (4) years of junior high school and two (2) years of senior high school. The age of entry into junior and senior high school levels is generally twelve (12) and sixteen (16) years, respectively.

Basic education shall be delivered in languages understood by the learners because language plays a strategic role in shaping the formative years of the students.

For kindergarten and the first three (3) years of elementary education, instruction, teaching materials, and assessment shall be in the regional or native language of the learners. The Department of Education (DepEd) shall develop a mother tongue-based multilingual education (MTB-MLE) transition program from Grade 4 to Grade 6 to gradually introduce Filipino and English as languages of instruction until the two (2) languages become the primary languages of instruction in the secondary level.

For purposes of this Act, mother tongue or first language (L1) shall refer to the language or languages first learned by a child, with which he or she identifies, and which is used as a medium of communication within the home and community, which he or she knows best, or uses most. This includes Filipino Sign Language [wikang de-senyas] used by individuals with related disabilities. Regional or native language shall refer to the traditional mode of speech or type of Filipino Sign Language existing in a region, locality, or place.

SEC. 5. Curriculum Development. – The DepEd shall develop the design and details of the curriculum for the enhanced basic education. It shall coordinate with the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) to develop a harmonized curriculum for basic and tertiary education for the global competitiveness of Filipino graduates. To ensure college readiness and to avoid remedial or repeat classes in basic education, the DepEd shall coordinate with the CHED and the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA).

To achieve an effective curriculum for the enhanced basic education, the DepEd shall conduct consultations with other national government agencies and other stakeholders such as, but not limited to, the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), Professional Regulation Commission (PRC), associations of private and public schools, national student organizations, national teacher organizations, parent-teacher associations, and business organizations on matters that will affect the said involved stakeholders.

The DepEd shall adhere to the following standards and principles in the development of the enhanced basic education curriculum:

(a) The curriculum shall be learner-centered, relevant, responsive, and appropriate to the developmental stage;

(b) The curriculum shall be meaningful, engaging, and research-based;

(c) The curriculum shall be culturally sensitive;

(d) The curriculum shall be contextualized and globalized;

(e) The curriculum shall employ pedagogies that are constructivist, inquiry-based, reflective, collaborative, and integrative;

(f) The curriculum shall adhere to the principles and framework of Mother Tongue-Based Multilingual Education (MTB-MLE) which starts from what the learners already know and builds from there; shall have instructional materials and teachers who are capable of implementing the MTB-MLE curriculum;

(g) The curriculum shall use a spiral progression approach to ensure mastery of knowledge and skills across each level; and

(h) The curriculum shall be flexible enough to allow schools to localize, indigenize, and enhance it based on their particular educational and social contexts. The production and development of local teaching materials shall be encouraged and the acceptance of these materials shall be subject to regional and division education units.

SEC. 6. Curriculum Advisory Committee. – There is hereby created a curriculum advisory committee which shall be chaired by the Secretary of the DepEd or his/her duly authorized representative and the members shall be composed of, but not limited to, one representative each from the CHED, TESDA, DOLE, PRC, Department of Science and Technology (DOST), and one representative from the business sector such as an industry association in the Information Technology–Business Process Outsourcing (IT-BPO). The advisory committee shall look into the review and evaluation of the implementation of the basic education curriculum and may suggest to the DepEd the formulation of necessary curriculum refinements.

SEC. 7. Teacher Recruitment and Training. – To ensure that the enhanced basic education program meets the requirements for quality teachers and school leaders, the DepEd and CHED shall undertake programs for teacher education and training, in collaboration with relevant government partners, academia, industry, and non-governmental organizations, as follows:

(a) In-Service Content and Pedagogy Training. – Existing DepEd teachers shall be retrained to meet the content and implementation standards of the new K to 12 curriculum.

The DepEd shall ensure that private educational institutions shall be given the opportunity to avail of such training.

(b) New Teacher Training. – New graduates of the current Teacher Education curriculum shall undergo additional training, upon employment, to align their skills with the content standards of the new curriculum. In addition, the CHED, in coordination with the DepEd and relevant stakeholders, shall ensure that the Teacher Education curricula offered in Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) meet the required quality standards for new teachers. Organizations with appropriate recognition acting as TEIs, in coordination with the DepEd, CHED, and other relevant stakeholders, shall ensure that the curricula of these organizations meet the required quality standards for trained teachers.

(c) School Leadership Training. — Superintendents, principals, curriculum coordinators, and other school instructional leaders shall also undergo workshops and training to enhance their skills in their roles as academic, administrative, and community leaders.

Henceforth, such professional development programs shall be initiated and implemented regularly throughout the school year to ensure the continuous upgrading of teacher skills.

SEC. 8. Acceptance into Employment of Graduates in Science, Mathematics, Statistics, Engineering and Other Specialists in Subjects with Acceptable Applicants and Faculty in Technical-Vocational Courses and Higher Education Institutions. — Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 26, 27, and 28 of Republic Act No. 7836, also known as the “Philippine Teachers Professionalization Act of 1994,” the DepEd and private educational institutions shall, according to the requirements of particular subjects, accept:

(a) Graduates in science, mathematics, statistics, engineering, music, and other courses with a shortage of qualified applicants in the Licensure Examination for Teachers (LET) to teach in their area of specialization in elementary and secondary education. Qualified LET applicants also include graduates accepted by foundations with appropriate recognition for their expertise in the education sector and have completed acceptable requirements designated by these organizations: Provided, That they have passed the LET within five (5) years from the date of their acceptance: Provided, further, That if such graduates are willing to teach part-time, the provisions of the LET shall not be required;

(b) Graduates of technical-vocational courses to teach in their specialized subjects in secondary education: Provided, That such graduates possess certifications issued by TESDA: Provided, further, That they shall undergo appropriate in-training provided by the DepEd or Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) at the expense of the DepEd;

(c) Allow faculty of HEIs to teach general education and specialized subjects in secondary education: Provided, That the faculty possess a relevant bachelor’s degree, and have satisfactorily served as a full-time faculty member of the HEI;

(d) The DepEd and private educational institutions may accept practitioners, who are experts in unique subjects offered in the Basic Education Curriculum, to teach at the secondary level: Provided, That they shall teach only on a part-time basis. For this purpose, the DepEd, in coordination with the appropriate government agencies, shall establish the standards of required qualifications for the acceptance of these experts.

SEC. 9. Advocacy for Guidance and Career Counseling. — To properly guide students in choosing their career direction that they intend to pursue, the DepEd, in coordination with the DOLE, TESDA, and CHED, shall conduct regular career advocacy activities for secondary school students. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 27 of Republic Act No. 9258, also known as the “Guidance and Counseling Act of 2004,” career guidance and counseling counselors who are not registered or licensed as guidance counselors shall be allowed to conduct career advocacy activities to secondary school students in the school where they are currently employed: Provided, That they shall undergo a training program to be conducted or recognized by the DepEd.

SEC. 10. Expansion of Beneficiaries of E-GASTPE. — The benefits provided under Republic Act No. 8545 or the “Expanded Government Assistance to Students and Teachers in Private Education Act” shall be expanded to deserving students enrolled under the enhanced basic education program.

The DepEd shall utilize the services of private educational institutions and non-DepEd schools offering senior high school through programs under Republic Act No. 8545, and other financial arrangements developed by the DepEd and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) based on the principles of public-private partnership.

SEC. 11. Appropriations. — The Secretary of Education shall include in the Department’s program the implementation of the enhanced basic education program, with initial funding to be taken from the current appropriations of the DepEd. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued implementation of the enhanced basic education program shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 12. Transitory Provisions. –– The DepEd, CHED, and TESDA shall develop appropriate strategies and mechanisms necessary to ensure a smooth transition from the current ten (10) year basic education cycle to the enhanced basic education cycle (K to 12). The strategies may cover changes in physical infrastructure, staffing, organizational and structural issues, bridging models from Grade 10 competencies and requirements for entry into new tertiary curricula, and government and other entity coordination. Modeling for senior high school may be implemented in selected schools to pilot the transition process and provide concrete data for the transition plan.

To oversee the initial implementation of the enhanced program for basic education and to address the expected low enrollment in various levels for HEIs and Technical Vocational Institutions (TVIs) starting School Year 2016-17, the DepEd shall coordinate with HEIs and TVIs for the utilization of the latter’s personnel and physical facilities. Furthermore, the DepEd, CHED, TESDA, TVIs and HEIs shall coordinate with each other to implement strategies to ensure the academic, physical, financial, and human resource capabilities of HEIs and TVIs to provide educational and training services to graduates of the enhanced basic education program who are less affected. The faculty of HEIs and TVIs who are authorized to teach secondary education students under Section 8 hereof shall be prioritized in the hiring of teachers during the transition period. The implementing rules and regulations (IRR) shall provide for the transition period.

SEC. 13. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on the Enhanced Basic Education Program (K to 12 Program). – There is hereby created a Joint Oversight Committee to oversee, monitor, and assess the implementation of this Act.

The Oversight Committee shall be composed of five (5) members each from the Senate and the House of Representatives, including the Chairpersons of the Committees on Education, Arts and Culture, and Finance of both Houses. The composition of the Committee of each House shall have at least two opposition or minority members.

SEC. 14. Required Evaluation and Review. – At the end of School Year 2014-2015, the DepEd shall conduct a required review and submit a midterm report to Congress on the state of implementation of the K to 12 program in addressing the current shortages in: (1) teachers; (b) classrooms; (c) textbooks; (d) chairs; (e) toilets; and (f) other deficiencies that need to be addressed.

The DepEd shall include in the midterm report the following key metrics on access to and quality of basic education: (a) participation rate; (b) retention rate; (c) National Achievement Test results; (d) completion rate; (e) teacher welfare and profile of training; (f) adequacy of funding requirements; and (g) other learning facilities, including, but not limited to, computer and science laboratories, libraries and learning resource centers, and sports, music, and arts facilities.

SEC. 15. Accountability to Global Standards. – The DepEd shall commit to increasing per capita spending on education towards the immediate attainment of global standards.

SEC. 16. Implementing Rules and Regulations. – The Secretary of the DepEd, the Chairperson of the CHED, and the Director-General of the TESDA shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the implementation of this Act not later than one hundred eighty (180) days from its effectivity.

SEC. 17. Separability Clause. – If any provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, such shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other provisions hereof.

SEC. 18. Repealing Clause. – Provisions relating to Republic Act No. 232 or “The Education Act of 1982,” Republic Act No. 9155 or “The Governance of Basic Education Act of 2001,” Republic Act No. 9258, Republic Act No. 7836, and all other laws, decrees, and executive orders and rules and regulations inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 19. Effectivity Clause. – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Enacted,

(Signed) FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Signed) JUAN PONCE ENRILE President of the Senate

This Act, which was consolidated from Senate Bill No. 3286 and House Bill No. 6643 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 30, 2013.

(Signed) MARILYN BARUA-YAP Secretary General House of Representatives

(Signed) EDWIN B. BELEN Secretary of the Senate

Approved: MAY 15, 2013

(Signed) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

President of the Philippines

Translation of the Official Gazette for informational purposes. This is not the official translation of the law.

Read in English