Translation of the Official Gazette for information purposes. This is not the official translation of the law.

Read in English

No. 5727

No. 3299

Congress of the Philippines

Metropolitan Manila

Fifteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Began and held in Metropolitan Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third of July, two thousand and twelve.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10351]

AN ACT AMENDING THE STRUCTURE OF TAXES IMPOSED ON ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY AMENDING SECTIONS 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 8, 131 AND 288 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8424, ALSO KNOWN AS THE NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1997, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9334, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 141 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 9334, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 141. Distilled Spirits. On distilled spirits, in accordance with the provisions of Section 133 of this Code, the corresponding tax shall be imposed, assessed and collected in accordance with the following schedule:

(a) Effective January 1, 2013

(1) The ad valorem tax equivalent to fifteen percent (15%) of the net retail value (excluding excise tax and value-added tax) per proof; and

(2) In addition to the ad valorem tax imposed herein, a specific tax of Twenty Pesos (PHP20.00) per proof liter.

(b) Effective starting January 1, 2015

(1) The ad valorem tax equivalent to fifteen percent (15%) of the net retail value (excluding excise tax and value-added tax) per proof; and

(2) In addition to the ad valorem tax imposed herein, a specific tax of Twenty Pesos (PHP20.00) per proof liter.

(c) In addition to the ad valorem tax imposed herein, the specific tax amount of Twenty Pesos (PHP20.00) imposed under this Section shall be increased by four percent (4%) each year thereafter and effective starting January 1, 2016 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

Medicinal preparations, flavoring additions to extracts, and all other preparations, except cleaning preparations, which, other than water, constitute the main ingredient of distilled spirits, shall be subject to the same tax as the main ingredient.

This tax shall be increased in proportion to any strength of spirits taxed in excess of proof spirits, and this tax shall attach to the substance as soon as it becomes such, even though it may be subsequently separated as pure or impure spirits, or altered to become another substance as a result of either the original production process or any subsequent process.

‘Spirits or distilled spirits’ shall refer to the substance known as ethyl alcohol, ethanol, or spirits of wine, including all distillations, purifications and dilutions thereof, from whatever source, by whatever process made, and including whisky, brandy, rum, gin and vodka, and other similar products or mixtures.

‘Proof spirits’ shall mean alcohol containing half (1/2) of its volume of alcohol of a specific gravity of seven thousand nine hundred and thirty-nine ten-thousandths (0.7939) at fifteen degrees centigrade (15°C). A “proof liter” shall mean one liter of proof spirits.

‘Net retail value’ shall mean the selling price of distilled spirits at retail in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the National Capital Region, excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible excise taxes and the value-added tax. For distilled spirits sold outside the National Capital Region, ‘net retail value’ shall mean the selling price of distilled spirits in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the region excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible excise taxes and the value-added tax.

The major supermarkets, as determined under this Act, shall be those with the largest annual total sales in the National Capital Region or the region, as the case may be, based on the National Statistics Office, and shall not include stores or kiosks, convenience stores or sari-sari stores, and other similar establishments: Provided, That no two (2) supermarkets in the survey list shall be related to and/or branches of each other: Provided, finally, That in case a particular distilled spirit is not sold in major supermarkets, a price survey may be conducted in retail stores, as the case may be, as determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue.

The net retail value shall be determined by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) through a price survey under oath.

The methodology and all significant documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

A reduction of the proposed net retail value by as much as fifteen percent (15%) of the actual net retail value shall impose an additional excise tax on the manufacturer or importer equivalent to the fixed tax and the difference between the reduced proposed net retail value and the actual net retail value.

“Distilled spirits that have been entered into the domestic market after the effectivity of this Act shall be subject to tax in accordance with their proposed net retail prices.

“‘Proposed net retail price’ shall mean the net retail price which the manufacturers or importers intend to be the retail price of locally manufactured or imported distilled spirits in major supermarkets or retail outlets in the National Capital Region for sales nationwide, and in other regions, for those with regional markets. Within three (3) months from product launch, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall validate the proposed net retail price of the new product against the net retail price according to its definition and initially determine the appropriate tax for a newly introduced distilled spirit. Within nine (9) months from said validation, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall revalidate the previously validated net retail price against the net retail price at the time of revalidation to finally determine the correct tax on a newly introduced distilled spirit.

“All distilled spirits found in the market at the time of effectivity of this Act shall be subject to tax at the tax rates set forth above based on the latest price survey of distilled spirits conducted by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

“The methodology and all essential documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

“Manufacturers and importers of distilled spirits shall be required, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, and within the first five (5) days of each third week thereafter, to submit to the Commissioner a sworn statement of the volume sold for each particular brand of distilled spirits sold in their establishment during the immediately preceding three-month period.

“Any manufacturer or importer who, in violation of this Section, makes a false statement or representation in his or her sworn statement or omits any of the essential data or information required shall, according to the final finding of the Commissioner that the violation has been committed, be penalized by a total cancellation or revocation of the permit to him or it or to conduct business as a manufacturer or importer of distilled spirits.

“Any corporation, association or partnership responsible for any act or omission that violates this Section shall be penalized by triple the amount of the deficiency taxes, surcharges and interest that may be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

“Any person responsible for any act or omission prohibited under this Section shall be criminally liable and penalized under Section 254 of this Code. Any person who knowingly aids or abets in the commission of any such act or omission shall be criminally liable in the same manner as the person who committed it.

“When the violator is not a citizen of the Philippines, he/she shall be immediately deported after serving his/her sentence, without any further proceedings for deportation.”

SEC. 2. Section 142 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 9334, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 142. Wines. – On wines, there shall be collected for each liter of capacity volume effective January 1, 2013, the following corresponding taxes:

“(a) Sparkling wine/champagne regardless of proof, if the net retail price per bottle with a capacity volume of seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 ml.) (exclusive of excise tax and value-added tax) is:

“(1) Five hundred pesos (PHP500.00) or less – Two hundred fifty pesos (PHP250.00); and

“(2) More than Five hundred pesos (PHP500.00) – Seven hundred pesos (PHP700.00).

“(b) Still wines and carbonated wines containing fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume or less, Thirty pesos (PHP30); and

(c) Still wines and carbonated wines containing more than fourteen percent (14%) but not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of alcohol by volume, Sixty pesos (PHP60.00).

The amount of tax imposed under this Section shall be increased by four percent (4%) annually thereafter and shall take effect beginning 1 January 2014 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

Fortified wines containing more than twenty-five percent (25%) of alcohol by volume shall be taxed as distilled spirits. ‘Fortified wine’ shall mean natural wine to which distilled spirits have been added to fortify the alcohol.

‘Net retail price’ shall mean the selling price of sparkling wine/champagne at retail in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the National Capital Region, excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible corresponding taxes and the value-added tax. For sparkling wine/champagne sold outside the National Capital Region, ‘net retail price’ shall mean the selling price of sparkling wine/champagne in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the region excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible corresponding taxes and the value-added tax.

The major supermarkets, according to the findings under this Act, are those with the largest annual total revenues in the National Capital Region or in the region, as the case may be, based on the National Statistics Office, and shall not include stores or kiosks, convenience stores or sari-sari stores, and other similar establishments: Provided, That no two (2) supermarkets in the survey list are related to and/or branches of each other: Provided, finally, That if a particular sparkling wine/champagne is not sold in major supermarkets, a price survey may be conducted in retail stores, as the case may be, based on the determination of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue.

The net retail price shall be determined by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) through a price survey under oath.

The methodology and all important documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

The reduction of the proposed net retail price by up to fifteen percent (15%) of the actual net retail price shall impose an additional corresponding tax on the manufacturer or importer equivalent to the scheduled tax and the difference between the reduced proposed net retail price and the actual net retail price.

Sparkling wine/champagne already in the domestic market upon the effectivity of this Act shall be taxed in accordance with their proposed net retail prices.

‘Proposed net retail price’ shall mean the net retail price which the manufacturers or importers intend to be the retail price of locally manufactured or imported sparkling wine/champagne in major supermarkets or retail outlets in the National Capital Region for sales nationwide, and in other regions, for those with regional markets. Within three (3) months from the product launch, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall validate the proposed net retail price of the new product against the net retail price according to its definition herein and shall initially determine the appropriate tax for a newly introduced sparkling wine/champagne. Within nine (9) months from said validation, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall revalidate the previously validated net retail price against the net retail price at the time of revalidation to finally determine the correct tax for a newly introduced sparkling wine/champagne.

The proper tax classification of sparkling wine/champagne, whether registered before or after the effectivity of this Act, shall be determined every two years from the date of effectivity of this Act.

All sparkling wine/champagne found in the market at the time of effectivity of this Act shall be taxed in accordance with the tax rates set forth above based on the latest price survey of sparkling wine/champagne conducted by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

The methodology and all important documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

Manufacturers and importers of wines shall be required, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, and within the first five (5) days of the third week thereafter, to submit to the Commissioner a sworn statement of the volume sold for each particular brand of wines sold in his/her store during the immediately preceding three-month period.

Any manufacturer or importer who, in violation of this Section, makes a false statement or representation in his/her sworn statement or omits any of the required essential data or information shall, upon final determination by the Commissioner that the violation has been committed, be penalized by a total cancellation or revocation of the permit to him/her or it to conduct business as a manufacturer or importer of wines.

Any corporation, association, or partnership liable for any act or omission that violates this Section shall be fined three times the amount of the deficiency taxes, surcharges, and interest that may be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

Any person liable for any act or omission prohibited under this Section shall incur criminal liability and be punished under Section 254 of this Code. Any person who voluntarily aids or encourages the commission of any such act or omission shall incur criminal liability similar to that of the principal offender.

When the violator is not a citizen of the Philippines, he/she shall be immediately deported after serving the sentence, without any further deportation proceedings.

SEC. 3. Section 143 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 9334, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 143. Fermented Liquors. – The corresponding tax shall be imposed, assessed and collected for beer, lager beer, ale, porter, and other fermented liquors, except tuba, basi, tapuy and similar fermented liquors according to the following schedule:

“Effective January 1, 2013

(a) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60) or less, the tax shall be fifteen pesos (PHP15.00) per liter; and

(b) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is more than fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60), the tax shall be twenty pesos (PHP20.00) per liter.

“Effective January 1, 2014

(a) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60) or less, the tax shall be seventeen pesos (PHP17.00) per liter; and

(b) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is more than fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60), the tax shall be twenty-one pesos (PHP21.00) per liter.

“Effective January 1, 2015

(a) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60) or less, the tax shall be nineteen pesos (PHP19.00) per liter; and

(b) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is more than fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60), the tax shall be twenty-two pesos (PHP22.00) per liter.

“Effective January 1, 2016

(a) When the net retail value (excluding corresponding taxes and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60) or less, the tax shall be twenty-one pesos (PHP21.00) per liter; and

(b) When the net retail value (excluding corresponding taxes and the value-added tax) per liter of capacity per volume is more than fifty pesos and sixty centavos (PHP50.60), the tax shall be twenty-three pesos (PHP23.00) per liter.

Effective starting January 1, 2017, the tax on all fermented liquor shall be twenty-three pesos and fifty centavos (PHP23.50) per liter.

The amount of tax imposed under this Section shall be increased by four percent (4%) each year thereafter and effective starting January 1, 2018 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance. However, in the case of fermented liquors affected by the provision on “no downward reclassification” in accordance with the prescription of this Section, the four percent (4%) increase shall be applied to their respective corresponding tax rates.

Fermented liquors brewed and sold in micro-breweries or in small establishments such as drinking bars and restaurants shall be subject to the amount of twenty-eight pesos (PHP28.00) per liter effective starting January 1, 2013: Provided, That this amount shall be increased by four percent (4%) each year thereafter and effective starting January 1, 2014 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

Fermented liquors that have already entered the domestic market after the effectivity of this Act shall be taxed in accordance with their proposed net retail values.

The ‘proposed net retail value’ shall mean the net retail value which the manufacturers or importers intend to be the retail value of locally manufactured or imported fermented liquors in major supermarkets or retail outlets in the National Capital Region for sales nationwide, and in other regions, for those with regional markets. Within three (3) months from product launch, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall validate the proposed net retail value of the new product against the net retail value according to its definition herein and initially determine the appropriate tax for a newly introduced fermented liquor. Within nine (9) months from such validation, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall revalidate the previously validated net retail value against the net retail value at the time of revalidation to finally determine the correct tax for a newly introduced fermented liquor.

The ‘net retail value’ shall mean the selling price of the fermented liquor at retail in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the National Capital Region, excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible corresponding taxes and the value-added tax. For brands marketed outside the National Capital Region, the ‘net retail value’ shall mean the selling price of the fermented liquor in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the region excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible corresponding taxes and the value-added tax.

The major supermarkets, as determined in this Act, shall be those with the largest annual total gross sales in the National Capital Region or in the region, as the case may be, based on the National Statistics Office, and shall not include stores or kiosks, convenience stores or sari-sari stores, and other similar establishments: Provided, That no two (2) supermarkets in the survey list shall be related and/or branches of each other: Provided, finally, That should a particular fermented liquor not be sold in major supermarkets, a price survey may be conducted in retail stores where such fermented liquor is sold in the National Capital Region or in the region, as the case may be, as determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue.

The net retail value shall be determined by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) through a price survey under oath.

The methodology and all significant documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Committee on Oversight on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

A reduction of the proposed net retail value by as much as fifteen percent (15%) of the actual net retail value shall impose an additional corresponding tax on the manufacturer or importer equivalent to the prescribed tax and the difference between the reduced proposed net retail value and the actual net retail value.

Any downward reclassification of existing categories, for purposes of taxation, of fermented liquors registered during the effectivity of this Act that would reduce the tax imposed thereon, or the levy from it, is prohibited.

The proper tax classification of fermented liquors, whether registered before or after the enactment of this Act, shall be determined every two (2) years from the date of enactment of this Act.

All fermented liquor found in the market at the time of effectivity of this Act shall be taxed in accordance with the tax rates set forth above based on the latest price survey of sparkling wine/champagne conducted by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

The methodology and all important documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

Every brewer and importer of fermented liquor shall be required, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, and within the first five (5) days of every third week thereafter, to file with the Commissioner a sworn statement of the volume sold for each particular brand of fermented liquor sold in his/her establishment during the immediately preceding three-month period.

Any brewer or importer who, in violation of this Section, makes a false statement or representation in his/her sworn statement or omits any of the required essential data or information shall, in accordance with the final findings of the Commissioner that the violation was committed, be punished by a total cancellation or revocation of the permit to him/her or it to conduct business as a brewer or importer of distilled spirits.

Any corporation, association or partnership liable for any act or omission that violates this Section shall be fined triple the amount of the deficiency taxes, surcharges, and interest that may be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

Anyone liable for any act or omission prohibited under this Section shall be criminally liable and punished under Section 254 of this Code. Anyone who voluntarily helps or encourages the commission of any such act or omission shall be criminally liable in the same manner as the one who committed it.

When the violator is not a citizen of the Philippines, he/she shall be immediately deported after serving his/her sentence, without further proceedings for deportation.

SEC. 4. Section 144 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 9334, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

SEC. 144. Tobacco Products. – There shall be collected a specific tax of One peso and seventy-five centavos (PHP1.75) effective January 1, 2013 on each kilogram of the following tobacco products:

(a) Tobacco twisted by hand or delivered in a condition for consumption in any manner other than the ordinary mode of drying and hardening;

(b) Tobacco prepared or partly prepared with or without machinery or instrument or not tipped or sweetened unless otherwise provided below; and

(c) Small cuttings and scraps, stems, cuttings, trimmings, and refuse of tobacco unless otherwise provided below.

Tobacco leaves in stalk, tobacco prepared or partly prepared with or without machinery or instrument or not tipped or sweetened, small cuttings and scraps, stems, cuttings, gilts, midribs, and refuse of tobacco from the stripping or threshing of whole leaf tobacco shall be transferred, disposed of, or otherwise sold, without any prior payment of the specific tax assigned thereto, if it is exported abroad or used in the manufacture of tobaccos, cigarettes or other tobacco products on which the final product shall pay the corresponding tax, under conditions to be prescribed in rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner.

On tobacco specifically prepared for chewing so as not to be used in any other manner, one peso and fifty centavos (PHP1.50) per kilogram, effective January 1, 2013.

The amount of tax imposed under this Section shall be increased by four percent (4%) each year thereafter and effective January 1, 2014 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

No tobacco product manufactured in the Philippines and intended for export shall be removed from its place of manufacture or exported abroad without posting an export bond equivalent to the specific tax thereon if sold domestically: Provided, however, That tobacco products for export may be transferred from the place of manufacture to a bonded warehouse, after posting a transfer bond, prior to exportation.

Tobacco products imported into the Philippines and destined for other countries shall be allowed entry without posting a bond equivalent to the value of the customs liability, duties, and value-added tax imposed thereon if sold domestically.

Manufacturers and importers of tobacco products are required, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, and within the first five (5) days of each third week thereafter, to submit to the Commissioner an affidavit of the volume sold for each particular brand of tobacco product sold in their store during the immediately preceding three-month period.

Any manufacturer or importer who, in violation of this Section, makes a false statement or representation in their affidavit or that of its, any of the required essential data or information is, according to the final finding of the Commissioner that the violation was committed, shall be punished by a complete cancellation or revocation of the permit to him or it or to conduct business as a manufacturer or importer of tobacco or cigarettes.

Any corporation, association or partnership liable for any act or omission that violates this Section shall be fined triple the amount of the deficiency taxes, surcharges and interest that may be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

Anyone liable for any act or omission prohibited under this Section shall have criminal liability and be punished under Section 254 of this Code. Anyone who voluntarily aids or encourages the commission of any such act or omission shall have criminal liability similar to that of the actual perpetrator.

When the violator is not a citizen of the Philippines, he/she shall be immediately deported after serving the sentence, without any further deportation proceedings.

SEC. 5. Section 145 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 9334, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

”SEC. 145. Tobacco and Cigarettes

“(A) Tobacco. – The corresponding tax shall be imposed, assessed and collected for tobacco in accordance with the following schedule:

“(1) Effective starting January 1, 2013

“(a) The ad valorem tax equivalent to twenty percent (20%) of the net retail price (excluding the corresponding excise tax and the value-added tax) per tobacco; and

“(b) In addition to the ad valorem tax imposed herein, a specific tax of Five pesos (PHP5.00) per tobacco.

“(2) In addition to the ad valorem tax imposed herein, the specific tax amount of Five pesos (PHP5.00) imposed under this Section shall be increased by four percent (4%) each year thereafter and effective starting January 1, 2014 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

“(B) Hand-Rolled Cigars. – The corresponding tax shall be imposed, assessed and collected for hand-rolled cigars in accordance with the following schedule:

“Effective starting January 1, 2013, Twelve pesos (PHP12.00) per pack;

“Effective starting January 1, 2014, Fifteen pesos (PHP15.00) per pack;

“Effective starting January 1, 2015, Eighteen pesos (PHP18.00) per pack;

“Effective starting January 1, 2016, Twenty-one pesos (PHP21.00) per pack; and

“The amount of tax imposed under this subsection shall be increased by four percent (4%) annually* effective January 1, 2018 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

“Hand-rolled cigarettes with corresponding registration may only be packed in packs of twenty and other combinations of packing not exceeding twenty.

“‘Hand-rolled cigarettes’ refer to the method of packing cigarette pieces using a person’s hands and not through other methods such as mechanical equipment, machines or apparatus.

“(C) Machine-rolled Cigarettes. The corresponding tax shall be imposed, assessed and collected for hand-rolled cigarettes in accordance with the provisions below.

“Effective starting January 1, 2013

“(1) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) is Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack or less, the tax is Twelve pesos (PHP12.00) per pack; and

“(2) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) is more than Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack, the tax is Twenty-five pesos (PHP25.00) per pack.

“Effective starting January 1, 2014

“(1) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) is Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack or less, the tax is Seventeen pesos (PHP17.00) per pack; and

“(2) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) is more than Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack, the tax is Twenty-seven pesos (PHP27.00) per pack.

“Effective starting January 1, 2015

“(1) When the net retail price (excluding the corresponding tax and the value-added tax) is Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack or less, the tax is Twenty-one pesos (PHP21.00) per pack; and

(2) When the net retail price (excluding excise tax and value-added tax) exceeds Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack, the tax is Twenty-eight pesos (PHP28.00) per pack.

“Effective starting January 1, 2016

(1) When the net retail price (excluding excise tax and value-added tax) is Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack or less, the tax is Twenty-five pesos (PHP25.00) per pack; and

(2) When the net retail price (excluding excise tax and value-added tax) exceeds Eleven pesos and fifty centavos (PHP11.50) per pack, the tax is Twenty-nine pesos (PHP29.00) per pack.

“Effective starting January 1, 2017, the tax on all machine-made cigarettes shall be thirty pesos (PHP30.00) per pack.

“The amount of tax imposed under this subsection shall be increased by four percent (4%) annually* effective January 1, 2018 through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

“Machine-made cigarettes with corresponding registration may only be manufactured and packaged in packs of twenty and other combinations of packaging not exceeding twenty.

“A reduction of the proposed net retail price by up to fifteen percent (15%) of the actual net retail price shall impose an additional excise tax on the manufacturer or importer equivalent to the fixed tax and the difference between the reduced proposed net retail price and the actual net retail price.

“Cigarettes already entered into the domestic market after the effectivity of this Act shall be taxed in accordance with their proposed net retail prices.

“‘Proposed net retail price’ shall mean the net retail price which the manufacturers or importers intend to be the retail price of locally manufactured or imported fermented liquor in major supermarkets or retail outlets in the National Capital Region for sales nationwide, and in other regions, for those with regional markets. Within three (3) months from product launch, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall validate the proposed net retail price of the new product against the net retail price according to its definition and initially determine the appropriate tax for a newly introduced cigarette. Within nine (9) months from said validation, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall revalidate the previously validated net retail price against the net retail price at the time of revalidation to finally determine the correct tax on a newly introduced cigarette.

“‘Net retail price’ shall mean the selling price of the cigarette at retail in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the National Capital Region, excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible excise taxes and value-added tax. For cigarettes sold outside the National Capital Region, ‘net retail price’ shall mean the selling price of the cigarette in at least five (5) major supermarkets in the region excluding the amount intended to cover all collectible excise taxes and value-added tax.

“Major supermarkets, as defined under this Act, shall refer to those with the largest annual total gross sales in the National Capital Region or in the region, as the case may be, based on the National Statistics Office, and shall not include retail stores or kiosks, convenience stores or sari-sari stores, and others of similar nature: Provided, That no two (2) supermarkets in the survey list are related and/or affiliates of each other: Provided, finally, That should a particular cigarette not be sold in major supermarkets, a price survey may be conducted in retail stores where the said cigarette is sold in the National Capital Region or in the region, as the case may be, as determined by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue.

“The net retail price shall be determined by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) through a price survey under oath.

“The methodology and all significant documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

“A reduction of the proposed net retail price by up to fifteen percent (15%) of the actual net retail price shall impose an additional excise tax on the manufacturer or importer equivalent to the fixed tax and the difference between the reduced proposed net retail price and the actual net retail price.

The proper tax classification of cigarettes, whether registered before or after the effectivity of this Act, shall be determined biennially from the date of effectivity of this Act.

All cigarettes found in the market at the time of effectivity of this Act shall be taxed in accordance with the levels of tax set forth above based on the latest price survey of cigarettes conducted by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

The methodology and all essential documents used in conducting the latest price survey shall be submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created under Republic Act No. 8240.

No tobacco product manufactured in the Philippines and intended for export shall be removed from its place of manufacture or exported abroad without posting an export bond equivalent to the corresponding tax due thereon if sold domestically: Provided, however, That tobacco products for export may be transferred from the place of manufacture to a bonded facility, after posting a transfer bond, prior to export.

Tobacco products imported into the Philippines and destined for re-export shall be allowed entry without posting a bond equivalent to the amount of the customs liability, duties and value-added tax imposed thereon if sold domestically.

In the total volume of cigarettes sold in the country, any manufacturer and/or dealer of tobacco products shall be required to procure at least fifteen percent (15%) of their required tobacco leaf from local growers, which may be subject to adjustment in accordance with international treaty obligations.

Manufacturers and importers of tobacco and cigarettes shall be required, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, and within the first five (5) days of each third week thereafter, to submit to the Commissioner a sworn statement of the volume of tobacco and/or cigarettes sold in his/her store during the immediately preceding three-month period.

Any manufacturer or importer who, in violation of this Section, makes a false statement or representation in his/her sworn statement or omits any of the required essential data or information shall, subject to the final determination by the Commissioner that a violation has been committed, be penalized by a total cancellation or revocation of the permit to him/her or it to engage in business as a manufacturer or importer of tobacco or cigarettes.

Any corporation, association or partnership liable for any act or omission in violation of this Section shall be penalized by triple the amount of the deficiency taxes, surcharges and interest that may be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

Any person liable for any act or omission prohibited under this Section shall be criminally liable and penalized under Section 254 of this Code. Any person who willingly aids or abets in the commission of any such act or omission shall be criminally liable in the same manner as the person who actually committed it.

When the violator is not a citizen of the Philippines, he/she shall be immediately deported after serving his/her sentence, without further proceedings for deportation.”

SEC. 6. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 8424, or the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8. Duty of the Commissioner to Ensure the Provision and Distribution of Forms, Receipts, Certificates, and Uses, and the Identifications of Payment of Taxes. –

“(A) Provision and Distribution to Appropriate Officials. – Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, it shall be the duty of the Commissioner, among other things, to assign, provide, and distribute to the appropriate officials the necessary licenses; internal revenue stamps; unique, secure and non-removable marks of identification (hereinafter referred to as unique identification marks), such as codes or seals, to be affixed to or forming part of all packages and cartons and any external wrapping of cigarettes and bottles of distilled spirits; labels and other forms; certificates; bonds; records; invoices; books; receipts; equipment; applications and apparatus used in the administration of the laws within the jurisdiction of the Bureau. For this purpose, the internal revenue stamps, or other marks and labels shall originate from the Commissioner the printing with sufficient security features.

“The internal revenue stamps, whether bar code or fusion design, or other marks shall be required to be affixed or printed firmly and conspicuously on each package of tobacco and cigarettes and bottles of distilled spirits subject to the corresponding tax in the manner and form prescribed by the Commissioner, with the approval of the Secretary of Finance.”

To further improve tax administration, cigarette and alcohol manufacturers are mandated to install automated volume counters for packages and bottles to prevent excessive reduction or misdeclaration of deductions.

SEC. 7. Section 131, Subsection A of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 9334, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 131. Payment of Corresponding Taxes on Imported Articles. –

“x   x   x

“Notwithstanding the provision of any law, whether general or special, the importation of tobacco and cigarettes, distilled spirits, fermented liquors and wines into the Philippines, even if consigned to duty-free shops and duty-free outlets, shall be subject to all applicable taxes, duties, charges, including the corresponding tax thereon. This shall apply to tobacco and cigarettes, distilled spirits, fermented liquors and wines brought directly to the respective warehouses or lawful freeports of the Subic Special Economic and Freeport Zone, created under Republic Act No. 7227; the Cagayan Special Economic Zone, created under Republic Act No. 7922; the Zamboanga City Special Economic Zone, created under Republic Act No. 7903, and other similar freeports that may be established or created by law from time to time: Provided, however, That notwithstanding the provisions of Republic Acts No. 9400 and 9593, the importation of tobacco and cigarettes, distilled spirits, fermented liquors and wines directly made by government-owned and operated duty-free shops, such as Duty-Free Philippines (DFP), shall be exempt from all applicable duties only: x   x   x

“x   x   x

“Confiscated articles shall be destroyed using the environmentally sound method available in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioners of Customs and Internal Revenue.

“x    x   x.”

SEC. 8. Section 288, subsections (B) and (C) of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 9334, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

(B) Incremental Revenue from Republic Act No. 8240. – Fifteen percent (14%) of the incremental revenue collected from the taxes on tobacco products under Republic Act No. 8240 shall be allocated and divided among the provinces producing burley and native tobacco in accordance with the volume of tobacco leaf production. The fund shall be used only for programs that promote alternative livelihood opportunities for tobacco farmers and workers such as:

(1) Programs that provide knowledge, training, and other support to tobacco farmers to shift to the production of agricultural products other than tobacco, such as, but not limited to, high-value crops, spices, rice, corn, sugarcane, coconut, livestock raising, and fisheries;

(2) Programs that will provide financial support to tobacco farmers who have been displaced or have stopped harvesting tobacco;

(3) Cooperative programs that will assist tobacco farmers in planting alternative crops or implementing other livelihood projects;

(4) Livelihood programs and projects that will promote, improve, and develop the tourism potential of tobacco-producing provinces;

(5) Infrastructure projects such as farm-to-market roads, schools, hospitals, and rural health facilities; and

(6) Agro-industrial projects that will allow tobacco farmers to be involved in the management and eventually the ownership of projects, such as secondary processing and post-harvest activities like cigarette manufacturing and by-product utilization.

“The Department of Budget and Management, in consultation with the Department of Agriculture, shall issue rules and regulations regarding the allocation and release of this fund, no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days from the effectivity of this Act.

“(C) Incremental Revenues from the Corresponding Alcohol and Tobacco Taxes. –

“After deducting the allocations under Republic Acts No. 7171 and 8240, eighty percent (80%) of the remaining balance of the incremental revenues generated from this Act shall be allocated for universal health care under the National Health Insurance Program, the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and health promotion programs; and twenty percent (20%) shall be allocated nationwide, based on political subdivisions and districts, for medical assistance and programs in facilities for health improvement, the annual needs of which shall be determined by the Department of Health (DOH).”

SEC. 9. Transitional Provision. – A special financial assistance for workers displaced from the alcohol and tobacco industries shall be appropriated and included in the appropriations under the Department of Labor and Employment to fund the unemployment mitigation program; and to the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) to fund the training and retooling programs of displaced workers, to be integrated into the General Appropriations Acts for Fiscal Years 2014 to 2017.

SEC. 10. Annual Report. – The Department of Budget and Management (DBM), the Department of Agriculture (DA), the Department of Health (DOH), and the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) shall each submit to the Oversight Committee, created under Republic Act No. 8240, a detailed report on the expenditures of the amounts allocated in this Section on the first week of August each year. The reports shall be simultaneously published in the Official Gazette and the websites of the agencies.

SEC. 11. Congressional Oversight Committee. – The composition of the Congressional Oversight Committee, created under Republic Act No. 8240, shall include the Chairpersons of the Committees on Agriculture and Health in the Senate and the House of Representatives as part of the four (4) members to be designated from each House.

Upon receipt of the annual reports from the DBM, DA, DOH, DOLE, PhilHealth and TESDA, the Committee shall review and ensure the proper implementation of this Act with respect to the expenditures of the allocated funds.

SEC. 12. Implementing Rules and Regulations. – The Secretary of Finance shall, upon recommendation of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, and in consultation with the Department of Health, promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act not later than one hundred and eighty (180) days from its effectivity.

SEC. 13. Separability Clause. – If any provision of this Act is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining parts of this Act or any provision not affected by such declaration of invalidity shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 14. Repealing Clause. – All laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, executive or administrative orders and other similar issuances issued by the president that are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 15. Effectivity Clause. – This Act shall take effect immediately upon its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

Adopted,

(Signed) JUAN PONCE ENRILE President of the Senate

(Signed) FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act, which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 5727 and Senate Bill No. 3299, was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 11, 2012.

Adopted: 19 DIS 2012

(Signature) EMMA LIRIO-REYES

Secretary of the Senate

(Signature) MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP

Secretary General

House of Representatives

(Signature) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

President of the Philippines

*Translation from the Official Gazette for informational purposes. This is not the official translation of the law.

Read in English