S.No. 2748
IL. No. 3862

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila

Fifteenth Congress

Hirst Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of
July, two thousand ten.

—
[ Repusuic ActNo. 10154 }

AN ACT REQUIRING ALL CONCERNED GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
TO ENSURE THE EARLY RELEASE OF THE RETIREMENT PAY,
PENSIONS, GRATUITIES AND OTHER BENEFITS OF RETIRING
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION. 1. Declaration of State Policy. ~ It is hereby
declared that it is the policy of the State to ensure the timely
and expeditious release of the retirement pay, pensions,
gratuities and other benefits of all retiring employees of the
government. Public officers and emnployees who have spent the
best years of their lives serving the government and the public
should not be made to wait to receive benefits which are due
to them under the law. Accordingly, it is: ‘Hereby mandated
that highest priority shall be given.to the. payment and/or

  
 

settlement of the pensions, gratuities and/or other retirement
benefits of retiring government employees.

SEC. 2. Period for Release of Retirement Benefits. -
The head of the government agency concerned, the President
and other responsible officers of the Government Service
Insurance System (GSIS), the President and other responsible
officers of the Home Development Mutual Fund (Pag-IBIG
Fund) and/or the Secretary and other responsible officers of
the Department of Budget and Management (BM) shall
ensure the release of the retirement pay, pensions, gratuities,
and other benefits of a retiring government employee within
a period of thirty (80) days from the date of the actual
retirement of said employee: Provided, That all requirements
are submitted to the concerned government agency at least
ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of retirement:
Provided, further, That in the case of the GSIS, it shall pay
the retirement benefits of the retiring employee on his/her last
day of his/her service to the government, pursuant to the GSIS
Charter.

SEC. 3. Retiring Employees With Pending Cases. — In
the case of retiring government employees with pending cases
and whose retirement benefits are being lawfully withheld due
to possible pecuniary liability, the head of the agency where
such case is pending shall ensure that the said case shall be
terminated and/or resolved within a period of three (3) months
from the date of the retirement of the concerned employee:
Provided, That in case the concerned agency fails to terminate
and/or resolve the case within the said period without any
justifiable reason(s), the retirement benefits due to the
employee shall be immediately released to him/her without
prejudice to the ultimate resolution of the case; except, when
the delay is deliberately caused by the retiring employee.

SEc. 4. Coverage. — This Act shall cover all branches,
agencies and/or instrumentalities of the government, including
government-owned and/or -controlled corporations (GOCCs),
excluding personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines,
and shall be applicable both to applications for compulsory
retirement and optional or early retirement as authorized by
law.


SEC. 5. Penal Provisions. — The unjustified failure
and/or refusal to release the pension, gratuities and other
retirement benefits due to a retiring government employee
within the periods prescribed above or to comply with any
provision of this Act shall be a ground for the filing of
administrative disciplinary action against the erring officer(s)
and/or employee(s). Such erring officer(s) and/or employee(s)
shall, after hearing and due proceedings, be penalized with
suspension from the service without pay from six (6) months
to one (1) year, at the discretion of the disciplining authority.

This penalty shall not apply if the release of the
retirement benefits could not be accomplished due to force
majeure and other insuperable causes. In such cases, the
thirty (30)-day period shall be counted from the time such
cause(s) cease(s) to exist.

SEc. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. ~ The
Civil Service Commission (CSC), after consultation and
coordination with the government agencies and/or
instrumentalities affected by this Act, including, but not
limited to, the GSIS, the Pag-IBIG Fund, the Constitutional
Commissions, the Legislature and the Judiciary as well as the
Office of the Government Corporate Counsel (OGCC) and the
Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG),
shall promulgate and issue the appropriate rules and
regulations for the proper implementation of this Act.

Such rules and regulations shall include provisions
prescribing uniform periods for the advance filing of retirement
applications in the different agencies concerned, as well as
standard periods for the processing and release of claims for
retirement benefits, gratuities and allowances which will
pinpoint responsibility in case of delay in the release thereof.

SEC. 7. Separability Clause. — If any provision, part
or portion of this Act shall be held as invalid, the provisions,
parts or portions of this Act not otherwise affected thereby
shall remain valid and effective.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause. — All laws, executive
issuances, orders and rules and regulations contrary to or


inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or any part thereof
are hereby repealed, amended and/or modified accordingly.

SEc. 9. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or
in two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the country.

  
       
 

Approved,

FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.
Speaker of the House

President of the Sen
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Hill No. 2748
and House Bill No. 3862 was finally passed by the Senate
and the House of Representatives on May 30, 2011 and
June 1, 2011, respectively.

MARILYN z Keine

Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

 

   
 
  

Approved: JUL 1 4

VX

BENIGNO IM 0

President

QO

 

Mitt
PNOY002976