S, No. 3204 
H. No. 6204 
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh 
day of July, two thousand fifteen. 
{ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10871J 
AN ACT REQUIRING BASIC EDUCATION STUDENTS TO 
UNDERGO AGE-APPROPRIATE BASIC LIFE SUPPORT 
TRAINING 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of th
Philippines in Congress assembled: 
SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as 
the "Basic Life Support Traming in Schools Act". 
SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. - Pursuant to Section 15, 
Article II of the 1987 Phihppine Constitution, it is hereby 
declared the policy of the State to protect and promote the 
right to health of the people and instill health consciousness 
among them. 
Pursuant thereto, the State shall ensure that able-bodied 
citizens are equipped with the necessary knowledge and basic 
skills to respond to certain health emergencies. 

SEC. 3. Basic Life Support for Basic Education. Students. 
- It shall be the duty of aU public and private 
schools operating nationwide to provide their st
basic life support training through the use of 
training in an age-appropriate manner. The instr
include programs which liave been developed by th
Heart Association (PHA) or Philippine National 
(PNRC) using nationally-recognized, evidence-based
for emergency cardiovascular care, and psychomoto
to support the instruction. As far as practic
education schools shall incorporate basic life su
as part of the schools' comprehensive health an
education curriculum. 
As used in this Act, psychomotor training re
hands-on practice to support cognitive learning.
SEC. 4. Certification for Training. - AU successful 
student-trainees shall be certified to have un
training required by a competent school authorit
SEC. 5. Training Providers. - The school principal 
administrator shall coordinate with the Departme
(DOH) for its assistance in providing competent i
the school's basic life support education trainin
DOH shall accredit nongovernment organizations 
competent to provide basic life support instruct
SEC. 6. Exceptions. - Students suffering from a
physical or mental disabiUty which may render th
to perform a basic life support procedure are ex
going through the basic Ufe support training pr
SEC. 7. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to c
out the provisions of this Act shall be charged
current year's appropriation of the Departmen
implementing agencies. Thereafter, such amount a
necessary for the continued implementation of th
be included in the annual General Appropriation
SEC. 8. Implementing Rules and Regulations. - Within 
ninety (90) days from the approval of tliis Act,
of Education, in consultation with the Secretar
shall formulate the rules and regulations imple
provisions
issued pur
after its
circulatio
SEC. 9.
(15) days 
newspaper 
Approve
FELICIAN
Speaker
of Repr
Senate 
onMay 23, 
No. 6204 b
MARILYN B
Secreta
House of 
Approved
B E
P
L a p s e d
W i t h o u
In a c c o
2 T ( 1 ) o