H, No, 6021

Ropablic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
fetes Manis

Sixteenth Congress
Ghich Regular Session

ee,

—2

Begun and held in Metro. Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No.10901 ]

AN ACT GRANTING THE PILIPINAS ASIAN PEARL
AIRWAYS, INC. A FRANCHISE TO ESTABLISH,
OPERATE AND MAINTAIN DOMESTIC AND
INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORT SERVICES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Natureand Scope of Franchise. ~ Subject to
the provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and applicable
laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to Pilipinas
Asian Pearl Airways, Ine., hereunder referred to as the grantee,
its successors or assignees, a franchise to establish, operate and
maintain transport services for the carriage of passengers, mail,
goods and properties by air, both domestic and international.


Air transport services shall include the maintenance
and operation of hangars and aircraft service stations and
facilities and other services of similar nature which may be
necessary, convenient or useful as an auxiliary to aircraft
transportation.

The grantee shall have the right at its terminal and landing
fields, as well asin its aircraft, to construct, operate and maintain
stations or transmitting sets for wireless telegraphy and direction
findings, and other radio aids te air navigation, using wavelengths
in accordance with the rules and regulations made from time
to time by the proper agencies of the government. The wireless
communication facilities shall be used solely for receiving and
transmitting weather forecasts and other matters in connection
with the grantee's services,

SEC. 2. Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). — The grantee
shall secure from the CAB the appropriate permits and licenses
. for its operations.

All aircraft used by the grantee including their accessories
and equipment shall at all times be air worthy and the crew
members shall be licensed by the Governmentof the Philippines.
They shall be equipped with radio communications, safety and
other equipment, and shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with the regulations and technical requirements of
the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP) or other
regulatory bodies the government may prescribe for this purpose.

The grantee's equipment and the operation of such
equipment shall at all times be subject to inspection and regulation
hy the CAAP.

The grantee shall comply with the provisions of Republic
Act No. 776, as amended, otherwise known as "The Civil
Aeronautics Act of the Philippines", and the regulations
promulgated thereunder from time to time.

SEC. 8. Responsibility to the Public. — Excepting cases of
force majeure and whenever weather conditions permit, the
grantee shall maintain scheduled and/or non-scheduled and/or
chartered air transport services to any and all points and places
throughout the Philippines and between the Philippines and other
countries at such frequencies ag traffic needs may require:
Provided, however, That at least twenty-five percent (26%) of all
its frequencies shall be for the domestic market,

SEC. 4. Rates for Services. — The grantee shall fix just
and reasonable rates for the transportation of passengers,
mail, goods and freight, subject to the regulations and approval
of the CAB and other proper regulatory agencies of the
government,

SEC. 6. Term of Franchise. ~ This franchise shall be for
a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of effectivity of
this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall
be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the grantee fails to
comply with any of the following conditions:

() Commedice operations within one (1) year from the
approval of its permit by the CAB;

b) Secure an Air Operator Certificate (AOC) from CAAP
within the same period of its application for a CAB permit;

©) Operate continuously for two (2) years; and

@ Commence operations within two (2) years from the
effectivity of this Act,

SEC. 6. Acceptance and Compliance. ~ Acceptance of
this franchise shall be given in writing within sixty (60) days
after the effectivity of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the
grantee shall exercise the privileges granted under this Act,
Nonacceptance shall render the franchise void.


SEC. 7. Bond. — The grantee shall file a bond issued in

favor of the CAB, which shall determine the amount, to guarantee
the compliance with and fulfillment of the conditions under
which this franchise is granted. If, after three (8) years from the
date of approval of its permit by the CAB, the grantee shall have

fulfilled the same, the bond shall be cancelled hy the CAB. .

Otherwise, the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the government
and the franchise ipse facto revoked.

: SEC. 8. Landing Facilities. - The grantee may use the
landing and other aizport facilities on land and water as may be
maintained or owned by the government within the Philippines
on the grantee's line subject to such terme and. conditions,
restrictions, and national policy considerations as the Philippine
Government may impose: Provided, That the Philippine
Government shall have the right to use the landing and other

. airport facilities as may be maintained and owned by the grantee
in the Philippines.

SEC. 9. Contracts. - The grantee is authorized to enter
into transportation contracts with the Philippine Government,
including the carrying of mail, upon such terms and
conditions as may be mutually agreed upon. The grantee shall
give preferential consideration to contracts with the Philippine
Government, The grantee may likewise enter into transportation
maintenance and/or servicing contracts, and such other contracts
relating to air transport with other foreign-owned airlines
particularly with those which have international routes.

SEC. 10. Right of Government. - A special right is hereby
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of war,
rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster, or
disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and
operate the facilities or equipment of the grantee; to temporarily
suspend the operation of any facility or equipment in the interest
of public safety, security, and public welfare; or to authorize the
temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the
government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of

said facilities or equipment during the period when these shall
be so operated.

Sec. 11. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. - The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of accidents or
injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the operation
of the services under the franchise hereby granted.

SEC. 12. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or Assignment
of Franchise. - The grantee shall not lease, transfor, grant the
usufrudt of, sell nor assign this franchise or the tights and
privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company,
corporation or other commercial or legal entity, nor merge with
any other corporation or entity, nor shall transfer the controlling
interest of the grantee, whether asa wholeorin parts, and whether
simultaneously or contemporancously, to any such person, firm,
company, corporation or entity without the prior approval of the
Congress of the Philippines: Provided, That Congress shall be
informed of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or
assignment of frarfchise or the rights and privileges acquired.
thereunder, or the merger or transfer of the controlling
interest of the grantee, within sixty (60) days after the completion
of said transaction: Provided, further, That failure to report to
Congress such change of ownership shall render the franchise
ipso facto revoked: Provided, finally, That any person or entity
to which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be
subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.

SEC. 18. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with
the constitutional provision te encourage public participation in
public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens atleast
thirty percent (80%) of its outstanding capital stock or a higher
percentage that may hereafter be provided by law in any securities
exchange in the Philippines within five (8) years from the
commencement of its operations.


SEC. 14. Equality Clause. — Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under other existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted, upon prior
review and approval of Congress, shall become part of this
franchise and shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally
to the herein grantee: Provided, That the foregoing shall
neither apply to nor affect provisions of air transport services
franchises concerning territory covered by the franchise, the
life span of the franchise or the type of service authorized by
the franchise,

SEC. 15. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the
Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of every year
during the term of its franchise. The reportorial compliance
certificate issued by Congress shall be required before any
application for permit or certificate is accepted by the CAB.

SEC. 16. Penalty Clause. — Failure of the grantee to
submit the requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized
by a fine in the amount of five hundred pesos (P500.00) per
working day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the
CAB from the delinquent franchise grantee, separate from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the CAB.

SEC. 17. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or -

provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provigions not
affected thereby shall remain valid,

SEC. 18. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so
requires, and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant
of the privileges herein provided for.

 

q

Ske. 18. Effectivity. ~ This Act shall take effect fifteen
(18) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

   
 

\

 
 
  

KLIN M. DRILON fr eano BELMONTE JR.
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

s
a

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate on September 21, 2015
and May 23, 2016, respectively.

- OSCAR ES Manne BARYA-YAP
Secretaryof the Senate Secretary Geréral
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

Lapsed intafawon GUL 2 1 20%
Without the signature of the President
in accordance with Article Vi. Section
27 (1) af the Constitution,