H. No. 6038 
B e g u n a n d h e l d i n M e t r o M a n i l a , o n M o n d a y , 
t h e 
t w e n t y - s e v e n t h 
d a y o f J u l y , t w o t h o u s a n d 
f i f t e e n . 
[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10889] 
AN ACT RENEWING F O E ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE 
(25) 
TO CORONA I N T E R N A T I O N A L , I N C . U N D E R 
R E P U B U C ACT NO. 7398 
Be it enacted 
by the Senate 
and House 
of Representatives 
of the 
Philippines 
in Congress 
assembled' 
SiSCrnoN Z. N a t u r e a n d Scope of F r a n c h i s e . — Subject 
to the provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and 
applicable laws, rules and regulations, the &anchise granted 
to the Corona International, Inc., under Republic Act No. 7398, 
entitled "An Act Granting the Corona International Inc., a 
Franchise to Establish, Install, Maintain, Lease and Operate 
Wire and/or Wireless Telecommunications Systeias, Lines, 
Circuits and Stations Throughout the Philippines for Domestic 
and International Commimications, and For Other Purposes", 
hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors or ass^nees, 
to construct, install, establish^ operate, and maintain for 

commercial purposes and in the pubhc interest, whe anciyor 
wireless telecommunications systems including mobile cellular, 
paging, fiber optics, satellite transmit and receive systems, 
switclies, and their value-added services such as transmission of 
voice, data, facsimile, control signs, audio and video, information 
services, and all other telecommunications system technologies 
as are at present available or will be made available tlu:ough 
technological advances or innovations in the future; and/or 
construct, acqiure, lease and operate, or manage transmitting 
and receiving stations, lines, cables, or systems m the Philippines, 
for domestic and international oommunications, is hereby renewed 
for another twenty-five (25) years from the effectivily of tbis Act. 
SEC. 2. M a n n e r o f Operatwn 
of SUztions 
or Facilities. 
-
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed 
and operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the 
minimum interference on the wavelengths oc fcequencles of 
existing stations or other stations which may be established by 
Ifi^w, without in any way diminishing its own right to use its 
assigned wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of 
transmission, or reception thereon ae should maximize 
^ rendition of the grantee's services and/or the availabiUt? thereof. 
SEC. 3. Authority 
of the National 
Telecommunications 
Com?n.i8sion. 
(NTC). 
- The grantee shall secure irom the NTC a 
Certificate of PubUc Convenience and Necessity or the appropriate 
permits and Ucenses for the construction, installation, and 
operation of its telecommunications eysteme/fadUties. In issuing 
tbe certificate, the NTC shall have the power to impose conditions 
relative to the construction, operation, maintenance, or service 
level of the telecommunications systems. The NTC shall have 
the authority to regulate the construction and operation of its 
telecommunications systems. The grantee shall not tise ai^ 
ii'equency in the radio spectrum without authorization from the 
NTC. Such certificate shall state the areas covered and the 
date the grantee shall comnienoe the service. The NTC, however, 
shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of any such 
^ authority, permit or ficense. 
SEC. 4. Excavation 
a n d Restoration 
Works. 
- For the 
purpose of erecting and maintaining poles or other supports for 
wu'es or other conduct
maintaining underground 
it shall be lawful for the g
with tJie prior approval o
and Highways (DPWH) o
concerned, as may be ap
conduits in ai^ of the pub
lanes, alleys, avenues, side
and/or municipaUties: Prov
road, highway, street, lan
disturbed, altered, or cha
other supports or the u
conductors or conduits, 
workmanlike manner b
assigni^es, in accordance 
the LGU concerned. Sh
assignees, after the ten (
fail, refuse or neglect to r
place, road, highway, str
bridge disturbed, altere
successors or assignees,
shall have the rig^t to ha
good order and condition a
the grantee, its successo
SEC. 5. ReBponsibilit
conform to the ethics o
Btations/facihties for obsc
dissemination of deUbe
misrepresentation, or ass
The grantee shall 
service in any city and/or 
it has an approved Certific
for the estabUshment, op
^ exchange service, with
therefor, in the order of th
limit of the capacity of its 
the demand for the telepho
the capacity thereof, the g
the demand: Provided, 
satisfied by the expansio

exchange available in the market ae determined by the NTC, 
the grantee shall not be obHged to furnish such service unless 
the applicant for telephone service defrcQrs the actual expenses 
for the installation of the telecommunications apparatus 
necessaiy for the services and in such case, the NTC may extend 
the time within which the grantee shall furnish such service. 
The grantee shall operate and maintain all its stations, 
hues, cables, systems, and equipment for the transmission and 
reception of messages, signals, and pulses in a satisfactory 
maimer at all times, and, as far as economical and practicable, 
modify, iruprove, or change such stations, hues, cables, systems, 
and equipment to keep abreast with the advances in science and 
technology. 
SEC. 6. Rates for Services. 
~ The charges and rates for 
telecommimications services of the grantee, except the rates and 
charges on those that may hereafter be declared or considered as 
nonregulated services, whether flat rates or measured rates or 
variation thereof, shall be subject to the approval of the NTC or 
\its legal successor. The rates to be charged by the grantee shall 
be tmbundled, separable, and distinct among the services offered 
and shall be determii>ed in a manner tlmt regulated services do 
not subsidize the unregulated ones. 
SEC. 7. Right of Government. 
- A special right is hereby 
reserved to the President of the PhiUppines, in times of war, 
rebellion, pubhc peril, calamity, emergency, disaster, or 
distTirbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and 
operate the stations, transmitters, facihiies, or equipment of the 
grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any station, 
transmitter, facility, or equipment in the interest of pubUc safety, 
security, and pubhc welfare; or to authorize the temporary use 
and operation thereof by any agency of the government, upon 
due compensation to the grantee, for the use of the stations, 
transmitters, facihties, or equipment dmrng the period when 
these shall be so operated. 
The radio spectrum is a finite resource that is part of the 
national patrimony and the use thereof is a privilege conferred 
upon the grantee by the
after due process. 
SEC. 8. Term 
of 
effect for a period of tw
effectinty of this Act, un
shall be deemed ipso 
fads to operate continuo
SEC. 3. Acceptance
franchise shall be giv
PhiUppines, through the
of the House of Repres
Services of the Senate, 
of this Act. Upon givin
exercise the privileges 
shall render the fi'anchis
SEC, iO. Right 
of
authorized to conne
telecommunications s
systems installed', oper
authorized person or e
of providing extended an
to the pubUc, under the
upon by the parties con
review and modification 
SEC. 11. Gross 
assignees, shall keep a
the business transacted
on Audit (COA) and the N
not later than the thkty
for the preceding twelve
SEC. 12." Boofesa
of the grantee, its su
open to the inspection
representatives. It sha
the COA two (2) copie
receipts, the net profits, 

SEC. 13. Warranty 
i n Favor 
of the National 
a n d 
Local 
Governments. 
- The grantee ehailhold the national, provincial, 
city, and municipal governments of the Phihppines free from all 
claims, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of accidents 
or injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the 
construction or operation of the stations, transmitters, facilities, 
or equipment of the grantee. 
SEC. 14. Sale, 
Lease, 
Transfer, 
Usnfrmt, 
or 
Assignment 
ofF}'anchise. 
- The grantee shall not sell, lease, transfer, grant 
the usufC'uct of, nor assign this francliise or the rights and 
privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company, 
corporation, or other commercial or legal entity, nor merge vdth. 
any other corporation or entity, nor shall transfer the controlUng 
interest of the grantee, whether as a whole or in parts, and 
whether simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any person, 
firm, company, corporation, or entity without the prior approval 
of the Congress of the Phihppines: Provided, 
That Congress 
shall be informed of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, 
or assignment of franchise or the rights and privileges acquired 
thereunder, or of the merger, or transfer of the controlling 
interest of the grantee, within sixty (60) days after the 
completion of said transaction: Provided, 
further. 
That failure 
to report to Congress such change of ownership shall render 
the firanchise ipso facto revoked: Provided, 
finally, 
That any 
person or entity to which this franchise is sold, transferred, or 
assigned shall be subject to the same conditions, terms, 
restrictions, and hmitations of this Act. 
SEC. 15. Dispersal 
of Ownership. 
- In accordance with 
the constitutional provision to encourage pubhc participation 
in pubUc utilities, the grantee shall offer to FUipino citizens at 
least thirty percent (30%) or a higher percentage that may 
hereafter be provided by law of its outstanding capital stock in 
any securities exchange in the Phihppines within five (5) 
years from the commencement of its operations: Provided, 
That 
in cases where public offer of shares is not applicable, 
establishment of cooperatives operating pubhc utiUties must be 
implemented. Noncomphance therewith shall render the franchise 
tpso facto revoked. 
SEC. 16. Reportoria
submit an annual repor
through the Committee o
of Representatives and 
Senate, on its compUa
the franchise and on it
every year during the 
compUance certificate 
before any appUcation f
the NTC. 
SEC. 17. Pen«2iy
the requisite annual rep
a fine of five hundred 
noncomphance. The fin
delinquent franchise gr
penalties unposedby the
SEC. 18. iSyKa/i(
exemption, or immunity gr
which may herea^r be 
of CJongress, shall becom
immediately and uncond
Tliat the foregouig shaE 
of telecommunications fra
the firanchise, the life spa
authorized by the fi-anch
SEC. 19. Separabil
provisions of this Act is he
thereby shall remain va
SEC. 20, Repealab
franchise shall be subje
' the Congress of the Pliilip
and shall not be interpret
herein provided for. 

s 
SEC. 
21. Effectivity. 
- This Act shall take effect fifteen 
(15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of 
general circulation. 
Ajpproved, 
This Act which originated"^^ the House of 
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives 
on September 2 1 , 2 0 1 5 , amended by the Senate on 
February 1 , 2016, and which amendment was concurred in 
by the Hoiise of Ref^esentatives on May 23,2016. 
Secretary 
of the Senate 
Secretary 
General 
House 
of 
RepreserUatives 
Approved: 
BEMGNO S. AQUINO m 
President 
of the 
Philippines 
O 
^a^seci m t o f a w o o 
W i t h o u t the 
s i g n a t u r e o f i h e 
P r e s i d e n t 
i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h A r t i c l e V i , S e c t i o n 
2 7 ( 1 ) o f t h e C o n s U i i i t i m ,