H. No. 2285

Republic ofthe lilippines
Congress af the Philippines
Meten Manila
Pixteoath Congress
Ghich Regular Session

™~,

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, twaghousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 10891]

AN ACT GRANTING THE FIRST BAY POWER CORP. FBPC) A
FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, ESTABLISH,
OPERATE AND MAINTAIN 4 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
FOR THE CONVEYANCE OF ELECTRIC POWER TO THE
END USERS IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAUAN,
PROVINCE OF BATANGAS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and applicable
laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to First Bay
Power Corp. (BPC), hereunder referred to as the graniee, its
successors or assigns, a Franchise to construct, install, establish,
operate and maintain for commercial purposes and in the public
interest, a distribution system for the conveyance of electric power
to the end users in the Municipality of Bauan, Province of
Batangas.

A


Asused in this Act, distribution system refers to the systems
of wires and associated facilities including subtransmission lines
belonging to a franchised distribution utility extending between the
delivery point on the national transmission system or generating
facility and the metering point/acility of the end users.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Facilities. ~ All electric
distribution facilities, lines and systems for electric services
owned, maintained, operated, or managed by the grantee, its
sticcessore or assigns, shall be operated and maintained at all
times in a superior manner, and it shall be the duty of the grantee,
its successors or assigns, whenever required to do so by the Energy
Regulatory Commission, hereinafter referred to as the ERC, or
its legal successor, or the Department of Energy, hereinafter
referred to as the DOE, or its legal successor, or any other
government agency concerned, to modify, improve, and change
such facilities or systems in such a manner and to such extent as
the progress in science and improvements in the electric power
services may render reasonable and proper.

‘

Whenever practicable and for purposes of maintaining order,
safety and aesthetics along highways, roads, strects, alleys or
right-of-way, the grantee may allow the use of free spaces in its
poles, facilities, or right-of-way by interested parties upon
reasonable compensation to the grantee, considering the cost
incurred to accammodate and administer the use of the grantee's
facilities by such parties. The ERC shall decide in case of dispute
or disagreement between parties.

SEC. 3. Authority of the ERC/DOE. — The grantee shall
secure from the ERC/DOE or any other government agency which
has jurisdiction over the operation of the herein grantee, the
necessary certificate of public convenience and necessity and other
appropriate permits and licenses for the construction and operation.
of its electric distribution system..

SEC. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. — For the
purpose of erecting and maintaining poles, pipes and other
supports for wires or other conductors for the purpose of laying
and maintaining said facilities, wires, cables, pipes, or other
conductors, it shall be lawful for the grantee, its successors or

assigns, with the prior approval of the Department of Public Works
and Highways (DPWE) or the local government unit (LGU)
concerned as may be appropriate, to make excavations or lay
conduits in any of the public places, road, highways, streets, lanes,
alleys, avenues, sidewalks or bridges of said province, cities
and/or municipalities: Provided, however, That a public place,
road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewall or bridge
disturbed, altered or changed by reason of erection of poles or
other supports or the underground laying of wires, other
conductors or conduits, shall be repaired and replaced in
workmantlilee manner at the expense of the grantee, its successors
or assigns, in accordance with the standards set by the DPWH or
the LGU concerned. Should the grantee, its successors or assigns,
after the ten (10)- day notice from the said authority, fail, refuse
or nebslect to repair or replace any part of the public place, road,
highway, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk or bridge altered,
changed, or disturbed by the said grantee, its successors or assigns,
then the DPWH or the LGU concerned shall have the right to
have the same repaired and placed in good order and condition at
double expense to be charged against the grantee, its successors
or assigna.

SEC. 5. Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall
supply electricity to its captive market in the least costly manner.
In the interest of the public good and as far ae feasible and
whenever required by the ERC, the grantee shall modify, improve
or change its facilities, poles, lines, systems and equipment for
the purpose of providing efficient and reliable service and reduced,
electricity costs. The grantee shall charge reasonable and just
power rates for its services to all types of consumers within its
franchise areas in order that business and industries shall be
able to compete.

The grantee shall have the obligation to provide open and
nondiscriminatory access to its distribution system and services
for any end user within its franchise area consistent with Republic
Act No. 9186, otherwise known as the "Electric Power Industry
Reform Act of 2001". The grantee shall not engage in any activity
that will constitute an abuse of market power such as, but not
limited to, unfair trade practices, monopolistic schemes and any
other activities that will hinder competitiveness of business and
industries,


SEC. 6. Rates for Services. ~ The retail rates and charges
for the distribution of electric power by the grantee to its end
users shall be regulated by and subject to the approval of the
ERC or its legal successor.

The grantee shall identify and segregate in its electricity
bill to the end users the components of the retail rate pursuant
to Republic Act No, 9136, unless otherwiae amended. Such rates
charged by the grantee to the end users shall be made public and
transparent. The grantee shall implement lifeline rate to
marginalized end users as mandated under Republic Act No. 9136.

SEC. 7. Promotion of Consumer Interests. — The herein
grantes shall establish a consumer desk that will handle consumer
complaints and ensure adequate promotion of consumer interests,
The grantee shall act with dispatch on all complaints brought
before it.

SEC. 8. Right of Government. — A special right is hereby
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of war,
4 rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster or

disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and
operate the stations or facilities of the grantee; to temporarily
suspend the operation of any station or facility in the interest of
public safety, security and public welfare; or to authorize the
temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the
government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of
said stations or facilities during the period when these shall be 80
operated.

SEC. 9. Right of Eminent Domain. ~ Subject to the
limitations and procedures prescribed by law, the grantee is
authorized to exercise the right of eminent domain insofar asit may
bereasonably necessary for the efficient maintenance and. operation
of'services. The grantee is authorized to install and maintain its

poles, wires and other facilities over and across public property, -

including streets, highways, forest reserves and other similar property
of the Government of the Philippines, its branches or any of its
instrumentalities. The grantee may acquire such private property
as is actually necessary for the realization of ‘the purposes for which
this franchise is granted: Provided, That proper condemnation
proceedings shall have been instituted and just compensation paid.

Suc. 10. Tern of Franchise. — This franchise shall bein
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the date of
effectivity of this Act, unless sooner cancelled. This franchise shall
be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the grantee fails to
operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 11. Acceptance and Compliance. — Acceptance of
this franchise shall be given in writing to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the grantee shall
exercise the privileges granted under this Act. Nonaeceptance
shallyender the franchise void.

SEC. 12. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. - The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claime, accounts, demands or actions arising out of accidents or
injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the
construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
distribution systgm of the grantee.

SEC. 18. Liability to Damages. ~ The grantee shall be
liable for any injury and damage arising from or caused by accident
to persone and property by reason of any defective construction
under this franchise or of any neglect or omission to keep its
poles and wires in safe condition.

Suc. 14. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, etc. — The
grantee shall not sell, lease, transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor
assign this franchise or the rights and privileges acquired
thereunder to any person, firm, company, corporation, or other
commercial or legal entity, nor merge with any other corporation
or entity, nor shall transfer the controlling interest of the grantee,
whether as a whole or in parts, and whether simultaneously or
contemporaneously, to any such person, firm, company,
corporation or entity without the prior approval of the Congress
of the Philippines: Provided, That Congress shall be informed of
any lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, sale or assignment of
franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder within


sixty (60) days after the completion of said transaction:
Provided, further, That any such transfer, sale, or assignment
is in accordance with the constitutional limitations: Provided,
furthermore, That failure to report to Congress such change of
ownership shall render the franchise tpso facto revoked:
Provided, finally, That any person or entity to which this franchise
is sold, transferred, or assigned, shall be subject to the same
conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 16. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with the
constitutional provision to encourage public participation in public
utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least thirty
percent (80%) ofits outstanding capital stock or a higher percentage
that may hereafter be provided by law in any securities exchange in
the Philippines within five (6) years from the commencement ofits
operations: Provided, That in cases where public offer of shares is
not applicable, establishment of cooperatives and other methods of
encouraging public participation by citizens and corporations
operating public utilities must he implemented, Noncompliance
{herewith shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 16. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the
Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 80 of the
succeeding year,

Src. 17. Penalty Clause. - Any grantee who fails to
submit the requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized
by a fine of five hundred pesos (600.00) per working day of
noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the ERC from said
delinquent franchise grantee separate from the reportorial
penalties imposed by the ERC. All proceeds from the fines or
penalties shall accrue to the monitoring fund of the ERC in line
with its supervisory and regulatory functions. The reportorial
compliance certificate issued by Congress shall be required before
any application for permit or certificate ig accepted by the ERC.

wen

=,

SEC. 18. Equality Clause. — Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted, upon prior review
and approval of Congress, shall become part of this franchise and
shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the herein
grantee: Provided, however, That the foregoing shall neither
apply to nor affect provisions concerning territory covered by the
franchise, the life span of the franchise or the type of service
authorized by the franchise: Provided, further, That the foregoing
shall not apply to the sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or
assignment of legislative franchises with prior congressional
approval.

SEC. 19. Applicability Clause. — The grantee shall comply
with and be subject to the provisions of Commonwealth Act
No. 146, as amended, otherwise known as the "Public Service
Act" and Republic Act No. 9136, otherwise known as the "Electric
Power Industry Reform Act of 2001".

SEC. 20. Separability Clause. ~ If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 21. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal
by the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest
80 requires and shail not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of
the privileges herein provided for.

SEC. 22. Publication. ~ This Act shall be published,
through the initiative of the grantee, fifteen (18) days after it
has been signed by the President of the Philippines or has
lapsed into law.

 

SEC. 23. Effectivity. ~ This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of
general circulation.

Approved,

  
  

(G4 ihe2>—
M.DRILON ~FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.

President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate on October 9, 2015 and
May 23, 2016, respectively

Sake Lons MARILYN g Mode

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO 8. AQUINO II
President of the Philippines

o

Lapsed into law on _ SUL 2 1 2606 .
Without the signature of the President
in accordance with Article VE Sector.
27 13) of the Consbiviion