S. No. 2950
H. No. 5855

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metco Manila
Pixteenth Cangress

Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

—_s—__

[Repustic AcrNo. 1086'7]

AN ACT REORGANIZING AND MODERNIZING THE
NATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (NBD,
AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SEcTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the
“National Bureau of Investigation Reorganization and
Modernization Act”.

Sec. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to promote and maintain an effective, modern,
gender-responsive, competent and highly trained investigative
body, functionally integrated and national in scope.

Toward this end, the State shall formulate plans and
programs to enhance and modernize the National Bureau of
Investigation (NBI), with expanded structure, capability and
manpower, responsive to the demands of the times.

Ssc. 3. Reorganization, Modernization, and Expansion.
~The NBI is hereby reorganized and modernized to adequately
meet the increasing demands of an expanded investigative and
detective work.

It shallimplement a modernization program geared towards
the acquisition of state-of-the-art investigative and intelligence
equipment and the establishment of forensic and scientific
laboratories. The program shall include provisions for the training
of its personnel in this regard.

The present organizational structure of the NBI shall be
reorganized into the Office of the Director, Office of the Deputy
Director for Administration, Office of the Deputy Director for
Operations, Offices of the Assistant Directors for Investigation
Service, Intelligence Service, Comptroller Service, Human
Resource and Management Service, Forensic and Scientific
Research Service, Legal Service, and Information and
Communications Technology Service. Each service shall be
composed of the necessary divisions and sections.

The NBI shall establish a Regional Office in every region to
be headed by a Regional Director and District Offices in every
province to be headed by a Head Agent. Field Offices may also be
established and maintained by the Director as the need arises.

The NBI personnel complement shall be increased and their
positions upgraded, as follows:

Old Position From New Position To
Salary Grade Salary Grade

Director VI SG 30 Director SG 30

Director V

(Assistant Director) SG 29 Deputy Director SG 29

Director IIT

(Deputy Director) SG27 Assistant Director SG 28

Director IT

(Regional Director) SG 26 Regional Director SG 27

Director I

(Assistant Regional Assistant Regional

Director) SG 25 Director SG 26

 

Investigation Agent VI . :
(Head Agent) SG 25 Head Agent SG 25
Investigation Agent V
(Supervising Agent) SG24 Supervising Agent SG 24
Investigation Agent IV
(Senior Agent) SG23 Senior Agent SG 23
Investigation Agent III SG 22 Investigation Agent III SG 22
(Agent)

Investigation Agent II SG 20
Investigation Agent I SG18
Special Investigator V SG 24
Special Investigator IV SG 22
Special Investigator HI SG 18

The number of administrative support personnel shall also
be increased to effectively carry out their functions.

The NBI personnel occupying the positions affected by the
changes embodied in this Act at the time of its approval shall
thereafter occupy and discharge the duties and functions of their
new positions and receive the corresponding salary and benefits
without the necessity of new appointment.

Sec. 4. Powers and Functions. - The NBI shall have the
following powers and functions:

(a) Undertake investigation and detection of crimes and
offenses enumerated under Section 5 hereof;

(b) Issue subpoena for the appearance of any person for
investigation or production of documents, through its officers from
the ranks of Regional Director to Director;

(©) Act as a national clearing house of criminal records
and other related information for the benefit of the government;

@) Render technical assistance to government agencies and
instrumentalities, when so requested;

 

(e) Extend assistance in cases involving extradition and
mutual legal assistance, when requested by the Department of
‘ustice;

() Establish an NBI Academy which shall be responsible
for the recruitment, training, and development of all NBI agents
and personnel, among others;

@) Establish and maintain a Forensic and Scientific
Research Center which shall serve as the primary center for
forensic and scientific research in furtherance of scientific
knowledge in criminal investigation, detection, evidence collection
and preservation, and provide the necessary training therefor;

ch) Establish and maintain a Cyber Investigation and
Assessment Center which shall serve as the nerve center for
computer information technologies, data on cybercrime cases,
computer intrusion, threats, and other related crimes or activities;

@) Establish and maintain an integrated, comprehensive,
and state-of-the-art network of equipment and facilities to be used
by the NBI in its criminal investigation, detection, and evidence
gathering, and to provide the corresponding training in this
regard;

G) Request the assistance of the Philippine National Police
(PNP), Armed Forces of the Philippines, or any other agency of
the government, including government-owned and/or -controlled
corporations, in its anti-crime drive. Such assistance may include
the use of the agency’s personnel and facilities upon prior approval
by the head of the agency concerned;

) Conduct intelligence operations in furtherance of the
foregoing powers and functions;

@ Enter into any contract or transaction for the
acquisition, ownership, possession, administration, lease,
disposition or acceptance of real or personal property in its name,
subject to the approval of the Secretary of Justice;

(m) Establish a modern NBI Clearance and Identification
Center containing all derogatory and criminal records and civilian
identification records, including their identifying marks and
characteristics and fingerprint database, as well as dental records
pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1575, entitled “Requiring
Practitioners of Dentistry to Keep Records of Their Patients”;

(n) Maintain, for purposes of investigative and forensic
requirements of the NBI, relevant database such as ballistic
records of firearms including, but not limited to, data ownership,
possession, and other related identifying circumstances; and
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) databank; and

©) Perform such other functions as the President or the
Secretary of Justice may assign.

Src. 5. Jurisdiction. - The NBI shall have primary
jurisdiction to undertake investigations in the following cases:

(a) Human Trafficking cases in all airports in the
Philippines;

(b) Extrajudicial/Extra-legal killings committed by the
state’s security forces against media practitioners and activists;

(c) Killings of justices and judges;

(ad) Violation of Republic Act No. 10175, otherwise known
as the “Cybercrime Prevention Act”;

(e) Cases referred by the Inter-Agency Anti-Graft
Coordinating Council TAGCC);

(f) Violations of the Anti-Dummy Law;

(g) Cases involving threats to security or assaults against
the persons of the President, Vice President, Senate President,
Speaker of the House of Representatives, and Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court;

ch) Transnational crimes pursuant to existing international
agreements;

G) Identification of the dead/victims in case of mass fatality
incidents caused by natural disasters; and

G)__ Violations of commercial, economic, and financial or
white-collar crimes such as, but not limited to, those punishable
under Republic Act No. 8792, otherwise known as “E-Commerce
Act of 2000”; Republic Act No. 8484, otherwise known as “Access
Devices Regulations Act of 1998”; Republic Act No. 8293, otherwise
known as “Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines”; Republic
Act No. 8799, otherwise known as “Securities Regulation Code”;
Presidential Decree No. 1689, otherwise known as “Decree

 

Increasing the Penalty for Certain Forms of Estafa”, and other
similar penal statutes that may be enacted by Congress.

Provided, however, That the President or the Secretary of
Justice may direct the NBI to undertake the investigation of any
crime when public interest so requires.

Once the NBI takes cognizance of any of the aforementioned
cases, the PNP and other law enforcement agencies/investigative
entities shall collaborate with and render assistance to the NBI.
In cases where jurisdiction is vested exclusively and/or primarily
with the PNP or other law enforcement agency/investigating
agency, the NBI shall collaborate with and render assistance to
the same.

Src. 6. The NBI Director and Other Officials. — The NBI
shall be headed by a Director and assisted by two (2) Deputy
Directors, one for Administration and another for Operations,
and an Assistant Director for each of the following seven (7)
Services: Investigation Service, Intelligence Service, Human
Resource and Management Service, Comptroller Service, Forensic
and Scientific Research Service, Legal Service, and Information
and Communications Technology Service.

The NBI Director shall be appointed by the President and
shall have the rank, salary, and benefits equivalent to that ofan
Undersecretary. No person shall be appointed Director unless he
or she is a natural-born citizen of the Philippines and a member
of the Philippine Bar who has been engaged in the practice of law
for at least fifteen (15) years, preferably from within the ranks of

irectors. .

The Assistant Regional Directors to Deputy Directors shall
likewise be appointed by the President of the Philippines, coming
from the ranks of the NBI, upon the recommendation of the
Secretary of Justice.

No person shall be appointed Deputy Director or Regional
Director unless he or she is a citizen of the Philippines and a
member of the Philippine Bar who has been engaged in the practice
of law for at least ten (10) years for the Deputy Director and for at
least five (5) years for the Regional Director.

Sec. 7. Powers and Functions of the Director. — The
Director shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Formulate policies, guidelines, and programs to
effectively carry out the purposes of this Act;

(b) Direct, control, and supervise the administration and
operations of the NBI;

(©) Promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary
or proper for the effective exercise of the powers and functions of
the NBI, as well as the discharge of the duties and responsibilities
of its officials and personnel;

; (d) Determine, from time to time, subject to availability of
funds and the approval of the Secretary of the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM), the limit of reasonable
allowances, incentives, bonuses, privileges, and other benefits
which may be given to the NBI personnel;

(e) Create or abolish any division/unit and positions therein
as may be required by the exigencies of the service, subject to the
endorsement of the Secretary of Justice and approval of the DBM;

(f) Deploy any of its officials or personnel for missions abroad
including, but not limited to, assignments as functionaries
attached to any Philippine Embassy, consulate, or any other
diplomatic office abroad in coordination with the Department of
Foreign Affairs (DFA): Provided, That any expense incurred by
the NBI representative in the establishment of his or her office,
including operation and maintenance, is shouldered by the NBI;

(g) Hire consultants, subject to pertinent laws and rules,
as may be deemed required by the exigencies of the service;

(h) Issue mission orders and permits to carry duly licensed
firearms outside residence to its agents, organic personnel assisting
in the investigation, and other duly deputized personnel of the
Department of Justice assisting the NBI in their investigative
work;

Gi) Designate NBI informants for investigative purposes;

G) Remove, suspend, or otherwise discipline NBI agents
and personnel for cause in accordance with Civil Service Rules
and Regulations and other pertinent laws;

(k) Determine and impose administrative fees;

Q@) Perform any and all acts necessary, proper, or incidental
to the attainment of the purposes and objectives of this Act; and

(m) Perform such other functions as may be provided by
law or authorized by the Secretary of Justice.

 

Szc. 8. Qualifications of NBI Agents. - The minimum
qualifications of NBI agents are the following:

(a) Citizen of the Philippines;
(b) Of good moral character;

(c) A member of the Philippine Bar or a holder of a
Baccalaureate Degree who passed the necessary government
licensure examination relevant to the investigative functions of
the NBI; and

(a) Successfully passed the competitive mental and physical
examinations required by the NBI.

Suc. 9. Powers and Functions of Agents. — The agents of
the NBI shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Undertake investigations pursuant to the mandate of
the NBI;

(b) Conduct searches, arrests, and seizures in accordance
with existing laws, rules and regulations;

(c) Take and require sworn statements of any person or
persons so summoned in relation to cases under investigation;

(d) Administer oaths in cases under investigation; and

(e) Such other functions as may be assigned by the NBI
Director.

Sec. 10. Benefits and Privileges. - The NBI shall provide
its personnel with the following benefits:

(a) Health care services through a Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO) for its regular employees;

(b) Accident insurance policies for all employees;

(c) Trainings, scholarships, and seminars to deserving
employees to upgrade their knowledge and skills, on official time
and at the expense of the NBI;

(d) Longevity pay, subject to guidelines that shall hereafter
be issued by the NBI Director in accordance with existing laws
and regulations and subject further to the approval of the DBM
Secretary;

(e) Hazard pay, subject to pertinent laws and rules; and

(f) Transportation benefits, subject to availability of funds;
employees shall be provided with contracted transportation services
until such time that the office can procure additional motor vehicles
for this purpose.

SEc. 11. Seminars and Other Professional Fees. — Fees for
relevant seminars, as well as professional membership fees for
lawyers, registration fees, and related miscellaneous expenses
incurred in completing the Mandatory Continuing Legal
Education (MCLE) course shall be borne by the NBI. Likewise,
professional membership fees, registration fees, including the
mandatory continuing professional education (CPE), and related
miscellaneous expenses of other employees holding positions for
which a professional license is required by the NBI shall be borne
by the NBI.

Src. 12. Retention and Use of NBI Clearance Fees and
Other Fees. — The NBI shall be authorized to retain and use
every year thirty percent (30%) of its collections from clearance
fees for its modernization and to augment its operational expenses
such as, but not limited to, capital outlay, expenses for health
care services, career advancement and professionalization, legal
assistance, seminars and other professional fees, among others:
Provided, That in no case shall said annual appropriation exceed
one hundred fifty million pesos (P150,000,000.00).

Sgc. 13. Funding Source. ~ The funds required for the
implementation of this Act, including employee benefits, shall be
taken from:

(a) Collections from NBI clearance and certification fees;

(b) Incidental income from trainings, tests, and the like;

(c) Proceeds from the sale of confiscated/forfeited articles
after public auction from the cases investigated by the NBI upon
order of the court;

(d) Other fees which may be determined and imposed by
the Director; and

(e) The General Appropriations Act.
Src. 14. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within

sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the NBI Director,
in coordination with the Secretary of Justice and the Secretary

 

of Budget and Management, shall promulgate such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
this Act.

Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
DFA and the NBI shall promulgate the implementing rules and
regulations on the assignment and deployment of NBI personnel
to select consular posts abroad who, subject to the pertinent
provisions of Republic Act No. 7157, otherwise known as the
“Philippine Foreign Service Act of 1991”, shall perform designated
duties except diplomatic and consular functions.

Src. 15. Transitory Provisions. — All unexpended
appropriations, real and personal property, contracts, records,
and documents relating to the existing NBI shall be transferred
to the reorganized NBI.

All rights, obligations, and liabilities of the existing NBI
shall likewise be deemed to be rights, obligations, and liabilities
of the reorganized NBI.

All incumbent officials and personnel of the NBI shall
continue in office and perform their duties as such without need
of reappointment: Provided, That the incumbent Assistant
Director shall continue in office as Deputy Director and the
incumbent Deputy Directors shall continue in office as Assistant
Directors of their respective or equivalent services.

Incumbent Special Investigators who have undergone the
basic training course in the NBI Academy at the time of the
passage of this Act but do not meet the qualifications of an agent
under this Act shall remain as Special Investigators whose position
status shall be converted from regular to co-terminous with the
incumbent, to be abolished once vacated.

SEc. 16. Separability Clause. — Should any provision of
this Act be declared invalid, the remaining provisions shall
continue to be valid and subsisting.

Src. 17. Repealing Clause. — Provisions of Republic Act
No. 157 dated 19 June 1947, Republic Act No. 2678 dated 18
June 1960, and Section 12, Chapter 4, Title III, Book IV of
Executive Order No. 292 or the Administrative Code of 1987, as
amended, and all laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations or
parts thereof which are contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

eeenenins Se tin Bearer teases en ese mie ae te Sn

tii

IT

Sec. 18. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2)
newspapers of general circulation.

  
 

Approved,
‘ so
FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.’ FRANKLIN M. DRILON
Speaker of the House resident of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidatn of Senate Bill No. 2950
and House Bill No. 5855 was finally passed by the Senate and
the House of Representatives on February 3, 2016 and May 28,
2016, respectively.

MARILYN B. aoe “Gace VaBES

Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

Approved: JUN 2 3 20%6
MAN \E*
BENIGNO 6. AQUINO III

President of the Philippines

  

oO

 
  
 

  

iii iin

NOY02 1521