en ne en reer ener

H No. #23
Republic of the Philinpines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Sixteenth Congress

hird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

——___

[ Rerustic Act No. 10912 }

AN ACT MANDATING AND STRENGTHENING THE CONTINUING
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM FOR ALL
REGULATED PROFESSIONS, CREATING THE CONTINUING
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER
RELATED PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

ARTICLE I
TITLE, POLICY AND DEFINITION OF TERMS

SECTION 1. Title. - This Act shall be known as the
“Continuing Professional Development Act of 2016”.

 

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is hereby declared the
policy. of the State to promote and upgrade the practice of
professions in the country. Towards this end, the State shall
institute measures that will continuously improve the
competence of the professionals in accordance with the
international standards of practice, thereby, ensuring their
contribution in uplifting the general welfare, economic growth
and development of the nation.

SEC. 8. Definition of Terms. — The following terms shall
be defined under this Act:

@) Accreditation refers to the formal or official approval
granted to a person, a program or an organization, upon
meeting essential requirements of achievement standards,
including qualifications or unit(s) of a qualification, usually for
4 particular period of time, as defined by an accrediting
agency;

(b) AIPO/APO refers to the Accredited Integrated
Professional Organization or the Accredited Professional
Organization in a given profession;

(©) ASEAN Qualifications Reference Framework or AQRF
refers to the device that enables comparisons of qualifications
across ASEAN Member States;

(d) ASEAN Mutual Recognition Arrangement or ASEAN
MRA refers to a regional arrangement entered into by the
ASEAN Member States, predicated on the mutual recognition
of qualifications, requirements met, licenses and certificates
granted, experience gained by professionals, in order to enhance
mobility of professional services within the region;

(e) Competence refers to an ability that extends beyond
the possession of lnowledge and skills, which include cognitive,
functional, personal and ethical competence;

® Continuing Professional Development or CPD refers
to the inculcation of advanced knowledge, skills and ethical
values in a post-licengure specialization or in an inter- or
multidisciplinary field of study, for assimilation into
professional practice, self-directed research and/or lifelong
learning;

(g) CPD Council refers to a body created to promote and
ensure the continuous improvement of professionals, in
accordance with national, regional and international standards
of practice;

(h) CPD credit unit refers to the value of an amount of
learning that can be transferred to a qualification achieved
from formal, informal or nonformal learning setting, wherein
credits can be accumulated to predetermined levels for the
award of a qualification;

@) CPD Program vefers to a set of learning activities
accredited by the CPD Council such as seminars, workshops,
technical lectures or subject matter meetings, nondegree
training lectures and scientific meetings, modules, tours and
visits, which equip the professionals with advanced
dmowledge, skills and values in specialized or in an inter- or
multidisciplinary field of study, self-directed research and/or
lifelong learning;

G) CPD Provider refers to a natural or juridical person
accredited by the CPD Council to conduct CPD Programs;

(k) Formal learning refers to educational arrangements
such as cyrricular qualifications and teaching-learning
requiremehts that take place in education and training
institutions recognized by relevant national authorities, and
which lead to diplomas and qualifications;

Q@ Informal learning refers to learning that occurs in
daily life assessed, through the recognition, validation and
accreditation process, and which can contribute to a
qualification;

(m) Learning outcomes refer to what a learner can be
expected to know, understand and/or demonstrate as a result
of a learning experience;

(n) Lifelong learning refers to learning activities
undertaken throughout life for the development of competencies
and qualifications of the professional:

(0) Nonformal learning refers to learning that has been
acquired in addition or alternatively to formal learning, which

fa

may be structured and made more flexible according to
educational and training arrangements;

(p) Online learning activities refer to structured or
unstructured learning initiatives, which make use of the
internet and other web-based Information and Communications
Technology solutions;

(q) Pathways and Equivalencies refer to mechanisms that
provide access to qualifications and assist professionals to move
easily and readily between the different education and training
sectors, and between these sectors, and the labor market,
through the Philippine Credit Transfer System;

) Philippine Qualifications Framework or PQF refers to
the quality assured national system for the development,
recognition and award of qualifications at defined levels, based
on standards of knowledge, skills and values, acquired in
different ways and methods by learners and workers;

(s) Prior learning refers to a person’s skills, knowledge
and competencies that have been acquired through work
experience, training, independent study, volunteer activities and
hobbies, that may be applied for academic credit, as a
requirement of a training program or for occupational
certification;

(t) Professional refers to a person who is registered and
licensed to practice a regulated profession in the Philippines
and who holds a valid Certificate of Registration and
Professional Identification Card (PIC) from the Professional
Regulation Commission (PRC);

(u) Qualification refers to a status gained after a person
has been assessed to have achieved learning outcomes or
competencies in accordance with the standard specified for a
qualification title, and is proven by a document issued by a
recognized agency or body;

(v) Quality assurance refers to planned and systematic
processes that provide confidence in the design, delivery and
award of qualifications within an education and training
system, and is a component of quality management that is

focused on ensuring that quality requirements will be fulfilled;
and

(w) Self-directed learning yvefera to learning activities such
as online training, local/international seminare/nondegree
courses, institution/company-sponsored training programs, and
the like, which did not undergo CPD accreditation but may
be applied for and awarded CPD units by the respective CPD
Council.

ARTICLE II
CPD PROGRAMS, COUNCILS AND SECRETARIAT

SEC. 4. Strengthening the CPD Program. - There shall
be formulated and implemented CPD Programs in each of the
regulated professions in order to:

(a) Enhance and upgrade the competencies and
qualifications of professionals for the practice of their
professions pursuant to the PQF, the AQRF and the ASEAN
MRaAs;

(6) Ensure international alignment of competencies and
qualifications of professionals through career progression
mechanisms leading to specialization/sub-specialization;

(c) Enfsure the development of quality assured
mechanism for the validation, accreditation and recognition
of formal, nonformal and informal learning outcomes, including
professional work experiences and prior learning;

(d) Ensure maintenance of core competencies and
development of advanced and new competencies, in order to
respond to national, regional and international labor market
needs; and

(e) Recognize and ensure the contributions of professionals
in uplifting the general welfare, economic growth and
development of the nation.

SEC. 5. Nature of CPD Programs. — The CPD Programs
consist of activities that range from structured to
nonstructured activities, which have learning processes and
outcomes.

These include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Formal learning;

(b) Nonformal learning;

(©) Informal learning;

@) Self-directed learning;

© Online learning activities; and

@® Professional work experience.

SEC. 6. Powers, Functions and Responsibilities of the
PRC and the Professional Regulatory Boards (PRBs). - The
PRC and the PRBs shall undertake the overall implementation
of the CPD Programs, and for this purpose, shall:

(a) Organize CPD Councils for each of the regulated
professions and promulgate guidelines for their operation;

(b) Review existing and new CPD Programs for all of
the regulated professions;

© Formulate, issue, and promulgate guidelines and
procedures for the implementation of the CPD Programs;

@) Coordinate with the academe, concerned government
agencies, and other stakeholders in the implementation of the
CPD Programs and other measures provided under this Act:
and

@) Coordinate with concerned government agencies in
the development of mechanisms and guidelines, in the grant
and transfer of credit units earned from all the learning
processes and activities, pursuant to this Act.

SEC. 7. CPD Council. — There is hereby created a CPD
Council in each of the regulated professions, which shall be
under the supervision of the concerned PRB. Every CPD
Council shall be composed of a chairperson and two (2)
members.

The chairperson of the CPD Council shall be the member
of the PRB so chosen by the PRB concerned to sit in the CPD
Council.

The first member shall be the president or officer of the
AIPO/APO duly authorized by its Board of Governors/Trustees.
In the absence of the AIPO/APO, the PRB concerned shall
submit within ten (10) working days from notification of such
absence, a list of three (8) recommendees from the national
professional organizations. The PRC shall designate the first
member within thirty (30) days from receipt of the List.

The second member shall be the president or officer of
the national organization of deans or department chairpersons
of schools, colleges or universities offering the course requiring
fhe licensure examination. In the absence of such organization,
the PRB concerned shall submit, within ten (10) working days
from notification of such absence, a list of three (3)
recommendees from the academe. The PRC shall designate the
second member within twenty (20) working days from receipt
of the list.

The term of office of the chairperson of the CPD Council
shall be coterminous with his/her incumbency in the PRB
unless soopler replaced by the PRB concerned through a
resolution, subject to the approval of the PRC. The first and
second members shall have a term of office of two (2) years
unless sooner replaced through a resolution by the AIPO/APO
concerned or the organization of deans or heads of
departments, respectively. However, members of the CPD
Council who are appointed by the PRC may be replaced before
the end of the two (2)-year period, upon the recommendation
of the PRB through a resolution.

SEC. 8. Powers, Functions and Responsibilities of the
CPD Council. - The CPD Couneil for each profession shall:

(a) Ensure the adequate and appropriate provision of
CPD Programs for their respective profession;

() Evaluate and act on applications for accreditation of
CPD Providers and their CPD Programs;

© Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the CPD
Programs;

@) Assess and/or upgrade the criteria for accreditation
of CPD Providers and their CPD Programs on a regular basis;

@) Develop mechanisms for the validation, accreditation
and recognition of self-directed learning, prior/informal
learning, online learning, and other learning processes through
professional work experience;

® Conduct researches, studies and benchmarking for
international alignment of the CPD Programs;

() Issue operational guidelines, with the approval of the
PRC and the PRB concerned; and

th) Perform such other functions related or incidental to
the implementation of the CPD.

SEC. 9. Secretariat. ~ A CPD Council Secretariat is
hereby created at the PRC Central and Regional Offices to
provide technical, administrative and operational support to the
CPD Councils and the PRBs in the implementation of the CPD
Programs. The CPD Council Secretariat shall be headed by
an Executive Director to be appointed by the PRC.

ARTICLE III
CPD PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING

SEC. 10. CPD as Mandatory Requirement in the Renewal
of Professional License and Accreditation System for the
Practice of Professions. — The CPD is hereby made as a
mandatory requirement in the renewal of the PICs of all
registered and licensed professionals under the regulation of
the PRC.

SEC. 11. Recognition of Credit Units. - All duly validated
and recognized CPD credit units earned by a professional shall
be accumulated and transferred in accordance with the
Pathways and Equivalencies of the PQF.

Re

SEC. 12. Career Progression and Specialization. - The
PRC and the PRBs, in consultation with the AIPO/APO, the
Civil Service Commission (CSC), other concerned government
agencies and industry stakeholders, shall formulate and
implement a Career Progression and Specialization Program
for every profession. The Career Progression and Specialization
Program shall form part of the CPD.

SEC. 13. Role of Concerned Government Agencies and
the Private Sector. — All concerned government agencies and
private firms and organizations employing professionals shall
include the CPD as part of their human resource development
plan and program.

ARTICLE IV
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 14. Funding. — The implementation of the provisions
of this Act shall be immediately included in the PRC
programs, the funding of which shall be included in its annual
submissions for inclusion in the annual General Appropriations
Act.

The fyhding requirement herein mentioned shall be used
for the regular operations of the CPD Councils, including the
monitoring of the conduct of the CPD Programs.

The PRC shall review and approve the proposed budget
for each CPD Council, taking into consideration the reasonable
expenses that will be incurred for travel, honorariun/allowances,
and per diems, when attending official CPD Council meetings
or performing other related functions assigned to them.

SEC. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
PRC and the PRBs, in consultation with the AIPO/APO and
other stakeholders, shall promulgate the implementing rules
and regulations (RR) within six (6) months from the effectivity
of this Act. However, a PRB may prescribe its own
requirements or procedure relating to the CPD as may be
pertinent and applicable to the specific profession: Provided,
That the same does not contravene any of the provisions of
this Act and its IRR.


SEC. 16. Fraud Relating to CPD. ~ Fraudulent acts
relating to the implementation and enforcement of this Act
shall be punishable under the pertinent provisions of the
Revised Penal Code, the New Civil Code and other applicable
laws.

In addition to the penalties prescribed in the
aforementioned laws, a professional who ig adjudged guilty of
any fraudulent act relating to the CPD shall also be meted
with the penalty of suspension or revocation of his/her PRC
Certificate of Registration and/or Certificate of Specialization.

In case of a government official or employee who is party
to any fraudulent act relating to the CPD, he/she shall also
be subject to the administrative penalties that may be imposed
under the anti-graft laws, the Administrative Code and the
Code of Conduct of Public Officials and Employees.

SEC. 17. Separability Clause. - If any part or provision
of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other
provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and
effect.

SEC. 18. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders and other administrative issuances or parts thereof,
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are
hereby repealed or modified accordingly,

SEC. 19. Effectivity. ~ This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days following its complete publication in the Official
Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the
Philippines.

Approved,
FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

ae a

Il

Senate Bill No. 2581, which was approved by the Senate on
August 3, 2015, was adopted as an amendment to House Bill
No. 6423 by the House of Representatives on May 28, 2016.

om 94 BARUAW AP

Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

oO

Lapsectintofawon ‘JUL 21 2
Without the signature of the President
in accordance with Article Vi, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution