H. No. 3785

Ropulc of the Bitippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Aistca Manila

Sixteonth Congress
Ghich Regular Session -._
—

Begun and hetd in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 108'78]

AN ACT STRENGTHENING AND INSTITUTIONALIZING
DIRECT CREDIT SUPPORT OF THE LAND
BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES TO AGRARIAN
REFORM BENEFICIARIES, SMALL FARMERS
AND FISHERFOLK, FURTHER AMENDING
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 3844, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS
THE "AGRICULTURAL LAND REFORM CODE’,
4S AMENDED

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 74 of Republie Act No. 3844, as
amended by Republic Act No. 10374, otherwise known as the
"Agricultural Land Reform Code", is hereby further amended to
read as follows:

"SEC. 74. Creation. -— To finance the
acquisition by the Government of landed estates
for division and resale to small landholders, as well
as the purchase of the landholding by the
agricultural lessee from the landowner, there is hereby
established a body corporate to be known as the ‘Land
Bank of the Philippines’, hereinafter called the Bank’,
which shall have its principal place of business in

. Manila. The legal existence of the Bank is extended
for a period of fifty (60) years from the expiration of
its original term on 08 August 2013, renewable for
another fifty (60) years. The Bank shall be subject to
such rules and regulations as the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas may from time to time promulgate.

"The Bank shall allocate five percent (6%) of
its regular loan portfolio (net of loans to the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas, interbank loans and availments
from domestic bills purchase line), for socialized credit
to qualified small farmers, fisherfolk and agrarian
reform beneficiaries (ARBs). This facility shall solely
finance agricultural projects pursuant to the
provisions of Section 4 of Republic Act No. 10000,
otherwise known as ‘The Agri-Agra Reform Credit
Act of 2009’.

"Credits extended to the beneficiaries named
therein under this facility shall be based on the
feasibility of the project and their paying capacity,
their estimated production, and/or securities they can
provide as well as assets as may be acquired by them
from the proceeds of the loan.

"This facility will be funded through the
operations of the Bank itself and will not require
additional government funding.

"All loans extended through this special
socialized credit facility shall qualify as part of
the Bank's compliance with the Agri-Agra Law.

"Credit under this special socialized credit
facility shall be extended through the following
conduits:

"@) Farmers' and fisherfolk's cooperatives;

‘&) Farmers’ and fisherfolk's organizations or
associations;

a “© Nonagricultural cooperatives (credit and
multipurpose);

"@ Cooperative banks;
"@) Rural banks;

ft
"(g) Agri-business firms or anchor firms
providing credit support to ARBs, and small
farmers and fisherfolk; and

"h) Duly accredited microfinance
nongovernment organizations by the Microfinance
NGO Regulatory Council.

"Loans under this special socialized credit
facility shall have an interest rate equivalent to not
more than seventy-five percent (76%) of the
Bank's prevailing rates for loans to cooperatives:
Provided, That these conduits shall have an interest
spread of not more than five (5) percentage points.
The interest spread shall exclude crop insurance
premiums and guarantee fees: Provided, further,
That a conduit cannot lend to another conduit.


"Criteria for eligibility under this special
socialized credit facility shall be determined by the
Bank and shall be reflected in the implementing rules
and regulations."

SEC. 2. Section 75 of Republic Act No. $844, as amended,
is hereby further amended by adding a new subsection (15) to
read as follows:

"(15) To offer and issue common and preferred
’ shares of stocks to ARBs, small farmers and fisherfolk
through their organizations, cooperatives, federations
and cooperative banks; development partners and
strategic investors such as multilateral and bilateral
institutions; rural banks and their associations, in
quantities to be determined by the Board of Directors
and in accordance with applicable laws, rules and
regulations: Provided, however, That the National
Government shall maintain, at all times, at least
two-thirds (2/8) ownership of the total outstanding
common shares of the Bank.

"Preferred shares of stock shall be non-voting.
Other features of preferred shares shall be determined
by the Board of Directors in accordance with
applicable laws and regulations."

Suc. 3. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, in consultation with the Land Bank
of the Philippines, shall formulate the rules and regulations
necessary for the implementation of this Act.

SEc. 4. Repealing Clause. — All laws, executive orders,
rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with any
provision hereof are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. Separability Clause. ~ If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid, the other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain and continue to be in full force and effect.

  
  

SEC. 6. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in any
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

of Representatives

Representatives was passed by the House

-DRILON  FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.
resident of the Senate Speaker of the House

« This Act which originated in the House of

of

‘Representatives on February 17, 2014, amended by the

Senate on February 1, 2016, and which amendments
were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on May 28, 2016.

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

Lapsed into (aw on (UL 17 20t6

Without the signature of the President
In accordance with Article VI, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution.

NED ‘eawmey be
OSCAR G, YABES MARILYN B’BARUS-Y AP