Republic ofthe Blips
Congress of the Philippines
Aleten Manila
Sixteenth Congress
Thich Regular Session

—_z—
™
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, twe thousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC Act No. 10890)

AN ACT GRANTING THE MACTAN ELECTRIC COMPANY,
INC. (MECO) A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, ESTABLISH, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR THE CONVEYANCE
OF ELECTRIC POWER TO THE END USERS IN THE
CITY OF LAPU-LAPU AND THE MUNICIPALITY OF
CORDOVA, PROVINCE OF CEBU

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and applicable
laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to the Mactan
Electric Company, Inc. (MIECO), hereunder referred to as the
grantee, its suecessoxs or assignees, a franchise to construct,
install, establish, operate and maintain for commercial purposes
and in the public interest, a distribution system for the conveyance
of electric power to the end users in the City of Lapu-Lapu and
the Municipality of Cordova, Province of Cebu.

As used in this Act, distribution system refers to the system
of wires and associated facilities including sub-transmission lines
belonging to a franchised distribution utility extending between

r

the delivery Point on the national transmission system or
generating facility and the metering point/facility of the end user.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Facilities. — All electric
distribution facilities, lines and systems for electric services
owned, maintained, operated, or managed. by the grantee, its
successors or assignees, shall be operated and maintained at all
times in a superior manner, and. it shall be the duty of the grantee,
its successors or assignees, whenever required to do so by the
Energy Regulatory Commission. (ERC) or its legal successor, or
the Department of Energy (DOE) or its legal successor, or any
other government agency concerned, to modify, improve, and
change such facilities or systems in such a manner and to such
extent as the progress in science and. improvements in the electric
power services may render reasonable and proper.

Whenever practicable and for purposes of maintaining order,
safety, and aesthetics along highways, roads, streets, alleys or
right-of-way, the grantee may allow the use of free spaces in its

‘poles, facilities or right-of-way by interested parties upon
reasonable compensation to the grantee considering the cost

‘ incurred to accommodate and administer the use of the grantee's
facilities by such parties. The ERC shall decide in case of dispute
or disagreement between parties.

SEC. 3. Authority of the ERC/DOE. —The grantee shall
secure from the ERC/DOE or any other government agency which
has jurisdiction over the operation of the herein grantee, the
necessary certificate of public convenience and necessity and other
appropriate permits and licenses for the construction and operation
of its electric distribution system.

SEC. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. — For the
purpose of erecting and maintaining poles, pipes and other
supports for the wires or other conductors for the purpose oflaying
and maintaining the facilities, wires, cables, pipes, or other
conductors, it shall be lawful for the grantee, its Buccessors or
assignees, with the prior approval of the Department of Public
Works and. Highways (DPWH) or the local government unit
concerned, as may be appropriate, to make excavations or lay
conduits in any of the public places, highways, streets, lanes,
alleys, avenues, sidewalks, or bridges of the province, city, and
municipality: Provided, however, Thata public place, highway,
street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewall or bridge disturbed, altered
or changed by reason of erection of poles or other supports or the
underground laying of wires, other conductors or conduits, shall

be vepaired and replaced in workmanlike manner at the expense
ofthe grantee, its successors or assignees, in accordance with the
standards set by the DPWH or the local government unit
concerned. Should the grantee, its successors or assignees, after
the ten (10)-day notice from the said authority, fail, refuse, or
neglect to repair or replace any part of public place, road, highway,
street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewall, or bridge altered, changed,
or disturbed by the grantee, its successors or assignees, then the
DPWH or the local government unit concerned shall have the
right to have these repaired and placed in goad order and condition.
at: double expense to be charged against the grantee, its successors
or assignees.

Suc. 6. Responsibility to the Public. - The grantee shall
supply electricity to its captive market in the least costly manner.
In the interest of the public good and as far as feasible and
whenever required by the ERC, the grantee shall modify, improve,
or change its facilities, poles, lines, systeme, and equipment for
the purpose of providing efficient and reliable service and reduced
electricity costs. The grantee shall charge reasonable and just
power rates for its services to all types of consumers within its
franchise areas in order that business and industries shall be
able to compete.

The grantee shall have the obligation to provide open and
nondiscriminatory access to its distribution system and services
for any end user within its franchise area consistent with Republic
Act No. 9186, otherwise known as the "Electric Power Industry
Reform Act of 2001". The grantee shall not engage in any activity
that will constitute an abuse of market power such as unfair
trade practices, monopolistic schemes, and other activities that
will hinder competitiveness of business and industries.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. - The retail rates and charges
for the distribution of electric power by the grantee to its end user
shall be regulated by and subject to the approval of the ERC or its
legal successor.

The grantee shall identify and segregate in its electricity
bill to the end users the components of the retail rate pursuant
to Republic Act No. 9136, unless otherwise amended. The rates
charged by the grantee to the end users shall be made public and.
transparent. The grantee shall implement lifeline rate to
marginalized end users as mandated under Republic Act No. 9136.

SEC. 7. Promotion of Consumer Interests. ~The grantee
shall establish a consumer desk that will handle consumer
complaints and ensure adequate promotion of consumer interests,
The grantee shall act with dispatch on all complaints brought
before it,

SEC. 8. Right of the Government. — A special right is
hereby reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of
war, rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster, or
disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and
operate the stations or facilities of the grantee; to temporarily
suspend the operation of any station or facility in the interest of
public safety, security and public welfare; or to authorize the
temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the
government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of
the stations or facilities during the period when these shall be so
operated.

SEC. 9. Right of Eminent Domain. - Subject to the

‘limitations and procedures prescribed by law, the grantee is

authorized to exercise the right of eminent domain insofar as it

- may be reasonably necessary for the efficient maintenance and

Operation of services. The grantee is authorized to install and
maintain its poles, wires, and other facilities over and across
public property, including streets, highways, forest reserves, and
other similar property of the Government of the Philippines, its
branches or any ofits instrumentalities. The grantee may acquire
such private property as is actually necessary for the realization
of the purposes for which this franchise is granted: Provided,
That proper expropriation proceedings shall have been instituted
and just compensation paid.

SEC. 10. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the date of
effectivity of this Act, unless sconer cancelled. This franchise
shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the grantee fails
to operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 11. Acceptance and Compliance. — Acceptance of
this franchise shall be given in writing to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the grantee shall
exercise the privileges granted under this Act. Nonacceptance
shall render the franchise void.

SEC. 12. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. ~ The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of accidents or
injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the
construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the
distribution system of the grantee.

SEC. 18. Liability to Damages. - The grantee shall be
liable for any injury and damage arising from or caused by accident
to persons and property by reason of any defective construction
under this franchise or of any neglect or omission to keep its
poles and wires in safe condition.

SEC. 14. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or Assignment
of Franchise. — The grantee shall not sell, lease, transfer, grant
the usufruct of, or assign this franchise or the rights and
privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company,
corporation, or other commercial or legal entity, or merge with
any other corporation or entity, or shall transfer the controlling
interest of the grantee, whether as a whole or in parts, and whether
simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any person, firm,
company, corporation, or entity without the prior approval of the
Congress of the Philippines: Provided, That Congress shall be
informed of any lease, transfer, granting the usufruct of, sale or
assignment of franchise or the rights or privileges acquired
thereunder, or of the merger or sale of the controlling interest,
within sixty (60) daye after the completion of said transaction:
Provided, also, That any such transfer, sale, or assignment is in
accordance with the constitutional limitations: Provided, further,
That failure to report to Congress such change of ownership shall
render the franchise ipso facto revoked: Provided, finally, That
any person or entity to which this franchise is sold, transferred,
or assigned, shall be subject to the same conditions, terms,
restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 15. Dispersal of Ownership. - In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in
public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least
thirty percent (30%) of its outstanding capital stock or a higher
percentage that may hereafter be provided by law in any securities
exchange in the Philippines within five (6) years from the
commencement ofits operations: Provided, That in cases where
public offer of shares is not applicable, establishment of

cooperatives and other methods of encouraging public participation.
by citizens and corporations operating public utilities must be
implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall render the
franchise ipso facto revoked,

SEC. 16. Reportorial Requirement. - The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the
Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of every year
during the term of the franchise. The reportorial compliance
certificate issued by Congress shall be required before any
application for permit or certificate is accepted by the ERC.

SEC. 17. Penalty Clause. — Failure to submit the requisite
annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a fine in the
amount of five hundred pesos (P600.00) per working day of
noncompliance. The fine shall he collected by the ERC from the
delinquent franchise grantee separate fram the reportorial
penalties imposed by the ERC. All proceeds from said fines or
penalties shall accrue to the monitoring fund of the ERC in line
with ite supervisory and regulatory functions.

SEC. 18. Equality Clause. - Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted, upon prior review
and approval of Congress, shall become part of this franchise and.
shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the herein
erantee: Provided, however, That the foregoing shall neither
apply to nor affect provisions concerning territory covered by the
franchise, the life span of the franchise or the type of service
authorized by the franchise: Provided, further, That the foregoing
shall not apply te the sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or
assignment of legislative franchises with prior congressional
approval,

SEC. 19. Applicability Clause.—The grantee shall comply
with and be subject to the provisions of Commonwealth Act No.
146, as amended, otherwise known as the "Public Service Act"and
Republic Act No, 9186, otherwise known as the "Electric Power
Industry Reform Act of 2001".

 

of te

; Suc. 20. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 21. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. - This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the publicinterest so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges
herein provided for.

SEC. 22. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of
general circulation.

Approved,

 
   
 

 

President of the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act whidh originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on May 19, 2016,
amended by the Senate on February 1, 2016, and which
amendment was concurred in by the House of Reprosentatives
on May 28, 2016.

Osc, : YABES MARILYN ae

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives
Approved:
BENIGNO §. AQUINO IIL

President of the Philippines
Lapsed into law on fJUL_ 17 2eie
Withaut the signaigyre of the President,

in accordance with Article VI, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution,

ZA Mtn Ge
M.DRILON FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.