cr

S. No. 3090
H. No. 6414
Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Afleten Manila
Sixteenth Congress
Ghirk Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Mondayathe twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

—n

[ Rerusiic Act No. 40917]

AN ACT AMENDING CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 9547, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS AN ACT
STRENGTHENING AND EXPANDING THE COV#RAGE
OF THE SPECIAL PROGRAM FOR EMPLOYMENT
OF STUDENTS, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7323,
OTHERWISE KNOWN 4S THE SPECIAL PROGRAM
FOR EMPLOYMENT OF STUDENTS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION i. Section 1 of Republic Act No. 9547 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 1. Any provision of law to the
contrary notwithstanding, any person or entity
employing at least ten (10) persons may employ poor

 

but deserving students, out-of-school youth (OSY) or,
dependents of displaced or would-be displaced workers
due to business closures, or work stoppages, or
natural calamities, intending to enroll in any
secondary, tertiary or technical-vocational
institutions, fifteen (15) years of age but not more
than thirty (30) years old, paying them a salary or
wage not lower than the minimum wage for private
employers and the applicable hiring vate for the
national and local Sovernment agencies: Provided,
That students enrolled in the secondary level shall
only be employed during summer and/or Christmas
vacations, while the OSY and those enrolled in
tertiary, vocational or technical education may be
employed at any time of the year: Provided, further,
That their period of employment shall be from
twenty (20) to seventy-eight (78) working days only,
except that during Christmas vacation, employment
shall be from ten (10) to fifteen (15) days which may
be counted as part of the students’ probationary
period should they apply in the same company or
agency after graduation: Provided, finally, That
students employed in activities related to their course
may earn equivalent academic and practicum or
on-the-job training credits ag may be determined by
the appropriate government agencies.

“For purposes of this Act, poor bat deserving
students, OSY, and dependents of displaced or
would-be displaced workers due to business closures,
or work stoppages, or natural calamities refer to
those whose parents’ combined income, together with
their own, if any, does not exceed the annual regional
poverty threshold level for a family of six (6) for the
preceding year as may be determined by the
National Economic and Development Authority
(NEDA). Employment facilitation services for
applicants to the program shall be done by the
Public Employment Service Office (PESO).

“Participating employers, in coordination with
the PESO, must inform their SPES employees of
their rights, benefits, and privileges under existing
laws, company policies, and employment contracts,”

SEC. 2. Section 2 of the same Act is hereby amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Sixty per centum (60%) of the said
salary or wage shall be paid by the employer in cash
and forty per centum (40%) by the government: also
in the form of cash directly to the student or through
financial institutions or other payment facilities,
subject to the existing rules on procurement which
shall be applicable in the payment for the student's
tuition fees, books, and other education-related
expenses, including their daily allowance for food and
transportation in going to school: Provided, That
local government units (LGUs) may assume
responsibility for paying in full the salary or wages:
Provided, further, That for low income LGUs
employing SPES beneficiaries, the national]
government share may be increased up to
seventy-five per centum (75%) depending on the
LGUs’ financial Capacity to pay the SPES
beneficiaries.

“The national government share shall be paid
within thirty (80) working days upon submission of
the partner-employer or participating establishment
of théir report on payment of salary or wages which
shall be the basis of the portion of the salary or
wages to be paid by the national government through
the Department of Labor and Employment.

“In case of sickness, absence, or death of the
SPES beneficiary, the immediate heirs may claim
the salary: Provided, That proof to this effect has
been clearly established.

“Likewise, the SPES beneficiary shall be entitled
to social protection by virtue of an insurance coverage
with the Government Service Insurance System
(GSIS) for a period of one (1) year.”

SEC. 3. Section 3 of the same Act is hereby amended
to read as follows:


 

&

“SEC. 3. The Department of Labor and
Employment shall issue the implementing rules and
regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Further, the Secretary of the Department of Labor
and Employment may issue additional guidelines
which may be deemed appropriate.”

SEC. 4. Section 4 of the same Act is hereby deleted.
Succeeding sections are hereby renumbered accordingly.

SEC. 5. Section 5 of the same Act is hereby amended to
read as follows:

“SEC. 4. The Secretary of the Department of
Labor and Employment shall include in the
Department's program the operationalization of the
expanded Special Program for Employment of
Students, including the maintenance of a database or
registry for monitoring of SPES beneficiaries,

“The amount necessary to carry out the purposes
of this Act is hereby authorized to be appropriated
in the General Appropriations Act for 1992 and the
subsequent annual general appropriations acts:
Provided, That the appropriation, for the purposes of
this Act, shall not be reduced by Congress below the
amount appropriated for the previous year and, after
approval, shall be automatically and regularly
released: Provided, further, That the appropriation.
herein shall be increased by at least twenty per
centum (20%) annually.”

SEC. 6. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the
validity and effectivity of the other provisions hereof,

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. — All laws, executive orders,
presidential proclamations, rules and regulations or parts
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. -~ This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least. two (2) newspapers of general circulation,

Approved,

bs bt
FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

  
  

NKLIN M. DRILON
resident of the Senate

Senate Bill No 8090, which was approved by the
Senate on February 1, 2016, was adopted as an amendment
$o House Bill No. 6414 by the House of Representatives on
May 28, 2016.

Secretary General
House of Representatives
é

“Ose vanes

Secretary of the Senate

_ Approved:

BENIGNO §. AQUINO II
President of the Philippines

oO
Lapsed intotawon JUL 21 206
Without the signature of the President
In accordance with Article V1, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution