H. No, 6053
Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Aieten Manila
Sixteenth Congress

—
™,
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 10888]

AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)
YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO ZOE
BROADCASTING, INC., AMENDING FOR THE
PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7297, ENTITLED
"AN ACT GRANTING THE ZOE BROADCASTING
NETWORK, INC. A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO
AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS
THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES’, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 7968

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Renewal of Franchise. — Subject to the
provisions of the Constitution, the immediately succeeding section.
and applicable laws, rules and regulations, the franchise granted
under Republic Act No. 7297, entitled "An Act Granting the
ZOE Broadcasting Network, Inc. a Franchise to Construct, install,
Operate and Maintain Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations
Throughout the Philippines, and for Other Purposes", as amended
by Republic Act No. 7968, to ZOE Broadcasting Network, Inc.,
hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors or assignees,
is hereby renewed for another twenty-five (25) years from the
effectivity of this Act.


SEC. 2. Section 1 of Republic Act No. 7297, as amended by
Republic Act No. 7968, is hereby amended to read as follows:

"SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise.
~ Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and
applicable laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby
granted to the ZOE Broadcasting Network, Inc., its
Successors or assignees, hereunder referred to as the
grantee, a franchise to construct, install, operate, and.
maintain, for commercial purposes and in the public
interest, radio and television broadcasting stations
throughout the Philippines, where frequencies
and/or channels are still available for radio and/or
television broadcasting, including digital terrestrial
television system, through microwave, satellite, or
whatever means, or the use of any technologies in
television and radio systems, with the corresponding
technological auxiliaries or facilities, special broadcast,
and other program and distribution services, and relay
stations, and to install radio communication facilities
for the grantee's private use in its broadcast services."

SEC. 8. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in
public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least
thirty percent (30%) or a higher percentage that may hereafter
be provided by law ofits outstanding capital stock in any securities
exchange in the Philippines within five (6) years from the
commencement of its operations: Provided, Thatin cases where
public offer of shares is not applicable, establishment of
cooperatives and other methods of encouraging public participation
by citizens and corporations operating public utilities must be
implemented. Ni oncompliance therewith shall render the
franchise ipse facto revoked.

Suc. 4. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 7297 on tax provisions
is hereby repealed.

SEC. 5. Adoption of Provisions Not Inconsistent with this
Act. — All other provisions of Republic Act No. 7297, as amended
by Republic Act No. 7968, which are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, shall continue to be in full force and effect,

SEC. 6. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 7. Repealability and Nonexelusivity Clause. - This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the publicinterest so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges
herein provided for.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(16) days from the date of its publication in at least two (2)
newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.

‘
‘ =

FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.
Speaker of the House
of Representatives

     
 

dent of the Senate

This Act avhich oviginated in the House of
Representatives &as passed by the House of Representatives
and the Senate on October 8, 2016 and May 23, 2016,
respectively,

“OscaS EF aBEs Mann hla

Secretary of the Senate Secretary Getteral
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO §. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

Lapsed into law on UL 7 2G
Without the signature of the President.
{n accordance with Article VI, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution,