H. No. 6193

Republic of the Philippines
Gaugress of the Philippines
Hstea Manila

Sixteenth Gougress
Ohicd Regular Session

—
~~,

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

ss

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 10886]

AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)
YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO KALAYAAN
BROADCASTING SYSTEM, INCORPORATED UNDER,
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7303, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 8105, ENTITLED "AN ACT GRANTING
THE KALAYAAN BROADCASTING SYSTEM,
INCORPORATED, A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO
BROADCASTING STATIONS IN THE ISLAND OF
MINDANAO AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES"

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the Philippine Constitution and applicable laws,
rules and regulations, the franchise granted to Kalayaan
Broadcasting System, Incorporated (KBSI), hereunder referred.
to as the grantee, its successors or assignees, under Republie Act
No. 7303, as amended by Republic Act No. 8105, entitled "An Act
Granting the Kalayaan Broadcasting System, Incorporated, a


Franchise to Construct, Install, Operate and. Maintain Radio
Broadcasting Stations in the Island of Mindanao and for Other
Purposes", to construct, install, establish, operate, and maintain
for commercial purposes and. in the public interest, radio and/or
television broadcasting stations, where frequencies and/or channels
are still available for radio and/or television broadcasting,
including digital television system, through microwave, satellite
or whatever means, including the use of any new technologies in
television and radio systems, with the corresponding technological
auxiliaries and facilities, special broadcast and other program
and distribution services and relay stations in the Island of
Mindanao, is hereby renewed for another twenty-five (26) years
from the effectivity of this Act.

SEc. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities, -
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
' interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
. any way diminishing its own privilege to use its assigned
wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission or
reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantee's
services and/or the availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications
Commission (NTC). — The grantee shall secure from the NTC
the appropriate permits and licenses for the construction and
operation of its stations and facilities and shall not use any
frequency in the radio/television spectrum without authorization
from the NTC. The NTC, however, shall not unreasonably
withhold or delay the grant of any such authority.

Suc, 4. Responsibility to the Public. - The grantee shall
provide adequate public service time to enable the government,
through the said broadcasting stations or facilities, to reach the
population on important public issues; provide at all times sound
and balanced programming: assist in the functions of public

-information and education; conform to the ethics of honest
enterprise; and not use its stations and facilities for the
broadcasting of obscene and indecent language, speech, act or
scene; or for the dissemination of deliberately false information
or willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of the publicinterest;
or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts,

as

Suc. 6. Right of Government. — A special right is hereby
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of war,
rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster, or
disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and
operate the stations or facilities of the grantee: to temporarily
suspend the operation of any station or facility in the interest of
public safety, security and public welfare; or to authorize the
temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the
government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of
said stations or facilities during the period when these shall be 60
operated.

1 The radio spectrum is a finite resource that is part of the
national patrimony and the use thereofis a privilege conferred
upon the grantee by the State and may be withdrawn anytime
after dus process. ‘

Suc. 6. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (26) years from the effectivity of
this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall
be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the grantee fails to
operate continudusly for two (2) years.

SEC. 7. Acceptance and Compliance. ~ Acceptance of this
new franchise shall be given in writing to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the grantee shall
exercise the privileges granted under this Act. Nonacceptance
shall render the franchise void.

SEC. 8. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of the Grantee.
~ The grantee shall not require any previous censorship of any
speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast from
its stations: Provided, That the grantee, during any broadcast,
shall cut off from the air the speech, play, act or scene, or other
matter being broadcast if the tendency thereof is to propose
and/or incite treason, rebellion or sedition; or the language used
therein or the theme thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided,
further, That willful failure to do ao shall constitute a valid cause
for the cancellation of this franchise.


- SEC. 9. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of accidents or
injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the
construction or operation of the stations of the grantee.

SEC. 10. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or Assignment
of Franchise. - The grantee shall not lease, transfer, grant the
usufruct of, sell nor assign this franchise or the rights and
privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company,
corporation or other commercial or legal entity, nor merge with
any other corporation or entity, nor shall transfer the controlling
interest of the grantee, whether as a whole or in parts, and whether
simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any such person, firm,
company, corporation or entity without the prior approval of the
Congress of the Philippines: Provided, That Congress shall be
informed of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or
assignment of franchise or the rights and privileges acquired
thereunder, or of the merger or transfer of the controlling interest
of the grantee, within sixty (60) days after the completion of said
transaction: Provided, further, That failure to report to Congress
such change of ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto
revoked: Provided, finally, That any person or entity to which
this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned, shall be subject to
the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of this
Act,

SEC. L1. Dispersal of Ownership. ~ In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in
public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens atleast
thirty percent (80%) or a higher percentage that may hereafter
be provided by law ofits outstanding capital stock in any securities
exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from the
commencement ofits operations: Provided, That in cases where
public offer of shares is not applicable, establishment of
cooperatives and other methods of encouraging public participation
by citizens and corporations operating public utilities must be
implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall render the franchise
ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 12. General Broadcast Policy Law. -— The grantee
shall comply with and be subject to the provisions of a general
broadcast policy law, which Congress may hereafter enact.

SEC. 18. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the
Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 80 of every year
during the term of its franchise. The reportorial compliance
certificate issued by Congress shall be required before any
appligation for permit or certificate is accepted by the NTC,

: SEC. 14. Penalty Clause. - Failure of the grantee to submit
the requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized bya
fine in the amount of five hundred pesos (P600.00) per working
day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the NTC
from the delinquent franchise grantee separate from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC.

SEc. 16. ruality Clause. — Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio and/or
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein grantee: Provided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions
of broadcasting franchises concerning territory covered by the
franchise, the life span of the franchise, or the type of service
authorized by the franchise.

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Actis held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

Suc. 17. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, ot repeal by
the Congress ofthe Philippines when the public interest. so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges
herein provided for.

 

Suc. 18. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

    

FRANKLIN M. Di FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.
ident of the Senate Speaker of the House -
of Representatives

This Act which originated in. the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives
and the Senate on October 9, 2015 and May 23, 2016, respectively.

\

a
Oscate. YABES MARILYN ®. BARUAYY AP
Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives =

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

9 ~

. RUL 27 206
Lapsed into law on :

Without the signature of the President,
In accordance with Article Vi, Section
27 (4) of the Constiution,