Congress of the Philippines

Metro manila

Fifteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, two thousand eleven.

REPUBLIC ACT NO.   10156

AN ACT CONFERRING UPON MEMBERS OF THE SANGGUNIANG BAYAN, SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGSOD AND SANGGUNIANG PANLALAWIGAN, THE APPROPRIATE CIVIL SERVICE ELIGIBILITY UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Conferment of Civil Service Eligibility. – An eligibility equivalent to a Career Service Professional Eligibility is hereby conferred upon a member of the Sangguniang Bayan, the Sangguniang Panlungsod and the Sangguniang Panlalawigan who has served for an aggregate period of nine (9) years in office: Provided, That such member must be a holder of a bachelor’s degree.

A member who has served for an aggregate period of six (6) years shah be granted an eligibility equivalent to a Career Service Sub-Professional Eligibility: Provided, That such member shall have at least earned seventy-two (72) units in any baccalaureate degree program: Provided, finally, That the eligibility granted under this section shall be considered appropriate for second and first level positions in the career service respectively, except those which require qualifications in skills or trade test and/or requiring board examinations and other special eligibilities provided under special laws.

SEC. 2. Implementing Rules and Regulations. – The Civil Service Commission (CSC), in consultation with the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Act within ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 3. Coverage. – This Act shall cover all members of the Sangguniang Bayan, Sangguniang Panlungsod and Sangguniang Panlalawigan who have been elected after the effectivity of the Local Government Code of 1991.

SEC. 4. Repealing Clause. – All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, issuances or any part thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2946 and House Bill No. 4357 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on October 10, 2011 and October 12, 2011, respectively.

Approved: December 20, 2011