H. No. 6315 
Begun and held rn Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh 
day of July, two thousand fifteen. 
[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10904] 
AN ACT GRANTING THE PILIPINAS RADIO WAVES 
CORP. A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, 
ESTABUSH, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO 
AND/OR TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS 
THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPIN'ES 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Represen
Philippines in Confess assembled: 
SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Fraiickise. - 
tbe provisions of the 19S7 Philippine Constituti
laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby g
Radio Waves Corp., hereunder referred to as th
successors or ass%nees, a franchise to a>nstruct
operate and maintain for commercial purposes an
interest, radio and/or television broadcasting 
the Philippines, with its central base of ope
San Jiian Cily where &equendes and/or channels a
&r radio and/or television broadcasting, indudia

system, through microwave, satellite or whatever mea
including the use of new technologies in television an
systems, with the corresponding technological auxiliar
facilities, special broadcast and other program and dis
services and relay stations. 
SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilitie
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be const
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in th
interference on the wavelengtlis or frequencies of exis
or other stations which may be established by law, wit
any way diminishing its own right to use its assigned wa
or frequencies and the quality of transmission or recep
as should maximize rendition of the grantee's services 
availabihty thereof 
SEC. 3. Prior Approval of the NcflionalTelecommunimii
Commission (NTC). - The grantee shall secure from the
the appropriate permits and licenses for the constructi
operation of its stations and fadlities and shaE not use 
in the radio/television spectrum without authorization
NTC. The NTC, however, shall not imreasonably withhold o
the grant of any such authority. 
SEC. 4. Responsibility to tlie Public. - The grantee
provide adequate public service time to enable the gov
through the said broadcasting stations or facilities, 
population on important public issues; provide at all t
and balanced pcogcamming; assist in the ftinctione of
information and education; conform to the ethics of 
enterprise; and not use its stations or fecOities for th
of obscene and indecent language, speech, act or scene,
dissemination of deliberately false information or 
misrepresentation, to the detriment of the public inte
incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or treasonab
SEC. 5. Bight of Government. - A special right is he
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in time
rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disas
disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily talw o
operate the stations or facilities of the grantee; to 
suspend the operation of any station or facility in the
public safet
temporary us
government, 
said station
operated. 
Tlie radi
national pat
upon the gra
after due pr
SEC. 6. Te
effecSfc for a
or cancelled
in the event
conditions: 
(a) Comme
approval of 
(b) Comni
effectivity 
(c) Opera
SEC. 7. Ac
franchise sh
Philippines,
the House of
Services of 
of this Act.
exercise the
shall render
SEC. 8. Bo
NTC, in the 
comphance wi
this franch
the approval
have fulfill
Commission. 
the governme

SEC. 9. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of the 
Grantee. - The grantee shall not require any previous cen
of ai^ speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be 
from its stations: Provided, That the grantee, during
broadcast, shall cut off from the air the speech, play, a
or other matter being broadcast if the tendency thereof
propose and/or indte treason, rebellion, or sedition; or t
used therein or the theme thereof is indecent or immo
Provided, further. That wiUful failure to do so shall co
valid cause for the cancellation of this franchise. 
SEC. 10. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local 
Governments, - The grantee shall hold the national, prov
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free
claims, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of acc
injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by
construction or operation of the stations of the grantee
y 
SEC. II. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, 
' Assignment of Franchise. - The grantee shall not sell
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franch
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person
company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity
merge with any other corporation or entity, nor shall t
the controlling interest of the grantee, whether as a wh
part, and whether simultaneously or contemporaneously, t
such person, firm, company, corporation, or entity witho
prior approval of the Congress of the Philippines: Provid
Congress shall be informed of any sale, lease, transfer,
usufruct, or assignment of franchise or the rights and p
acqtnred thereunder, or of the merger or transfer of the 
interest of the grantee, within sixty (60) days af(;er th
of said transaction: Provided, further. That failure to
Congress such change of ownership shall render the fran
ipso facto revoked: Provided, finally. That any person o
to which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigne
subjectto the same conditions, terms, restrictions, andH
of this Act. 
SEC. 12. Dispersal of Ownership. - In accordance wit
the constitutional provision to encourage public partici
pubUc utilities, the grantee shaE offer to Filipkio citi
thirty percen
be provided by
exchange in t
commencement o
public offer 
cooperatives a
by citizens a
be implemente
franchise ipso
SEC. 13. Gen
shall comply w
broadcast poli
SEC. 14. Re
submit an ann
through the CJ
Representativ
Senate, on it
franchise and 
during the te
certificate i
application fo
SEC. 15, Pe
submit the req
by a fine of 
noncomphance. 
delinquent fr
penalties unp
SEC. 16. Eq
privilege, ex
franchises, o
television br
Congress, shal
immediately an
Tliat the fore
of broadcasti
franchise, th
authorized by

SEC. 17. Separability Clause. — If asyofthesect
provi^oxis of this Act is held invalid, ail other
affected thereby shall remain valid. 
SEC. IS. Repealability and Nonexelusivity Clause
^ n c h ^ shall be sul>}ect to amendment, alteration, 
the Congress of the Fhihppmes when the pubhc interes
and shall not be interpreted as an exchisive gmnt o
herein provided for. 
SEC. 19. Effectivity. - This Act shall take eff
(15) days after its publication in the Official G
newspaper of general circulation. 
*^ This Act which originated in the House 
Representatives was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate on December 16, 20
May 23,2016, respectively. 
Secretary of the Senate 
Secretary General 
Home of Representatives 
Approved: 
BENIGNO S. AQUINO m 
President of the Philippines 
Uv/t^out (*ie signature of Ihe President 
In accordance with Article V5, Section 
n (1) of the qpnsfitutioa