BMP 
a No. 5417 
— s 
B e g u n a n d h e l d i n M e t r o M a n i l a , o n M o n d a y , 
t l i e t w e n t y - s e v e n t h 
d a y o f J i e l y , t w o t h o u s a n d 
f i f t e e n . 
( R E P U B L I C A C T N O . 10870] 
AN ACT REGULATING THE PHILIPPIN'E CEEDIT 
CARD INDUSTRY 
Be it enacted by the Senate and Hoitse of Representatives of the 
Philippmes in Cong^-ess assembled: 
SECTION i. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as 
"Philippine Credit Card Industry Regulation Law". 
SEC. 2. Declaration of Basic Policy. - It is the policy 
the State to foster the development of the credit ca
an indispensable tool in making consunter credit read
to all Filipinos under conditions of &ir and sound 
credit practices which are aligned with global best 
promoting an e^cient payment system and in encour
competition and faansparency that support a more e^ct
of credit card services. To ensure the vibrancy and
the credit card industry, the State shall institut
mechanisms to protect and educate credit cardholders
SEC. 3. Scope and Coverage. — This Act shall govern a
credit card issuers, acquirers and all credit card t

SEC. 4. Supervision. - The Bangko Sentral ng PiJipinas 
(BSP) shall euperviee all credit card issuers and acquirers. 
Supervision shaU include the following: 
(a) The issuance of rules of conduct or the establishment 
of standards of operation for uniform application to all institut
or functions covered, and the imposition of penalties in csise o
noncompliance therewitl^' 
(b) Tlie conduct of examination as determined by the 
Monetary Board to determine compliance with laws and 
regulations; 
(c) Oversight to ascertain that laws and regulations are 
complied vntli; and 
(d) Determining the reasonableness of fees and charges 
and the issuance of regulations on the same. 
SEC. 5. DefinitioTi of Terms. ~ As used in this Act, the 
foUovi'ing terms are defined as follows: 
(a) Acceleration clause refers to the provision in the 
contract betTveen the credit card issuer and the cardholder that
gives the credit card issuer tlie right to demand the full settle
of the obligation in case of default or nonpayment of any 
amount due or for ai^r valid reason; 
OJ) Acquirer refers to the institution that accepts and 
facilitates the processing of the credit card transaction 
which is initially accepted by the merchant; 
(c) Balance transfer refersto the transfer of the balance 
in a credit card account to another credit card account; 
(d) Billing cycle/billing period refers to the period of 
time between billings. Billing cycles shall comprise at least
fifteen (15) days; 
(e) Card association refers to any compai^' that provides 
credit card network such as, but not limited to, American 
Express, VISA International, MasterCard International, JOB 
International, Diners Club, and China Union Pay; 
(f) Cash advances refer to cash obtained fcom the credit 
card account in any manner availed by the cardholder; 
(g) Credit card refe
intended for the p
services on credit; 
(Ji) Credit card
that offers the use
(i) Credit card limi
for purchases, cash
charges, service fees
charged to the cred
0") Default or delinq
payment of an amoun
minimum^ayment req
least three (3) biLUn
^) Finance charges 
cardholder on all c
the terms and condi
of the credit card;
0) Installment-purch
payment for which i
(m) Industry associa
of companies engage
credit and payments
(n) Membership fee
issuer levies for th
to other memberslii
annual membership fe
(0) Minimum amoun
refers to the minim
pay on or before th
(^cle/billing perio
(1) Outstanding 
payment percentage 
(2) Any amount w
installment that is
(3) Any amount i

(4) AH past due amounts, if any; 
(p) Outstanding balance refers to the amount to be repaid 
as o£ statement cut-off date; 
(q) Statement cut-off date refers to the end date of a billing 
cycle as determined by the credit card issuer, when account 
activities purchases, payments, charges) during the billing cyc
are summarized; 
(r) Statement of account or billing statement refers to the 
regular .statement listing of the purchases, payments and 
other debits and credits made to the credit card account witli
the billing t^de; and 
(s) Suppktnentary card or extension card refers to a credit 
card issued to another person whose credit limit is coneohdate
with the primary cardholder. 
' 
SEC. 6. Minimum Requirements for Risk Management 
System of Credit Card Issuers. - To effectively dehver services 
Vnd at the same time safeguard their interests, the credit car
issuer and acquirer must establish an appropriate system for 
managing risk exposures arisuig from credit card operations. Suc
risk management system shall be documented in a complete and 
concise manner, and shall cover the organizational set-up for t
institution engaged in or unit handling the credit card busine
its information management ^stem, as well as accounting poUcies 
and procedures, internal and external functions, and internal
control system. 
SEC. 7. Minimum Requirements for tlie Issuance of Credit 
Cards. — Before issuing credit cards, credit card issuers must
conduct know*your-c!ient (ICYQ procedures and exercise proper 
diligence in ascertaining that applicants possess good credit
standing and are iinancially capable of fulfilling their cred
commitments. 
SEC. 8. Service Level Agreement. - There shaU. be, in 
the service level agreement between the acquiring banks and 
their partner merchants, a provision requiring merchants to 
perform due diligence to establish the identity of the cardhold
Notliing in tliis Act shall preclude a card issuer fi-om 
verifying or seeking confirmation with the cardholder any 
purchase if in th
as to the validit
SEC. 9. Determin
Thereof. - Credit 
credit standing a
credit limit to b
may thereafter im
of the account ba
guidelines: Provid
changes: Provided, 
be declined by th
cardliolder has t
subject to the ap
SEC. 10. Imposit
charges and other
time of the outst
amount of the out
SEC. 11, Informa
issuer shall disd
cardliolders the 
(a) Finance ch
due date; 
(b) The percen
amount to be fina
rate, as the cas
obhgation; 
(c) The defaul
delinquency-rela
payments: Provided
payment shall be 
prescribed minimu
further, That the l
outstanding bala
amounts pcyable u
schemes, if the c
contains an accel
of the credit car

(d) The method of determining the balance upon which 
interest and/or delinquency charges may be imposed; 
(e) The method of determining the amount of interest 
and/or deUnquency charges, including any minimum or fixed 
amount imposed as interest and/or delinquency charge; 
(i) Other fees, such as membership/renewal fees, 
processing fees, over-the-limit fees, collection fees, cred
investigation fees and attorney's fees; 
(g) For transactions made in foreign currencies, for dual 
currency accounts (peso and dollar billings), as weE as payment
made by credit cardholders in any cm-rency other than the billi
currency, the mamier of conversion from the transaction currenc
and payment currency to Philippine pesos or billing currency,
which may be a defiiiition or general description of conversio
,rates; 
^ 
(h) A reminder to the cardholder in the biUing statement, 
or its equivalent document, that payment of only the minimum 
amount due or any amount less than the total amount due for 
the bilUng cycle/billing period, would mean the imposition of
interest and/or other charges. A wiitton statement in the follo
form must be printed in the biUing statement - "Important 
Reminder: Paying less than the total amount due wiU increase 
the amount of interest you pay and the time it takes to repa
your balance"; and 
(i) Any other information that may be required by the 
BSP. 
The credit card issuer shall endeavor to convey the 
information in a manner that is understandable to the credit
cardholder: Provided, That the items enumerated above may be 
included in a billing statement on a quarterly basis at the
minimum in tabular format. 
SEC. 12. Compuiations to be Disclosed. - In addition to 
the foregoing, a credit card issuer must, to the extent practi
provide a detailed explanation and a clear illustration of t
manner by which all charges and fees are computed. The BSP 
shall determine the implementation date. 
SEC. 13. Changes 
- The cardliolder 
to any change in t
balance and the am
the cardholder fi
have the right to 
issuer subject to 
Compliance with
reasonable time a
card issuers shoul
SSC. 14. Over-the-
breaches the cred
transaction may b
credit card issue
prominently disclo
SEC. 15. Lost or S
lost or stolen, a
credit card issuer
/ 
SEC. 16. Confiden
issuers, their of
confidential the 
the following circ
(a) When discl
the cardholder; 
(b) When the cu
or exchanged with
association, or ca
(c) Upon order
any government of
of tlie BSP; 
(d) When discl
necessary for the 
to the credit car
cardholder; 

(e) When disclosure to third parties such as insurance 
companieB is necessary for the sole purpose of insuring the cr
card issuer from cardholder default or other credit loss, and
cardholder from fraud or unauthorized charges; and 
(£) When disclosure to third parties is for the purpose of
investigating fraud or imauthorized activities or mitigating 
involving card issuance, use and acquiring. 
The recipient of information described herein shall 
lilceVrise be bound to preserve confldentiaUty of the cardhol
data. 
SEC. 17. Customer Assistance Unit. - A card issuer shall 
establish a customer assistance unit witliin it^ organizati
which shall be responsible for providing prompt action for t
expeditious resolution of complaints; inquiries and requests.
SEC. 18. Complaint on Billing Error or Discrepancy. - A 
credit card issuer shall give cardholders up to thirty (30) c
^ 
days from statement date to report ai^r error or discrepanc
their billing statement. The credit card issuer shall take a
within ten (10) business days from receipt of such notice. 
SEC. 19. Appropriate Manner of Collection. ~ A credit 
card issuer may resort to all reasonable and legally permissi
means to collect amoxmts due them under the credit card 
agreement: Provided, That in the exercise of its rights and 
performance of duties, they must observe good faith, reasonab
conduct and proper decorum and refrain fr'om engaging in 
unscrupulous acts. 
A credit card issuer or collection agent shall not harass
abuse or oppress any person or engage in any un&ir practices, 
may be defined by BSP rules and regulations, in connection wit
the collection of any credit card debt. 
SEC. 20. Use of Third'Party Collection Agents. -Acredit 
card issuer may engage qualified third party service 
providers/collection agents for the purpose of assisting o
rendering services in the administration of the credit car
business including recovery of unpaid obligations and 
enforcement of rights against the cardholder. 
SEC. 21. Endorsem
the Credit Card Issuer
issuer ehaU inform
of the collection 
endorsement of the
prior to the actua
the full name of 
The requirement t
endorsement of th
included in the te
Provided, That the 
an account to only
Collection. - The cre
copimunicate with 
collection of any 
the BSP in guideli
SEC. 23. Due Date
the contract, if t
weekends and regu
date is automatica
tlirough any autho
centers of the cre
to the credit card
SEC. 24. Applicati
a payment from a 
interest rates for
regular purchases,
apply amounts in e
to the fees and ch
the highest rate o
the next higher ra
Provided, That the 
be the basis for d
SEC. 25. Termin
cancel or termina
the cardholder eit
for payment of the
and deferred uista

a one-time payment or on installments within a fixed period of 
time: Provided, further. That repayment ia installments shall 
oriy be generally subject to interest unless there is a violation of 
the new agreament. 
SEC. 26. Administrative 
Sanctions on Credit Card 
Issuers. - The provisions of Section 37 of Repubhc Act No. 7663, 
otherwise known as "The New Central Bank Act", shall be made 
appUcable to any credit card issuer, acquirer, their directors and 
officers including, but not limited to, the administrative sanctions 
that may be imposed, without prejudice to the cruninal sanctions 
agEiinst the culpable persons provided in Section 25 of this Act, 
for any willful violation of this Act or any related rules, 
regulations, orders or instructions issued by the Monetary Board: 
Provided, That in addition to the administrative sanctions that 
may be imposed, the authority' of the credit card issuer to issue 
credit cards may be suspended or cancelled by the BSP. 
SEC. 27. Violation of this Act and Other Related Rules, 
Regulations, Orders or Instructions. - A person who willfully 
yiolates any provision of this Act or any related rules, 
regulations, order or instructions, issued by the Monetary Board 
shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than two (2) years 
nor more than ten (10) years, or by a fine of not less than fifty 
thousand pesos (PSO.OOO.OO) but not more than two hundred 
thousand pesos (P200,000.00), or both, at the discretion of the 
court. 
SEC. 28. Transitory Provision. - All existing credit card 
companies that are not supervised by the BSP are hereby given 
such reasonable time as the Monetary Board may determine in 
order to comply with appUcable rules and regulations. 
SEC. 29. Separability Clause. - If any provision or 
section of this Act is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, 
the other provisions or sections hereof which are not affected 
thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect. 
SEC. 30. Repealing Clause. - AH other laws, decrees, 
executive orders, proclamations and administrative regulations, 
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or 
modified accordin^j^ 
SEC. 31. Effectiuit
(15) days after its pu
least two (2) national 
Approved, 
F/I^.NKLINM. DRILO
P -esident of the Se
FE
This Act which
Representatives w
Representatives on
the Senate on Febru
were concurred in b
May 23, 2016. 
Secretary of the Se
M
Approved: 
BENIGNO 
President 
O 
Lapsed into l a w o r 
W i t h o u t m e Signatu
(n accordance w i t h