R No. 5570 
-s-
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh 
day of Jiriy, two thousand fifteen. 
[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10892] 
AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25) 
Y E A R S T H E FRANCHISE GRANTED TO IBAAN 
E L E C T R I C CORPORATION (FORMERLY IBAAN 
ELECTRIC AND ENGINEERING CORPORATION) TO 
CONSTRUCT, O P E R A T E , AND MAINTAIN AN 
ELECTRIC LIGHT, HEAT, AND POWER SYSTEM IN 
THE MUNICIPALITY OF IBAAN, PROVINCE OF 
BATANGAS UNDER REPUBUC ACT NO. 7578 
Be it enacted 
by tke Senate 
and House of Representatives 
of the 
Philippines 
in Congress 
assembled: 
SECTION l . 
N a t u r e and Scope 
of F r a n c h i s e , - Subject 
to l^e provisions of the 19S7 Philippine Constitution and applicable 
laws, ndes and regidatioas, the £candbise granted to Ibaan Eiectric 
Corporation (formerly known as Ibaan Electric and Enguieering 
Corporation) under Republic Act No. 7578, entitled "An Act 

Granting the Ibaan Electric and Engineering Corporation a 
Franchise to Construct, Operate and Mainteiin an Electric light, 
Heat and Power System in the Municipality of Ibaan, Province 
of Batangas, and for Other Purposes", is hereby renewed for 
another twenty-iive (25) years &om the effectivity of this Act. 
As used in this Act, distribution system refers to the 
systems of wires and associated facilities including 
subtransmission lines beloi^;ing to a &ancliised disUibution utihty 
extending between the dehveiy point on the national transmission 
system or generating facility and the metering point/facility of 
the end user. 
SEC. 2. M a n m r of Operation 
of Facilities. - All electric 
distribution facilities, lines, and systems for electric services 
owned, maintained, operated, or managed by the grantee, its 
successors or assignees, shall be operated and maintained at all 
times in a superior manner, and it shall be the duty of the grantee, 
its successors or assignees, whenever required to do so by the 
^ 
'Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) or its legal successor, or 
the Department of Energy (DOE) 
or its legal successor, or any 
other government agency concerned, to modify, improve, and 
change the facilities or systems in such a manner and to such 
extent as the progress in science and improvements in the electric 
power semces may render reasonable and proper. 
Whenever practicable and for purposes of maintaining 
order, safety, and aesthetics along highways, roads, streets, alleys 
or right-of-way, the grantee may allow the use of iree spaces in 
its poles, faciUtiee, or right-of-way by interested parties upon 
reasonable compensation to the grantee, considering the cost 
incurred to accommodate and admimeter the use of the grantee's 
faciUties by such parties. The ERC shall decide incase of dispute 
or disagreement between parties. 
SEC. 3. A u t f i o r i t y o f t h e E R C / D O E . 
- The grantee shall 
•'^ 
secure ftom the ERC, D OE or any other government agency which 
has jinisdiction over the operation of the herein grantee, tlie 
necessary certificate of pnbHc convenience and necessity and 
other appropriate permits and licenses for the construction and 
operation of its electric distribution system. 
SEC. 4, Excavation 
purpose of erecting an
supports for the wires o
laying and maintaining t
conductors, it shall bo l
assignees, with the pri
Works aiid Highw^ (DP
concerned, as may be 
conduits in ai^ of the p
lanes, alleys, avenues
municipahty; Provided, fe
road, street, lane, alley
altere^d, or changed by
supports or the imdergro
conduits shall be repaire
at the expense of the 
accordance with the st
concerned. Should the 
the ten (lO)-day notice
neglect to repair or repla
road, street, lane, alle
changed, or disturbed 
assignees, then the DP
right to have the same
condition at double expe
successors or assignee
SEC. 5. Responsib
suppfy electricity to its c
In the interest of the 
whenever requiredby th
or change it^ fadlities, 
the purpose of providing
electricity costs. The g
^ power rates for its serv
franchised areas in or
able to compete. 
The grantee shal
nondiscriminatory acce
for any end user within i

Act No. 9136, otherwise loiown as the "Electric Power Industry 
Reform Act of2001". The grantee shall not engage in any activity 
that will constitute an abuse of market power such as unfair 
trade practices, monopoUstic schemes, and other activities that 
will hinder competitiveness of business and industries. 
SEC. 6. Rates 
for Services. 
— The retaiLrates and charges 
for the distribution of electric power by the grantee to its end 
user shall be regulated by and be subject to the approval of the 
ERC or its legal successor. 
The grantee shall identify and segregate ui its electricity 
biU to the end users the components of the retail rate pursuant 
to Republic Act No. 9136, unless otherwise amended. Such rates 
charged by the grantee to the end users shall be made pubhc and 
transparent. The grantee shall implement lifeline rate to 
marginalized end users as mandated imder RepubUc Act No. 9136. 
SEC. 7. Promotion 
of Consumer 
Interests. 
- The herein 
\grantee shaU establish a consumer desk that will handle consumer 
^ 
complaints and ensure adequatepromotionof consumerinterests. 
The grantee shall act with dispatch on all complaints brought 
before it. 
SEC. S. R i g h t of Government. 
- A specied right is hereby 
reserved to the President of the Phihppines, in times of war, 
rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster or 
disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and 
operate the stations or facilities of the grantee; to temporarily 
suspend the operation of ar^ station or facility in the interest of 
public safety, security and pubhc welfare; or to authorize the 
temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the 
govemmeixt, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of 
the stations or faciUties durmg the period when these shall be so 
operated. 
^ 
SEC. 9. R i g h t of E m i n e n t D o m a i n . - Subject to the 
limitations and procedures prescribed by law, the grantee is 
authorized to exercise the right of eminent domain insofar as it 
may be reasonably necessary for the efficient maintenance and 
operation of services. The grantee is authorized to install and 
maintain its poles, wir
pubhc proper^ includin
other similar property o
its branches, or any of
acquire such private p
realization of the purpo
Provided, 
That proper e
instituted and just comp
SEC. 10. Term 
o
effect for a period of t
efilectiviiy of this Act, un
be deemed ipso facto 
opera|« continuously fo
SEC. 11. Acceptan
this francliise shall be
Phihppines, through th
the House of Repres
Services of the Senate
of this Act. Upon such 
privileges granted und
the franchise void. 
SEC. 12. Warrant
Governments. 
- The 
city and municipal gove
claims, accounts, dem
injuries, whether to p
construction, installati
distribution s j ^ m of th
SEC. 13. Liabili
liable for any injmy and 
to persons and proper
under this franchise o
poles and wires in saf
SEC. 14. Sale, 
of Franchise. - The g
the usufruct of, nor a

privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company, 
corporation, or other commercial or legal entity, nor merge with 
auj' other corporation or entity, nor shall transfer the controlling 
interest of the grantee, whether as a whole or in parts, and whether 
simultaneously or contemporaneouefy, to any such person, firm, 
company, corporation, orentity without the prior approval of the 
Congress of the Plulippines: Provided, 
That Congress shall be 
informed of any lease, taransfer, granting the usufruct of, sale, or 
assignment of franchise or the rights or privileges acquired 
thereunder, or the merger or sale of the controlling interest witliin 
sixty (60) days after the completion of said transaction: 
Provided, 
f u r t h e r . That any such transfer, sale or assignment is in 
accordance with the constitutional limitations: 
Provided, 
furthermore, That failure to report to Congress such charge of 
ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked: 
Provided, 
fimlly. That any person or entity to wliich tliis franchise 
is sold, ta-ansferred, or assigned shall be subject to the same 
conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act. 
SEC. 1G. Dispersal 
of Ownership. 
~ In accordance with 
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in 
pubhc utihties, the grantee shall offer to KUpino citizens at least 
thicty percent (30%) of its outstanding capital stock or a higher 
percentage that may hereafter be provided by law in any securities 
exchange in. the Philippines within five (5) years fr'om the 
commencement of its operations: Provided, 
That in cases where 
public offer of shares is not applicable, establishment of 
cooperatives and other methods of encouraging pubUc participation 
by citizens and corporations operating pubhc utihties must be 
implemented. Nonoomphance therewith shall render the fr'anchise 
ipso facto revoked. 
SEC. 16. R e p o r t o r i a l Requirement. 
- The grantee shall 
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Plulippines, 
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of tiie House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the 
Senate, on its comphance with the terms and conditions of the 
franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of the 
succeeding year. The reportorial compliance certificate issued by 
Congress shall be required before any apphcation for permit or 
certificate is accepted by the ERC. 
SEC. 17, Penalty 
the requisite annual rep
fine in the amount of fiv
day of noncompliance. 
from the delinquent f
reportorial penalties im
fines or penalties shal
in line with its superviso
SEC. 18. Equality 
exemption, or immmiity
wliich may hereafter be 
of Congress, shall bec
accorded immediately a
Provided, 
Iwwever, 
Th
affect provisions conce
the life span of the franc
the fr'anchise: Provided, 
app^ to the sale, lease
of legislative frau^ises 
SEC. 19. Applicabil
with and be subject to
No. 146, as amended,
Act" and RepubUc Act N
Power Industry Reform
SEC. 20. Separabili
provisions of this Act is h
thereby shall remain va
SEC. 21. Repealabi
fr'anchise shall be sub
the Congre es of the 
requires and shaU not b
privileges herein provid

SEC. 
ZZ. Effectivity. 
- This Act shall take effect fifteen 
(15) days after its publication in the Official 
Gazette 
or in a 
newspaper of general drcidation. 
Approved, 
FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. 
Speaker 
of the 
House 
of 
Representatives 
This Act which originated in^ the House of 
Representatives 
was 
passed 
by 
tfee 
House 
of 
Representatives and the Senate on October 9, 2015 and 
June 6,2016, respectively. 
M A R D L Y N B r B A R U ^ A P 
Secretary 
Genercd. 
Hoiise 
of 
Representatives 
OSCAR^SrYABES 
Secretary 
of the 
Senate 
Approved: 
BENIGNO S. AQUINO IH 
President 
of the 
Philippines 
O 
t a p p e d mto 
o n ^ 
^ ^ 
W i t h o u t (i>e S i g n a t u r e o f t h e P r e s i d e n t 
I n d c c o r d a n c e 
w i t h A r t i c l e V I , S e c t i o n 
2 7 { • \  o f t h e ^ o n s t f t u f i o n