U. No. 6011

Republic of the Philippines
Cougress of the Philippines
lictra Manila

Sictoonth Congress
Thick Regular Session
—_6-__

Begun and held in Metra Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC, ACT No.10899 ]

AN ACT GRANTING VERITAS MEDIA ARTS INC.
AFRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, ESTABLISH,
OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO AND TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS IN THE PROVINCE OF
BOHOL AND THE VISAYAS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: :

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. ~ Subject to
the provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and applicable
laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to Veritas
Media Arts Inc., hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors
or assignees, a franchise to construct, install, establish, operate
and maintain for commercial purposes and in the public interest,
radio and/or television broadcasting stations in the Province of
Bohol and the Visayas, where frequencies and/or channels are
still available for radio and/or television broadcasting, including
digital television system, through microwave, satellite or whatever
means, including the use of any new technology in television and
tadio systems, with the corresponding technological auxiliaries

and facilities, special broadcast, and other program and
distribution services and relay stations.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities,
~ The statione or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed
and operated in a manner ag will, at most, result only in the
minimum interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of
existing stations or other stations which may be established by
law, without in any way diminishing its own right to use its
assigned wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of
transmission or reception thereon as should maximize rendition
of the grantee's services and/or the availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Prior Approval of the National
Telecommunications Commission. — The grantee shall secure
from the National Telecommunications Commission (NTC) the
appropriate permits and licenses for the construction and operation
of its stations and facilities and shall not use any frequency in
the radio/television spectrum without authorization from the NTC,
The NTC, however, shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the
évant of any such authority.

SEC. 4. Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall
provide adequate public service time to enable the government,
through the said broadcasting stations ox facilities, to reach the
population on important publicissues; provide at all times sound
and balanced programming; assist in the functions of public
information and education; conform to the ethics of honest
enterprise and not use its stations and facilities for the
broadcasting of obscene and indecent language, speech, act or
scene or for the dissemination of deliberately false information or
willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of the public interest;
or to incite, encourage, or assistin subversive or treasonable acts,

SEC. 5. Right of Government. — Aspecial right is hereby
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of war,
rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster or
disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and
operate the stations or facilities of the grantee; to temporarily
suspend the operation of any station or facility in the interest of
public eafety, security and public welfare; or to authorize the
temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the

government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of
said stations or facilities duuing the period when these shall be so
operated.

The radio spectrum is a finite resource that is part of the
national patrimony and the use thereofis a privilege conferred
upon the grantee by the State and may be withdrawn any time
after due process.

SEC. 6, Term of Franchise. ~ This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years, unless sooner revoked
or cancelled, This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in
the event the grantee fails to comply with any of the following
conditions:

(@) Commence operations within one (1) year from the
approval of its operating permit by the NTC;

®) Commence operations within three (3) years from the
effectivity of this Act; and

@ Opergte continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 7. Acceptance and Compliance. — Acceptance of this
franchise shall be given in writing to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the grantee shall
exercise the privileges granted under this Act, Nonacceptance
shall render the franchise void,

SEC. 8. Bond. - The grantee shall file a bond with the
NTC, in the amount that the NTC shall determine, to guarantee
compliance with and fulfillment of the conditions under which
this franchise is granted. If, after three (8) years from the date of
the approval of its permit by the NTC, the grantee shall have
fulfilled the same; the bond shall be cancelled by the NTC.
Otherwise, the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the government
and the franchise ipse facto revoked.

Suc. 9. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of the
Grantee. — The grantee shall notrequire any previous censorship


of any speech, play, actor scene, or other matter to be broadcast
from its stations: Provided, That the grantee, during any
broadcast, shall cut off from the air the speech, play, act or scene,
or other matter being broadcast if the tendency thereof is to
propose and/or incite treason, rebellion or sedition; or the language
used therein or the theme thereof ig indecent or immoral:
Provided, further, That willful failure to do so shall constitute a
valid cause for the cancellation of this franchise,

SEC. 10. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. - The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of. the Philippines free from all
claims, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of accidents or
injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the
construction or operation of the stations of the grantee, ©

SEC. L1. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or Assignment

. of Franchise. ~ The grantee shall not sell, lease, transfer, grant

the usuftuct of nor assign this franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company, corporation
or other commercial or legal entity, nor merge with any other
corporation or entity, nor shall transfer the controlling interest
of the grantee, whether as a whole or in parts, and whether
simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any such person, firm,
company, corporation or entity without the prior approval of the
Congyess of the Philippines: Provided, That Congress shall be
informed of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct of, or
assignment of franchise or the vights and privileges acquired
thereunder, or of the mnerger, or transfer of the controlling interest
of the grantee, within sixty (60) days after the completion of said
transaction: Provided, further, That failure to report to Congress
such change of ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto
revoked: Provided, finally, That any person or entity to which
this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be subject to
the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of this
Act.

SEC. 12. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in
public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens atleast
thirty percent (30%) o a higher percentage that may hereafter
be provided by law ofits outstanding capital stock in any securities

exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from the
commencement ofits operations: Provided, Thatin cases where
public offer of shares is not applicable, establishment of
cooperatives and other methods of encouraging public participation
by citizens and corporations operating public utilities must be
implemented, Noncompliance therewith shall render the franchise
ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 18. General Broadcast Policy Law. — The grantee
shall comply with and be subject to the provisions of a general
broadcast policy law which Congress may hereafter enact,

SEC. 14. Reporiorial Requirement. ~ The grantee shall
subihit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the
Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of every year
during the term of its franchise. The reportorial compliance
certificate issued by Congress shall be requixed before any
application for n. or certificate is accepted by the NTC,

SEC. 16. Penalty Clause, ~ Pailure of the grantee to submit
the requisite annual report: to Congress shall be penalized by a fine
of five hundred pesos (P800.00) per working day of. noncompliance.
The fine shall be collected by the NTC from the delinquent franchise
grantee separate from the reportorial penalties imposed by the
NTC.

SEC. 16. Equality Clause. ~ Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio and/or
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein grantee: Provided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions

’ of broadcasting franchises concerning territory covered by the

franchise, the life span of the franchise, or the type of service
authorized by the franchise,

 

SEC. 17. Separability Clause. ~ Tf any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid. .

SEC. 18. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —~ This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so
requires and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the
privileges herein provided for.

SEC. 19. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a

newspaper of general circulation.
a Tate

INM.DRILON FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. "os
President of the Senate ~ Speaker of the House
of Representatives

   
 

Approved,
s

 

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives
and the Senate on October 9, 2015 and May 23, 2016,
respectively.

Oscant-ydeus MARILYN BYBARUA/Y AP

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO I
President of the Philippines
Lapsed into law on ‘HL 2 1 2016
Without the signatlPe of the President,
in accordance itn Article VL, Section
27 (1) af the Constitution,