H. No. 1641 S. No. 332

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Sixteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand fourteen.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10661 ]

AN ACT DECLARING NOVEMBER OF EVERY YEAR AS NATIONAL CHILDREN’S MONTH

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “National Children’s Month Act”.

SEC. 2. The month of November of every year is hereby declared as “National Children’s Month”. This declaration commemorates the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 1989, and seeks to instill its significance in the Filipino consciousness.

SEC. 3. Pursuant to the observance of National Children’s Month, an annual program of activities shall be prepared and implemented, with the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), the National Youth Commission (NYC), and the Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC) as lead agencies. They are authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, for any assistance as may be needed in the discharge of the tasks under this Act.

SEC. 4. The Department of Education (DepED) and the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) shall facilitate and encourage the commemoration of this month in all schools, public and private, nationwide.

The Philippine Information Agency, in coordination with the DSWD, the DepED, the CHED, the NYC and the CWC shall ensure the effective information dissemination of this Act.

All local government units and private organizations including the civil society, private enterprises, and nongovernment, civic, and people’s organizations, are encouraged to observe National Children’s Month in simple rites and participate in the activities.

SEC. 5. Proclamation No. 74 (s. 1992) and Proclamation No. 267 (s. 1993) are hereby repealed. Any other provision of law, decree, order, rule, or regulation inconsistent with this Act is hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC, 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON President of the Senate

(Sgd.) FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 1641 and Senate Bill No. 332 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on March 16, 2015 and March 18, 2015, respectively.

Approved: MAY 29 2015

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines