H. No. 5452
S. No. 2779

Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Allztes Manila

Pixteenth Congress

Chics Regular Session

— ——

oe

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No.10922 }

AN ACT DECLARING THE SECOND WEEK OF NOVEMBER
OF EVERY YEAR AS ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL
LITERACY WEEK

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Title. - This Act shali be known as the
"Economic and Financial Literacy Act".

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is declared the policy of
the State to develop national consciousness on economic and
financial literacy by declaring the second week of

 

November of every year as "Economic and Financial Literacy
Week". The State recagnizes the growth potential of
the country through a financially literate people who make
sound financial decisions, mobilize savings, and contribute
ideas on improving economic and financial policies and
programs.

SEC. 8. Participating Government Agencies. — To ensure
meaningful observance of the Economic and Financial
Literacy Week as herein declared, the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA) shall lead the participation of
government agencies and instrumentalities during the
Economic and Financial Literacy Week. As the lead agency,
the NEDA shall plan, initiate, execute, and encourage
knowledge-expanding activities on economic and financial
literacy which may be adopted by government agencies and
instrumentalities, including local government units (LGUs),
government-owned and -controlled corporations (GOCCs) and
educational institutions.

The NEDA shall convene for the purpose the relevant
agencies, to include the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (SP), the
Department of Finance (DOP), the Department of Education
(WepED), the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), the
National Youth Commission (NY! C), and the Department of
the Interior and Local Government (@ILG).

All heads of government agencies and instrumentalities,
including LGUs, GOCCs, and those identified by the NEDA as
relevant agencies, are hereby directed to collaborate and cooperate
with the lead agency in advocating and implementing activities
to celebrate the Economic and Financial Literacy Week.

SEC. 4. Economic and Financial Literacy of Students and
the Youth. - To improve the economic and financial literacy of
students and the youth, all public and private elementary and
secondary schools under the DepED, the state and private colleges
and universities under the CHED, the Technical Education and
Skills Development Authority (TESDA), and the NYC, in

coordination with the NEDA, are hereby mandated to conduct
consciousness-raising and knowledge-expanding activities on
economic and financial literacy including the setting up of
literature corners, organizing fora, trainings, and conducting basic
economic and financial management classes.

The DepED is also encouraged to assess and revise the high
school economics curriculum to make it more age-appropriate,
and ensure that economic and financial education becomes an
integral part of formal learning.

Suc. 5. Communication Arm. - The Philippine
Information Agency (PIA) and the Presidential Communications
Development and Strategic Planning Office (PCDSPQ) are
hereby mandated to allot airtime for programs, and produce and
disseminate printed and online materials for economic and
financial literacy awareness and enhancement.

SEC. 6. Private Sector Participation. ~ The NEDA, in
coordination with the Philippine Economic Society (PES), and in
partnership with other academic and professional institutions,
shall lead and encourage the participation of the private
sector and civil society during the Economic and Financial
Literacy Week. The PES shall plan, initiate, and encourage
knowledge-expanding activities on economic and financial
literacy which may be adopted by the private sector and civil
society in their respective offices.

SEC. 7. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of
the law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain
valid and subsisting.

Skc. 8. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this
Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

 

 

SEC. 9. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation

Approved,

   
  

INM.DRILON FELICIANOBELMONTE JR. ‘

ident of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act was passed by the House of
Representatives as House Bill No. 5452 on February 23,
2015 and adopted™by the Senate as an amendment
to Senate Bill No. 2779 on June 6, 2016.

Osc. . ES MARILYN ov we do
Secretary of the Senate

Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO 8S. AQUINO II
President of the Philippines

G

Lapsed into faw on JUL 22 a6
Without the signature of the President
In accordance with Article Vi, Section

27 (1) af the Constitution