H. No, 6313
Ropu ofthe Blilippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Mlietcs Manila
Pixtooath Congress
Ghicd Regular Session

~~

Begun and held in Metre Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.
a

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 10885]

AN ACT GRANTING THE MAKINIG NETWORK, INC.
A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL,
ESTABLISH, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO
AND/OR TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS
THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and applicable
laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to Makinig
Network, Inc., hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors
or assignees, a franchise to construct, install, establish, operate
and maintain for commercial purposes and in the publicinterest,
radio and/or television broadcasting stations throughout the
Philippines, with its central hase of operations located at Ortigas
Center, San Antonio, Pasig City where frequencies and/or
channels are still available for radio and/or television broadcasting,
including digital television system, through microwave, satellite

“te

or whatever means, including the use of new technologies in
television and radio systems, with the corresponding technological
auxiliaries and facilities, special broadcast and other program
and distribution services and relay stations.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. —
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
any way diminishing its own right to use ite assigned wavelengths
or frequencies and the quality of transmission or reception thereon
as should maximize rendition of the grantee's services and/or the
availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Prier Approval of the Natienal
Telecommunications Commission (NTC). — The grantee shall
secure from the NTC the appropriate permite and licenses for the
construction and operation of its stations and facilities and shall
not use any frequency in the radio/television spectrum without
authorization from the NTC. The NTC, however, shall not
unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of any such authority.

SEC. 4. Responsibility to the Public. ~The grantee shall
provide adequate public service time to enable the government,
through the said broadcasting stations or facilities, to reach the
population on important public issues; provide at all times sound
and balanced. programming; assist in the functions of public
information and education; conform to the ethics of honest
enterprise; and not use its stations and facilities for the
broadcasting of obscene and. indecent language, speech, act or
scene; or for the dissemination of deliberately false information
or willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of the publicinterest;
or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

SEc. 5. Right of Government, — A special right is hereby
reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times of wax,
rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster or
disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over and
operate the stations or facilities of the grantee; to temporarily
suspend the operation of any station or facility in the interest of
public safety, security and. public welfare; or to authorize the

temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the
government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of
said stations or facilities during the period when these shall be so
operated.

The radio spectrum is a finite resource that is part of the
national patrimony and the use thereof is a privilege conferred.
upon the grantee by the State and may be withdrawn anytime
after due process.

Sac. 6. Term of Franchise. ~ This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years, unless sooner revoked
or cancelled. This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in
the event the grantee fails to comply with any of the following
contlitions:

(a) Commence operations within one (1) year from the
approval of its operating permit by the NTC;

(b) Commence operations within three (3) years from the
effectivity of this Act; and

© Op a continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 7. Acceptance and Compliance. — Acceptance of this
franchise shall be given in writing to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the grantee shall
exercise the privileges granted under this Act. Nonacceptance
shall render the franchise void.

Suc. 8. Bond. - The grantee shall file a bond with the
NTC, in the amount that the NTC shall determine, to guarantee
compliance with and fulfillment of the conditions under which
this franchise is granted. If, after three (8) years from the date of
the approval of its permit by the Commission, the grantee shall
have fulfilled the same, the bond shall be cancelled by the
Commission. Otherwise, the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the
government and the franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 9. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of the
Grantee, ~ The grantee shall not require any previous censorship
of any speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast
from its stations: Provided, That the grantee, during any
broadeast, shall cut off from the air the speech, play, act or scene,
or other matter being broadcast if the tendency thereofis to propose
and/or incite treason, rebellion, or sedition; or the language used
therein or the theme thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided,
further, That willful failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause
for the cancellation of this franchise.

Sec. 10. Warranty in Favor of National and Local
Governments. ~ The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of accidents or
injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the

construction or operation of the stations of the grantee.

SEC. 11. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or

. Assignment of Franchise. — The grantee shall not sell, lease,

transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquixed thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity, nor
merge with any other corporation or entity, nor shall transfer
the controlling interest of the grantee, whether as a whole or in
parts, and whether simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any
such person, firm, company, corporation or entity without the
prior approval of the Congress of the Philippines: Provided, That
Congress shall he informed of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of
usufruct, or assignment of franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder, or ofthe merger or transfer of the controlling
interest of the grantee, within sixty (60) days after the completion
of said transaction: Provided, further, That failure to report to
Congress such change of ownership shall render the franchise
ipso facto revoked: Provided, finally, That any person or entity
to which this franchise is sold, transferred or assigned, shall be
subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.

SEC. 12. Dispersal of Ownership. —In accordance with the
constitutional provision to encourage public participation in public
utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least thirty

percent (30%) or a higher percentage that may hereafter be
provided by law ofits outstanding capital stock in any securities
exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from the
commencement of its operations: Provided, That in cases where
public offer of shares is not applicable, establishment of
cooperatives and other methods of encouraging public participation
by citizens and corporations operating public utilities must be
implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall render the franchise
ipso facto revoked. .

SEC. 13. General Broadcast Policy Law. — The grautec
shall comply with and be subject to the provisions of a general
broadcast policy law which Congress may hereafter enact,

&

SEC. 14. Reportorial Requirement. ~ The grantee shall

‘submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,

through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of thé
Senate, on its compliance with the terme and conditione of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of every year
during the term of its franchise. The reportorial compliance
certificate issuéd by Congress shall be required hefore any
application forpermit or certificate is accepted by the NTC.

SEC. 15. Penalty Clause. — Failure of the grantee to submit
the requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a
fine of five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of
noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the NTC from the
delinquent franchise grantee separate from the reportorial
penalties imposed by the NTC,

SEC. 16. Equality Clause. ~ Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter he granted for radio and/or
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein grantee: Provided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions
of broadcasting franchises concerning territory covered by the
franchise, the life span of the franchise, or the type of service
authorized by the franchise.


SEC. 17. Separability Clause. — Tf any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

Ske. 18. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges
herein provided for.

SEC. 19. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazetie or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

d,
INM.DRILON FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.

President of the Senate Speaker of the House
“e of Representatives

Appr

 
    

  

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives
and the Senate on December 16, 2015 and May 23, 2016,
respectively.

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO DI
President of the Philippines

Lapsed into taw && "SUL 17 206
Without iby signature of the President,
In accordance with Article Vi, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution.