&

H. No. 6168

Republic of the Bbilippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Metco Matin

Sixteenth Congress
Ghicd Regular Session
™,,

—

ng
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10887 1

AN ACT AMENDING THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO BYERS
COMMUNICATIONS, INC. UNDER REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 8107, EXPANDING ITS SCOPE INTO NATIONAL
COVERAGE, AND RENEWING ITS TERM FOR
ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25) YEARS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: ~

SECTION 1. Republic Act No. 8107 is hereby amended to

read as follows:

"SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise.
— Subject to the provisions of the 1987 Philippine
Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
regulations, the franchise granted to Byers

 


Communications, Inc., hereunder referred to as the
grantee, its successors or assignees, under Republic
Act No. 8107, to construct, install, establish, operate,
and maintain for commercial purposes, including pay-
service, and in the public interest, radio and/or
television broadcasting stations throughout the
Philippines, where frequencies and/or channels are
still available for radio and/or television broadcasting,
including digital television system, through
microwave, satellite or whatever means, including the
use of new technologies in television and radio systems,
with the corresponding technological auxiliaries and
facilities, special broadcast and other program and.
distribution services and relay stations, is hereby
renewed for another twenty-five (25) years from the
effectivity of this Act.

"SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or

. Facilities. - The stations or facilities of the grantee

shall be constructed and operated ina manner as will,
at most, result only in the minimum interference on
the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations or
other stations which may be established by law,
without in any way diminishing its own right to use
its selected wavelengths or frequencies and the quality

of transmission or reception thereon as should

maximize rendition of the grantee's services and/or
the availability thereof.

"SEC. 8. Prior Approval of the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC). - The
grantee shall secure from the NTC the appropriate
permits and licenses for the construction and operation.
of its stations and facilities and shall not use any
frequency in the radio/television. spectrum without
authorization from the NTC. The NTC, however,
shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of
such authority.

"SEC. 4. Responsibility to the Public. — The
grantee shall provide adequate public service time to

=

enable the government, through the said broadcasting
stations or facilities, to reach the population on
important public issues; provide at all times sound
and balanced programming; promote public
participation such as in community programming;
assist in the functions of public information and
education; conform to the ethics of honest enterprise;
and not use its stations and facilities for the
broadcasting of obscene and indecent language, speech,
act or scene; or for the dissemination of deliberately
false information or willful misrepresentation, to the
detriment of the public interest; or to incite, encourage,
or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

“SEC. 6. Right of Government. ~ Aspecial right
is hereby reserved to the President. of the Philippines,
in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and order:
to temporarily take over and operate the stations or
facilities of the grantee; to temporarily suspend the
operation pf any station or facility in the interest of
public saloty, security and public welfare; or to
authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by
any agency of the government, upon due compensation
to the grantee, for the use of said stations or facilities
during the period when these shall be so operated.

"The radio spectrum is a finite resource that is
part of the national patrimony and the use thereof is a
privilege conferred upon the grantee by the State and
may be withdrawn anytime after due process.

"SEC. 6. Term of Fanchise. — This franchise
shall be in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years
from the effectivity of this Act, unless sooner revoked
or cancelled. This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto
revoked in the event the grantee fails to operate
continuously for two (2) years.

“SEC. 7. Acceptance and Co mpliance.
— Acceptance of this franchise shall be given in writing

a

to the Congress of the Philippines, through the .

Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services
of the Senate, within sixty (60) days from the
effectivity of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance,
the grantee shall exercise the privileges granted under
this Act. Nonacceptance shall render the franchise
void,

“SEC. 8. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of
the Grantee. ~ The grantee shall not require any
previous censorship of any speech, play, act or scene,
or other matter to be broadcast from its stations:
Provided, That the grantee, during any broadcast,
shall cut off from the air the speech, play, act or scene,
or other matter being broadcastif the tendency thereof
is to propose and/or incite treason, rebellion, or
sedition; or the language used therein or the theme
thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided, further,
That willful failure to do so shall constitute a valid
cause for the cancellation of this franchise.

"SEC. 8. Warranty in Favor of the National
and Local Governments. ~ The grantee shall hold
the national, provincial, city, and municipal
governments of the Philippines free from all claims,
accounts, demands, or actions arising out of accidents
or injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused
by the construction or operation of the stations of the
grantee.

"SEC. 10. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of
Usufruct, or Assignment of Franchise. - The grantee
shall not sell, leage, transfer, grant the usufruct of,
nor assign this franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder to any such person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal
entity, nor merge with any other corporation or entity,
nor shall the controlling interest of the grantee be
transferred, whether as a whole or in parts, and
whether simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any

such person, firm, company, corporation or entity
without the prior approval of the Congress of the
Philippines: Provided, That Congress shall be
informed of any sale, lease, tranefer, grant of usuftuct,
or assignment of franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder, or of the merger or transfer of
the controlling interest of the grantee, within sixty
(60) days after the completion of said transaction:
Provided, further, That failure to report to Congress
such change of ownership shall render the franchise
ipso facto revoked: Provided, finally, That any person
or entity to which this franchise is sold, transferred,
or assigned, shall be subject to the same conditions,
terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

“SEC. 11. Dispersal of Ownership. ~ In
accordance with the constitutional provision to
encourage public participation in public utilities, the
grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least thirty
percent (30%) or a higher percentage that may
hereafter be provided by law of its outstanding capital
stock in any Securities exchange in the Philippines
within five (6) years from the commencement of its
operations: Provided, That in cases where public offer
of shares is not applicable, establishment of
cooperatives and other methods of encouraging public
participation by citizens and corporations operating
public utilities must be implemented. Noncompliance
therewith shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked,

"SEC. 12. Equality Clause. - Any advantage,
favor, privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under
existing franchises, or which may hereafter be granted
for radio and/or television broadcasting, upon prior
review and approval of Congress, shall become part
of this franchise and shall be accorded immediately
and unconditionally to the herein grantee: Provided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect
the provisions of broadcasting franchises concerning
territory covered by the franchise, the life span of the


franchise or the type of service authorized hy the
franchise.

"SEC. 13. General Broadcast Policy Law. — The
grantee shall comply with and be subject to the
provisions of a general broadcast policy law which
Congress may hereafter enact.

"SEC. 14, Reportorial Requirement. — The

grantee shall submit an annual report to the Congress
" of the Philippines, through the Committee on
Legislative Franchises of the House of Representatives
and the Committee on Public Services of the Senate,
on its compliance with the terme and conditions of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of
every year during the term of its franchise. The
reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or
certificate is accepted by the NTC.

"SEC. 15. Penalty Clause. — Failure of the
grantee to submit the requisite annual report to
Congress shall be penalized by a fine of five hundred
pesos 500.00) per working day of noncompliance. The
fine shall be collected by the NTC from the delinquent
franchise grantee separate from the reportorial
penalties imposed by the NTC.

"SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If any of the
sections or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all
other provisions not affected thereby shall remain
valid.

"SEC. 17. Repealability and Nonexclusivity
Clause. - This franchise shall be subject to
amendment, alteration, or repeal by the Congress of
the Philippines when the public interest so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of
the privileges herein provided for."

 

SEC. 2. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (18)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

Ze ", =
FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.
Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

Thié Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on
December 16, 2015 and May 28, 2016, respectively,

MARILYN Lo

Secretary General
House of Representatives

Soothe vane
OSCAR'S. YABES

Secretary of the Senate

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

Oo

Lapsed into law on SUL 1 7 208
Without the signature of the President
in accordance with Article VI, Sectior:
27 (1) af the Constitutian.

é