S. No. 2947
H. No. 4116

Republic of the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippines
Seize Manils
Sixteenth Congress

Thich Regular Session

™,
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[ Repugiic Act No. 10884]

AN ACT STRENGTHENING THE BALANCED HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, AMENDING FOR THE
PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7279, AS AMENDED,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE URBAN DEVELOPMENT
AND HOUSING ACT OF 1992

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Balanced Housing Development Program Amendments”.

SEC. 2. Amendatory Provisions. ~ The following
provisions of Republic Act No. 7279, entitled “An Act to Provide
for a Comprehensive and Continuing Urban Development and
Housing Program, Establish the Mechanism for its
Implementation, and for other Purposes”, are hereby amended:

(a) Section 3 of Republic Act No. 7279 ig hereby
amended by redefining paragraph (x) to read as follows:

“(z) ‘Socialized housing’ refers to housing
programs and projects covering houses and lots or
homelots only, or residential condominium units
undertaken by the government or the private sector
for the underprivileged and homeless citizens which
shall include sites and services development,
long-term financing, liberalized terms on interest
payments, and such other benefits in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.”

(b) Section 18 of Republic Act No. 7279 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 18. Balanced Housing Development. ~
The Program shall include a system to be specified
in the Framework plan whereby owners and/or
developers of proposed subdivision and condominium
projects shall be required to develop an area for
socialized housing equivalent to at least fifteen
percent (15%) of the total subdivision area or total
subdivision project cost and at least five percent (6%)
of condominium area or project cost, at the option
of the developer, in accordance with the standards
as provided by law: Provided, That proposed
socialized subdivision projects and proposed socialized
condominium projects shall be exempt from this
requirement. For this purpose, the Housing and
Urban Development Coordinating Council and the
National Economic and Development Authority shall
jointly determine and set separate socialized housing
price ceilings for socialized subdivision and socialized
condominium projects which shall be mandatorily
reviewed or revised every two (2) years. The balanced
housing development as herein required may also be
complied with by the owners and/or developers
concerned in any of the following manner:

“(a) Development of socialized housing in a new
settlement;

“(h) Joint-venture projects for socialized housing
with either the local government units or any of the
housing agencies or with another private developer,
or with a nongovernmental organization engaged in
the provision of socialized housing and duly accredited
by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board, but
if the developer has failed to complete the
development of the project, the owner and/or
developer of the main subdivision or condominium
project shall be solidarily liable only to the extent
of compliance to the balanced housing requirement
regardless of the provisions of their joint venture
agreement; or

“©) Participation in a new project under the
community mortgage program.

“The Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board
is hereby mandated to submit to Congress an annual
report on the compliance hereof by the owners
and/or developers of subdivision and condominium
projects.

“Any person violating any provision of this
sectioy’ shall be imposed a fine of not less than five
hundfed thousand pesos (P500,000.00), for the first
offense; suspension of licenee to do business for a
period of three (3) to six (6) months and a fine of
not less than five hundred thousand pesos
(500,000.00), for the second offense; and cancellation
of license to do business for the third offense.”

(c) Section 20 of Republic Act No. 7279 is her

amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 20. Incentives for Private Sector
Participating in Socialized Housing. — To encourage
greater private sector participation in socialized
housing and further reduce the cost of housing units
for the benefit of the underprivileged and homeless,
the following incentives shall be extended to the
private sector:

eby

 

“(a) Reduction and simplification of qualification
and accreditation requirements for participating
private developers;

“(b) Creation of one-stop offices in the different
regions of the country for the processing, approval
and issuance of clearances, permits and licenses:
Provided, That clearances, permits and licenses shall
be issued within ninety (90) days from the date of
submission of all requirements by the participating
private developers;

“© Simplification of financing procedures; and

“(d) Exemption from the payment of the
following:

“(1) Project-related income taxes;

“(2) Capital gains tax on raw lands used for
the project;

“@)_ Value-added tax for the project contractor
concerned;

“(4) Transfer tax for both raw completed
projects; and

“(6) Donor's tax for lands certified by the local
government units to have been donated for socialized
housing purposes.

“Provided, That a_ socialized housing
certification issued by the Housing and Land Use
Regulatory Board shall be sufficient for the purpose
of availment of tax exemption: Provided, further,
That upon application for exemption, a lien on the
title of the land shall be annotated by the Register
of Deeds: Provided, furthermore, That the socialized
housing development plan has already been approved
by the appropriate government agencies concerned:
Provided, finally, That all the savings realized by
virtue of this provision shall accrue in favor of the
beneficiaries subject to the implementing guidelines
to be issued by the Housing and Urban Development
Coordinating Council.”

een

KX”

SEC. 3. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Housing
and Land Use Regulatory Board shall promulgate a new
set of implementing rules and regulations for the amended
Sections 3, 18 and 20 of Republic Act No. 7279, consistent
with the parameters and standards set forth in said sections,
Nongovernment organizations and people’s organizations
involved in housing rights and urban poor advocacy, as well
as the private sector, shall be consulted in the process of
drafting these implementing rules and regulations.

SEC. 4. Reporting to Congress. - The Chief Executive
Officer of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board shall
ubmit an evaluation report to Congress every two (2) years
after the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 5. Separability Clause. - If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the
law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid
and subsisting.

SEC. 6 Repealing Clause, - Any law, presidential decree
or issuarfce, executive order, letter of instruction,
administrative order, rule or regulation contrary to, or
inconsistent with, the provisions of this Act is hereby repealed,
modified or amended accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. ~ This Act shall take effect fifteen

: (15) days after the completion of its publication in the Official

Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation,

Approved,

, ELICIANO BELMONTE JR.

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2947
and House Bill No. 4116 was finally passed by the Senate

and the House of Representatives on February 3, 2016 and
May 23, 2016, respectively.

Preece fay SON,
MARILYN Bs UASY AP OSCAR Ss

Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO §. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

Lapsed into fawon ‘JUL 1 7 2016
Withour vig signature of ithe President,
in accordance with Article VI, Section
27 (4) of the Constitutian.