8. No. 2239
H. No. 925
Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
AMletrs Manila
Sixteenth Congress
Ghick Regular Seasian

™,
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

ot —

[ Rerusuic ActNo. 10905]

AN ACT REQUIRING ALL FRANCHISE HOLDERS OR
OPERATORS OF TELEVISION STATIONS AND
PRODUCERS OF TELEVISION PROGRAMS TO
BROADCAST OR PRESENT THEIR PROGRAMS WITH
CLOSED CAPTIONS OPTION, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Requirement. — All franchise holders or
operators of television stations and producers of television
programs are required to provide closed captions option in the
broadcast of their programs including newscast, news programs
and pre-scripted programs.

Sec. 2. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

 

(@) Closed caption shall mean a method of subtitling
television programs by coding statements as vertical data
signal that are decoded at the receiver and superimposed at
the bottom of the television screen.

(b) Economically burdensome shall mean that which result,
in a significant difficulty or expense to be determined by the
following factors:

(1) The nature and cost of the closed captions for the
programming;

(2) The impact on the operation of the provider or producer;
(8) The financial resources of the provider or producer; and
(4) The type of operations of the provider or producer.

© Newscast or news programs shall refer only to report of
happenings of recent occurrence of a varied character, such as
political, social, moral, religious and other subjects intended for
the information of the general public. It shall alsa refer to straight
hews reporting as distinguished from news analyses or editorials,
commentaries and opinions.

Src. 8. Exempt Programming. — The following shall
be exempt from closed captioning:

(a) Public service announcements that are shorter
than ten (10) minutes;

(b) Programs shown in the early morning hours from
1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.;

(c) Programs that are primarily textual in nature; and

(2) When compliance would be economically burdensome.

SEC. 4. Penalties. - Any franchise holder or operator of
television stations and producer of television programs who shall
violate the provisions of this Act shall be punished by a fine of not
less than fifty thousand pesos (P60,000.00) but not more than

po:

 

too

one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) or by imprisonment
of not less than six (6) months but not more than one (L) year,
or both, at the discretion of the court.

In case the offender is a corporation, partnership or
association, or any other juridical person, the president, manager,
administrator, or person-in-charge of the management of the
business who knowingly and willfully voted or assented or acted
with bad faith and gross negligence to the unlawful act. punishable
under this Act shall be liable therefor. In addition, the license or
permit to operate its business shall be cancelled.

SEc. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Movie and Television Review and Classification Board, in
consultation with the National Telecommunications Commission
and other concerned agencies and entities, shall promulgate the
necessary rules and regulations within one hundred twenty (120)
days from the effectivity date of thie Act, including guidelines
and applications of exemption, system of warnings, penalties and
appeals, and monitoring and compliance.

Src. 6. Repealing Clause. -— All laws, decrees, orders, rules
or regulations, other issuances or parts thereof inconsistent with
this Act sre pereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 7. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Actis declared invalid, other parts or provisions hereof uot affected
thereby shall remain and continue to be in full force and effect.

SEc. 8. Effectivity. —This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette
or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation,

Approved,

FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

 

Senate Bilj
Senate on Ma

Suse Bill No. 225 by the
May 23, 2016,

No. 2239, which wag approved by the
Y 23, 2016, was adopted ag an amendment to
House of Representatives on

Manityn # panyhae “Oscanarhcons

Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of, Representatives

ot

Approved:

BENIGN® §. AQUINO III

President Of the Philippines
oO

Lapsed intotawon JUL 2 1 ane
Withaut the Signature of the President
in accordance with Article VI. Section
27 (1) af the €onstitution