H, No. 6418
S. No. 29

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Sixteenth Gangress

—2a— =

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen,

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 10911]

AN ACT PROHIBITING DISCRIMINATION AGAINST ANY
INDIVIDUAL IN EMPLOYMENT ON ACCOUNT OF
AGE AND PROVIDING PENALTIES THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the
"Anti-Age Discrimination in Employment Act".

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policies. — The State shall
promote equal opportunities in employment for everyone.
To this end, it shall be the policy of the State to:

(@ Promote employment of individuals on the basis
of their abilities, knowledge, skills and qualifications rather
than their age. .

(b) Prohibit arbitrary age limitations in employment.

© Promote the right of all employees and workers,
regardless of age, to be treated equally in terms of compensation,
benefits, promotion, training and other employment opp ortunities,

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. -— As used in this Act:

@) Employée refers to a person who performs professional,
managerial or administrative work and is paid salaries by the
employer as compensation for services rendered;

() Employer refers to any person, natural or juridical,
employing the services of an employee or worker and shall
include the government and all its branches, subdivisions and
instrumentalities, all government-owned and -controlled
corporations, and government financial institutions, as well as
nonprofit private institutions or organizations;

© Job applicant refers to a person who applies for
employment;

@ Labor contractor refers to any person or an agent of
that person who regularly undertakes, with or without
compensation, the procurement of employees or workers for an

remployer, or the procurement for employees‘ or workers’
opportunities to work for an employer;

@ Labor organization refers to any union or association
of employees or workers which exists in whole or in part for the

purpose of collective bargaining or for dealing with employers

concerning terms and conditions of employment;

® Publisher refers to any person or juridical entity
engaged in the printing of information on paper and its
distribution, buying or securing of airtime or space on television,
radio or the internet, and other similar media: and

@) Worker vefers to a person whe performs manual labor
involving skilled or unskilled work, and is paid wages by the
employer as compensation for services rendered.

Suc. 4. Coverage. — The provisions of this Act shall apply
-to all employers, labor contractors or subcontractors, if any,
and labor organizations.

SEc. &. Prohibition of Discrimination in Employment on
Account of Age. ~ (a) It shall be unlawful for an employer to:

Q) Print or publish, or cause to be printed. or published, in
any form of media, including the internet, any notice of
advertisement relating te employment suggesting preferences,
limitations, specifications, and discrimination based on age;

@) Require the declaration of age or birth date during the
application process;

(3) Decline any employment application because of the
individual's age;

@ Discriminate against an individual in terms of
comipensation, terms and conditions or privileges of employment
on account of such individual's age;

Ay

) Deny any employee's or worker's promotion or
opportunity for training because of age;

© Forcibly lay off an employee or worker because of old
age; or

(7) Impose early retirement on the basis of such employee's
or worker's age. :

b) It shali be unlawful for a labor contractor or
subcontractor, if any, to refuse to refer for employment or
otherwise discriminate against any individual because of such
pereon's age.

© Itshall be unlawful for a labor organization to:

(i) Deny membership to any individual because of such
individual's age;

Exclude from its membership any individual because

of such individual's age; or

(8) Cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate
against an individual in violation of this Act.

@ Itshall be unlawful for a publisher to print or publish
any notice of advertisement relating to employment suggesting
preferences, limitations, specifications, and discrimination based
on age.

Sn

SEC. 6. Exceptions. -— It shall not be unlawful for an
employer to set age limitations in employment if:

@) Age is a bona fide occupational qualification
reasonably necessary in the normal operation of a particular
business or where the differentiation is based on reasonable
factors other than age;

@) Theintentis to observe the terms of a bona fide seniority
system thatis not intended to evade the purpose of this Act;

©) The intent is to observe the terms of a bona fide
eniployee retirement or a voluntary early retirement plan
consistent with the purpose of this Act: Provided, That such
xetirement or voluntary retirement plan is in accordance with
the Labor Code, as amended, and other related laws; or ,

@ The action is duly certified by the Secretary of Labor
and Employment in accordance with the purpose of this Act.

SEC. 7. Penalty. - Any violation of this Act shall be
punished with a fine of not less than fifty thousand pesos
(P60,000.00) but not more than five hundred thousand pesos
(500,000.00), or imprisonment of not less than three (8) months
but not more than two (2) years, or both, at-the discretion of
the court. If the offense is committed by a corporation, trust,
firm, partnership or association or other entity, the penalty shall
be imposed upon the guilty officer or officers of such, corporation,
trust, firm, partnership or association or entity.

SEC. 8. Education and Research Programs. ~ The
Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) shall:

@) Conduct studies and researches on minimizing
impediments to the employment of older persons, and furnish
such information to employers, labor groups, and the general
public; and

&) Promote programs, in coordination with public and
private agencies, that will further enhance the knowledge and
skills of every individual regardless of age.

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
DOLE shall have the authority to investigate and require the
keeping of records necessary for the administration of this Act.

Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
Secretary of Labor and Employment shall formulate the
hecessary rules and regulations to implement the provisions
of this Act.

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. — Should any provision of
this Act be declared unconstitutional, the remainder thereof
not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect,

SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. -— All existing laws,
presidential decrees, executive orders, proclamations or
administrative regulations that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

+ SEC. 12, Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette oy in. a
newspaper of general circulation,

| Approved,

  
 
  

INM.DRULGON FELICIANOBELMONTE IR.
esident of the Senate Speaker of the House
| of Representatives

  

This Act was passed hy the House of Representatives as
House Bill No. 6418 on May 28, 2016 and adopted by the Senate
as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 29 on May 80, 2016.

Oscah@A Anes esse Stande

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives
Approved:
BENIGNO S. AQUINO HI

President of the Philippines

Lapsed intofawon dul 2 1 206
Without the signature of the President
In accordance with Article VI, Section
27 (1) of the Constitution