HL No, 6314

Bopublic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Mictes filzila

Sixteenth Congress
Thich Regular Session

~
a mm

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, twe-thousand fifteen.

[REPUBLIC ACT No. 40903]

ANACT GRANTING THE MEGAMANILA TELECOM CORP.
AFRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, ESTABLISH,
OPERATE AND MAINTAIN TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMS THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
tothe provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and applicable
laws, rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to
Megamanila Telecom Corp., hereunder referred to as the grantee,
its successors or assignees, a franchise to construct, install,
establish, operate and maintain for commercial purposes and in
the public interest, throughout the Philippines, with its central
base of operations located at Ortigas Center, San Antonio, Pasig
City, wire and/or wireless telecommunications systems including,
but not limited to, mobile, cellular, paging, fiber optics, satellite

transmit and receive systems, switches, and their value-added
services such as, but not limited to, transmission of voice, data,
facsimile, control signs, audio and video, information services
bureau and all other telecommunications systems technologies
as are at present available or will be made available through
technological advances or innovations in the future: and/or
construct, acquire, lease and operate or manage transmitting
and receiving stations, lines, cables, or systems as are convenient
or essential to efficiently carry out the purpose of this franchise.

SEG: 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities.
— The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed
and operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the
minimum interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of
existing stations or other stations which may be established by
law, without in any way diminishing its own right to use its
selected wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission
or reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantec's
services and/or the availability thereof.
\

SEC. 3. Authority of the National Telecommunications
Commission (NTC). — The grantee shall secure from the NTC
a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity or the
appropriate permits and licenses for the construction, installation
and operation of its telecommunications systems/facilities. In
issuing the certificate, the NTC shall have the power to impose
such conditions relative to the construction, operation,
maintenance, or service level of the telecommunications
systems. The NTC shall have the authority to regulate the
construction and operation of its telecommunications systems.
The grantee shall not use any frequency in the radio spectrum
without authorization from the NTC. Such certificate shall
state the areas covered ‘and date the grantee shall commence
the service. The NTC, however, shall not unreasonably withhold
or delay the grant of any such authority, permit or license.

Suc. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. - For the
purpose of erecting and maintaining poles or other supports
for said wires or other conductors for the purpose of laying and
maintaining underground wires, cables or other conductors, it

_ Shall be lawful for the grantee, its successors or assignees,

with the prior approval of the Department of Public Works

and Highways (DPWH) or the local government unit (LGU)
concerned, as may be appropriate, to make excavations or lay
conduits in any of the public places, roads, highways, streets,
lanes, alleys, avenues, sidewalks or bridges of said province,
cities and/or municipalities: Provided, however, That a publie
place, road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk or
bridge disturbed, altered or changed by reason of erection of
poles or other supports or the underground. laying of wires,
other conductors or conduits, shall be repaired and replaced
in workmanlike manner by the said grantee, its successors
or assignees, in accordance with the standards set by the
DPWH or the LGU concerned. Should the grantee, its
successors or assignees, after the ten (10)-day notice from the
said authority, fail, refuse or neglect to repair or replace any
part of public place, road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue,
sidewalk or bridge disturbed, altered or changed by the said
grantee, its successors or assignees, then the DPWH or the
LGU concerned shall have the right to have the same repaired
and placed in good order and condition at double expense to
be charged against the grantee, its successors or assignees.

SHO. 5. Responsibility to the Public. - The grantee shall
conform to the ethics of honest enterprise and not use its
stations/facilities for obscene or indecent transmission, or for
dissemination of deliberately false information or willful
misrepresentation, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

The grantee shall provide basic or enhanced telephone
service in any city and/or municipality in the Philippines where
it has an approved. Certificate of Public Convenience and
Necessity for the establishment, operation and maintenance
of a local exchange service, without discrimination to any
applicant therefor, in the order of the date of their applications,
up to the limit of the capacity of its local telephone exchange
and, should the demand for the telephone service at any time
increase beyond the capacity thereof, the grantee shall increase
the same to meet such demand: Provided, That in case the
total demand to he satisfied by the expansion is less than the
smallest viable local exchange available in the market as
determined by the NTC, the grantee shall not be obliged to
furnish such service unless the applicant for telephone service
defrays the actual expenses for the installation of the

telecommunications apparatus neceesary for such services
and in such case, the NTC may extend the time within which
the grantee shall furnish such service.

The grantee shall operate and maintain all its stations,
lines, cables, systems, and equipment for the transmission
and reception of messages, signals, and pulses in a
satisfactory manner at all times, and as far ag economical
and practicable, modify, improve, or change such stations,
lineg, cables, systems, and equipment to keep abreast with
the advances in science and technology.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. ~ The charges and rates for
telecommunications services of the grantee, except the rates
and charges on those that may hereafter be declared or
considered as nonregulated services, whether flat rates or
measured rates or variation thereof, shall be subject to the

‘ approval of the NTC or its legal successor. The rates to be

\ charged by the grantee shall be unbundled, separable, and

‘ distinct among the services offered and shall be determined
in such a manner that regulated services do not subsidize the
unregulated ones.

SEC. 7. Right of Government. — A special right is
hereby reserved to the President of the Philippines, in times
of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster,
or disturbance of peace and order: to temporarily take over
and operate the stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment
of the grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any
station, transmitter, facility, or equipment in the interest of
public safety, security, and public welfare; or to authorize
the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of
the government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for
the use of said stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment
during the period when these shall be so operated.

The radio spectrum is a finite resource that is part of
the national patrimony and the use thereof is a privilege

conferred upon the grantee by the State and may be

withdrawn any time after due process.

SEC. 8. Term of Franchise. - This franchise shall be
in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the date of
effectivity of this Act, unless sooner cancelled. This franchise
shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the grantee
fails to comply with any of the following conditions:

(a) Commence operations within one (1) year from the
approval of its operating permit by the NTC; :

(b) Commence operations within three (8) years from the
effectivity of this Act; and

2@ Operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 9. Acceptance and Compliance. — Acceptance of
this franchise shall be given in writing to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative Franchises
of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate, within sixty (60) days from the
effectivity of this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the
grantee shall olerciee the privileges granted under this Act.
Nonacceptance shall render the franchise void.

SEC. 10. Bond. — The grantee shall file a bond with
the NTC in the amount that it shall determine to guarantee
compliance with and fulfillment of the conditions under which
this franchise is granted. If, after three (8) years from the
date of the approval of its permit by the NTC, the grantee
shall have fulfilled the conditions, the bond shall be cancelled
by the NTC. Otherwise, the bond shall be forfeited in favor of
the government and the franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 11. Right of Interconnection. - The grantee is
hereby authorized to connect or demand connection of its
telecommunications systems to other telecommunications
systems installed, operated and maintained by any other duly
authorized person or entity in the Philippines for the purpose
of providing extended and improved telecommunications
services to the public, under such terms and conditions
mutually agreed upon by the parties concerned and the same
shall be subject to the review and modification of the NTC.

Suc. 12. Gross Receipts. - The grantee, its successors
or assignees, shall keep a separate account of the gross
receipts of the business transacted by it and shall furnish
the Commission on Audit (COA) and the National Treasury a
copy of such account not later than the thirty-first (81°) day
of January of each year for the preceding twelve (12) months.

SEC. 18. Books and Accounts. ~ The books and accounts
of the grantee, ite successors or assignees, shall always be
open to the inspection of the COA and its duly authorized
representatives. It shall be the duty of the grantee to submit
to the COA two (2) copies of the quarterly reports on the
gross receipts, the net profits and the general condition
of the business.

Src. 14. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city and municipal governments of the Philippines free from
pllclaims, accounts, demands or actions arising out of accidents
or injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the
construction or operation of the stations, transmitters, facilities,
and equipment of the grantee.

Sec. 18. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. ~ The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity, nor
merge with any other corporation or entity, nor shall transfer
the controlling interest of the grantee, whether as a whole or
in part, and whether simultaneously or contemporaneously, to
any such pereon, firm, company, corporation, or entity without
the prior approval of the Congress of the Philippines: Provided,
That Congress shail be informed of any sale, lease, transfer,
grant of usufruct, or assignment of franchise or the rights
and privileges acquired thereunder, or of the merger or
transfer ‘of the controlling interest of the grantee, within
sixty (60) days after the completion of said transaction:
Provided, further, That failure to report to Congress such
change of ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto
revoked: Provided, finally, That any person or entity to which

os

this franchise is sold, transferred or assigned, shall be subject
to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.

SEC. 16, Dispersal of Ownership. - In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation
in public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at
least thirty percent (80%) or a higher percentage that may
hereafter be provided by law of its outstanding capital stock
in any securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5)
years from the commencement of its operatione: Provided,
That in cases where public offer of shares is not applicable,
establishment of cooperatives operating public utilities must
be implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall render the
franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 17. Reporterial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House
of Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of
the Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions of.
the franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of
every year during the term of its franchise. The reportorial
compliance certificate issued by Congress shall be required.
before any application for permit or certificate is accepted by
the NTC.

SEC. 18. Penalty Clause. — Failure of the grantee to
submit the requisite annual report to Congress shall be
penalized by a fine of five hundred pesos (P600.00) per
working day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by
the NTC from the delinquent franchise grantee separate
from the reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC.

SEC. 19. Equality Clause. — Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under other existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted, upon prior review
and approval of Congress, shall become part of this franchise
and shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the
herein grantee: Provided, That. the foregoing shall neither
apply to nor affect the provisions of telecommunications
franchises concerning territory covered by the franchise, the


life span of the franchise or the type of service authorized
by the franchise.

SEC. 20. Seperability Clause. — If any of the sections
er provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions
not, affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 21. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —
This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration,
or repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the
public interest. so requires and shall not be interpreted as
an exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided for.

ms

SEC. 22. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in
a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved, *

 
   
 

 

M.DRILON FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.

‘resident of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives
and the Senate on December 16, 2015 and May 23, 2016,
respectively.

OSCAR“GrY ABES MARILYN! “6
Secret

of the Senate Secretary General
. House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO II
President of the Philippines

Lapsed intolawon JUL 21 26%
Withaut the signatGhe of the Presider
in accordance with Article VI, Seghot
27 (1) of the-Constitution

feb

 

see