H. No. 5713
S. No. 2987

Republic af the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippines
AMetea Manila

Aixtoouth Congress
Ghicd Regular Session
—_—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand fifteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 10864]

AN ACT DEFINING RAW SUGAR OR RAW CANE SUGAR,
AMENDING SECTION 109(4) AND (F) OF THE
NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1997, AS
AMENDED, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION. 1. Section 109(A) and (F) of the National
Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 109. Exempt Transactions. —(1) Subject
to the provisions of subsection (2) hereof, the following
transactions shall be exempt from the value-added
tax:

"(A) Sale or importation of agricultural and
marine food products in their original state, livestock
and poultry of a kind generally used as, or yielding


or producing foods for human consumption; and
breeding stock and genetic materials therefor.

“Products classified under this paragraph
shall be considered in their original state even if
they have undergone the simple processes of
preparation or preservation for the market, such
as freezing, drying, salting, broiling, roasting,
smoking or stripping. Polished and/or husked rice,
corn grits, raw sugar or raw cane sugar and
molasses, ordinary salt and copra shall be
considered in their original state;

"For this purpose, notwithstanding the
process/es involved in its production, ‘raw sugar or
raw cane sugar' means sugar whose content of
sucrose by weight, in the dry state, corresponds to a
polarimeter reading of less than 99.5 degrees."

"ERX

“) Services by agricultural contract growers
and milling for others of palay into rice, corn into
grits and sugar cane into raw sugar or raw cane
sugar."

"x x x"

SEC. 2. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Secretary of Finance, upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, shall issue the implementing
rules and regulations of this Act within ninety (90) days starting
from the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That the failure of the
concerned agencies to promulgate the said rules and regulations
shall not prevent the implementation of this Act upon its
effectivity.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause. - All laws, acts, decrees,
executive orders, issuances, and rules and regulations or parts
thereof which are contrary to and inconsistent with any provision
of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 4, Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is subsequently declared unconstitutional, the validity of

the remaining provisions hereof shall remain in full force and.
effect.

Suc. 6. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect
immediately after its complete publication either in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Philippines.

Approved,

   
  

  

IN M. D! IN FELICIANO BELMONTE JR.
[President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 87 18
and Senate Bill No. 2987 was finally passed on Febuary 2, 2016 .

OscaR Ss MARILYN Skins
Secretary of he Senate

Secretary Gener
House of Representatives

Approved:

BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
President of the Philippines

Oo

Lapsed inte faw on GUN 10 208
Without the signature of the President
in accordance with Article VI, Section
27 (1) af the Canstitution