H. No. 4307

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Sixteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand fourteen.

[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10683 ]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE SIARGAO ISLAND SPORTS ACADEMY AND TRAINING CENTER IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DAPA, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established in the Municipality of Dapa in Siargao Island, Province of Surigao del Norte, a sports academy to be known as the Siargao Island Sports Academy and Training Center, which shall be constituted as the primary sports development and training center for Surigao del Norte and the neighboring provinces as well.

SEC. 2. The Province of Surigao del Norte, in coordination with the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC), shall take the necessary steps to upgrade, improve and modernize existing facilities, equipment and personnel, and integrate them into the newly created sports academy and training center.

The Provincial Government of Surigao del Norte, in coordination with the PSC, shall create the necessary training programs and competitions, as well as the system by which the facilities shall be maintained and managed in order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this Act.

SEC. 3. The construction, establishment and operation of the Siargao Island Sports Academy and Training Center shall be funded by the Provincial Government of Surigao del Norte and such funds as may be granted by the PSC and by the Office of the President. In addition, grants and endowments may be obtained from local or foreign sources intended for sports development.

SEC. 4. Appropriations . – The Secretary of Education shall immediately include in the Department’s programs the operation of the Siargao Island Sports Academy and Training Center, the funding of which shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 5 . Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). – The PSC, in coordination with the Department of Education (DepED), the Provincial Government of Surigao del Norte and the Municipality of Dapa, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the implementation of this Act within ninety (90) days after its enactment into law.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives on May 19, 2014, amended by the Senate on June 8, 2015, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives on June 10, 2015.

Approved: SEP 18 2015

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines