H. No. 586 
~uhlir nt tlfe f¥lippilll!s 
,ixfeenf4 QIn"gress 
• 
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh 
day of July, two thousand fifteen. 
[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10686) 
AN ACT CREATING THE REGISTRY OF DEEDS FOR THE 
PROVINCE OFZAMBOANGASIBUGAYTO BE SITUATED 
IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF IPILANDAPPROPRIATING 
FUNDS THEREFOR 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
Philippines in Congress assembled: 
SECTION 1. There shall be created a Registry of Deeds for 
the Province ofZamboanga Sibugay which shall have territorial 
jurisdiction over all municipalities ofthe province. Its office shall 
be located in the Municipality ofIpil. 
SEC. 2. The Register of Deeds shall be appointed by the 
President taking into consideration the recommendation of the 
Secretary of Justice. 

The Register of Deeds shall be assisted by a st~ff 
complement, in accordance with existing laws, to be appointed! by 
the Secretary of Justice upon the recommendation of ~he 
Administrator of the Land Registration Authority (LRA). 
The Registry of Deeds is authorized to collect fees and 
charges for services rendered in connection with the performance 
of its duties. In case the amounts collected during its first three 
(3) years of operation shall meet the annual average reven,ue 
standards set by Section 7 of Presidential Decree No. 1529, 
otherwise known as "The Property Registration Decree", a Dep1,1ty 
Register of Deeds and, in the appropriate case, a Second Dep\lty 
Register of Deeds, shall be appointed by the Secretary of Justice 
upon the recommendation of the Administrator of the LRA. 
SEC. 3. All records pertaining to, as well as all office 
equipment and supplies exclusively purchased and used for the 
jurisdiction of the Registry of Deeds of the Province ofZamboanga 
Sibugay, which are in the possession of the Registry of Deeds, of 
Zamboanga del Sur shall be transferred to the new Office of !!he 
Register of Deeds of the Province ofZamboanga Sibugay. 
' 
SEC. 4., The Secretary of Justice shall formulate the rules 
and regulations necessary for the implementation of this Act. 
SEC. 5. The amount necessary to implement the provisions 
of this Act shall be included in the budget of the LRAin the anmial 
GeneralAppropriations Act. 
SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect after fifteen (15) da:ys 
from its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of 
general circulation. 
O!h'~.·~" ~ 
FELICIANO~~ 
Speaker of the House 
' 
of Representatives 

Tbis Act ~bich originated in the House of Representatives 
was passed b;Virh:e House of Representatives on August 4, 2014, 
amended by the Senate on June 8, 2015, and wbich amendments 
were concurred in by the House of Representatives on August 4, 
~S~AR~ES 
Secretary of the Senate 
Approved: 
~t~ 
Secretary General 
House of Representatives 
BENIGNO S. AQUINO ill 
President of the Philippines 
o 
OCT 1 1 2015 
1./": r;~,)u~ ,~h9 sIgn3ture of the PresIdent 
in aCGoidance with Article VI, Secbor 
2.7 (1) :Jfthe Constitution.