H. No. 4183

Republic of the Philippines .
Gongress of the Philippines
Aletro Manila
Pifteenth Cangress

Third Regular Session
—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand twelve.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 10594]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A STATE COLLEGE IN THE CITY
OF TALISAY, PROVINCE OF CEBU TO BE KNOWN
AS THE TALISAY CITY STATE COLLEGE AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: :

SECTION 1. Establishment. — There is hereby established
a state college in the City of Talisay, Province of Cebu to be known
as the Talisay City State College, hereinafter referred to as the
College. ‘ wy
wert,

SEC. 2. General Mandate. — The College shall primarily
provide advanced education, higher technological, professional
instruction and training in science, education, agriculture, fishery
and industrial fields and other relevant areas of study. It shall
also undertake research and extension services and programs in
food production, nutrition, health and sports development, and
provide progressive leadership in its areas of specialization.


SEc. 3. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
— The College shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy, pursuant to paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV of
the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines.

SEC. 4. Curricular Offerings. — The College shall offer
undergraduate and graduate studies in the fields of science,
education, agriculture, fishery and industrial fields and other
degrees/courses within its areas of specialization and according
to its capabilities, as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary
to carry out its objectives in order to meet the needs of the Province
of Cebu and Region VII.

The College may operate a reasonably-sized laboratory
school, if it has an Institute of Education.

SEC. 5. Administration. — The College shall have the
general powers of a corporation set forth in Batas Pambansa
Blg. 68, as amended, otherwise known as "The Corporation Code
of the Philippines". The administration of the College and the
exercise of its corporate powers shall be vested exclusively in the
Board of Trustees and the President of the College.

SEC. 6. The Governing Board. — The governing board of
the College shall be the Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to
as the Board, which shall be composed of the following:

(a) The Chairperson of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED), Chairperson;

(b) The President of the College, Vice Chairperson;

(c) The Chairperson of the Committee on Education, Arts
and Culture of the Senate, member;

@> The Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and
Technical Education of the House of Representatives, member;

- .@) The Regional Director of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA), member;


@ _ The Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture
(DA); member;

(g) The President of the faculty association of the College,
member; -

th) The President of the student council of the College,
member;

@ The President of the alumni association of the College,
member; and

G) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who
have distinguished themselves in their profession or fields of
specialization, members.

The Board shall appoint the two (2) prominent citizens from
among a list of at least five (5) qualified persons in the Province of
Cebu, as recommended by the search committee constituted by
the College President, in consultation with the Chairperson of
the CHED and the other members of the Board, based on the
normal standards and qualificatioris for the position.

The term of office of the President of the faculty association,
the President of the student council and the President of the alumni
association shall be coterminous with their respective terms of
office, as set forth in their respective constitutions and bylaws.

The two (2) prominent citizens shall serve for a term of two
(2) years from the date of appointment.

Src. 7. Powers and Duties of the Board of Trustees. —
The Board shall have the following specific powers and duties, in
addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise
of all the powers granted to the board of directors of a corporation
under existing laws:

(a) Topromulgate and implement policies in accordance
with the declared State policies on education and other pertinent
provisions of the Philippine Constitution on education, agriculture,


science and technology, as well as the policies, standards and
thrusts of the CHED under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise
known as the "Higher Education Act of 1994";

. (b) To promulgate rules and regulations not contrary to
law as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and functions
of the College;

(c) Toreceive and appropriate all sums as may be provided
for the support of the College in the manner it may determine in
its discretion, in order to carry out the purposes and functions of
the College;

@ To import economic, technical and cultural books
and/or publications;

) Toreceive in trust legacies, gifts and donations of real
properties of all kinds and to administer and dispose of the same
when necessary for the benefit of the College, and subject to the
limitations, directions and instructions of the donor, if any;

() Tofix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges
such as, but not limited to, matriculation fees, graduation fees
and laboratory fees, as the Board may deem proper to impose,
after due consultations with the involved sectors.

Such fees and charges, including government subsidies and
other income generated by the College, shall constitute special
trust funds and shall be deposited in any authorized government
depository bank, and all interests that shall accrue therefrom
shall form part of the same funds for the use of the College.

Any provision of existing laws, rules and regulations to the
contrary notwithstanding, any income generated by the College
from tuition fees and other charges, as well as from the operation
of auxiliary services and land grants, shall be retained by the
College and may be disbursed by the Board for instruction,
research, extension or other programs/projects of the College:
Provided, That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed for the specific
purposes for which these are collected.


If, for reason beyond its control, the College shall not be
able to pursue any project for which funds have been appropriated
and allocated under its approved program of expenditures, the
Board may authorize the use of said funds for any reasonable
- purpose which, in its discretion, may be necessary and urgent for
the attainment of the objectives and goals of the College;

(g) To adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition
and other school fees for greater access to poor but deserving
students;

(h) To authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real and personal properties, including necessary
supplies, materials and equipment;

@ To appoint, upon recommendation of the President of
the College, Vice Presidents, deans, directors, heads of
departments, faculty members and other officials and employees
of the College;

@) To fix and adjust salaries of faculty members and
administrative officials and employees, subject to the provisions
of the Revised Compensation and Position Classification System
and other pertinent budget and compensation laws governing hours
of service, and such other duties and conditions as it may deem
proper; to grant them, at its discretion, leaves of absence under
such regulations as it may promulgate, any provision of existing
laws to the contrary notwithstanding; and to remove them for
cause in accordance with the requirements of due process of law;

«k) To approve the curricula, instructional programs and
rules of discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic
Councils as herein provided;

@ Toset policies on admission and graduation of students;
(m) Toaward honorary degrees upon persons in recognition

_ of their outstanding contribution in the fields of agriculture, public
service, arts, science and technology, education or in any field of


specialization within the academic competence of the College; and
to authorize the awarding of certificates of completion of nondegree
and nontraditional courses;

(n) To establish and absorb nonchartered tertiary
institutions within the Province of Cebu as branches and extension
centers in coordination with the CHED, and in consultation with
the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and to offer
therein programs or courses to promote and carry out equal and
greater access to educational opportunities as mandated by the
Constitution;

©) To establish research and extension centers of the
College where such will promote the development of the latter;

(p) To establish professorial chairs in the College and to
provide fellowships for qualified faculty members and scholarships
to deserving students;

@) To delegate any of its powers and duties provided for
hereinabove to the President or Officer-in-Charge and/or other
officials of the College as it may deem appropriate, so as to expedite
the administration of the affairs of the College;

(rt) To authorize an external management audit of the
College, to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and
regulations of the Commission on Audit (COA); and to institute
reforms, including academic and structural changes, on the basis
of the audit results and recommendations;

(8) To collaborate with other governing boards of state
universities and colleges within the Province of Cebu or Region
VII, under the supervision of the CHED and in consultation with
the DBM, and work towards the restructuring of the College to
become more efficient, relevant, productive and competitive;

(}) Toenter into joint ventures with business and industry
for the profitable development and management of the economic
assets of the College, the proceeds from which shall be used for
the development and strengthening of the same;


(u) To develop consortia and other forms of linkages with
local government units (LGUs), institutions and agencies, both
public and private, local and foreign, in furtherance of the purposes
and objectives of the College;

(vy) To develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate institutions and agencies,
public and private, local and foreign, and to appoint
experts/specialists as consultants, part-time or visiting or
exchange professors, scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

(w) Toset up the adoption of modern and innovative modes
of transmitting knowledge such as the use of information
technology, the dual learning system, open learning or distance
education and community laboratory for the promotion of greater
access to higher education and graduate studies, as the case may
be;

(x) To establish policy guidelines and procedures for
participative decision-making and transparency within the College;

(y) To privatize, where most advantageous to the College,
the management of nonacademic services such as health, food,
building, grounds or property maintenance and such other similar
activities; and

(2) To extend the term of the President of the College
beyond the age of retirement, but not beyond the age of seventy
(70), whose performance has been unanimously rated by the Board.
as outstanding, based on the guidelines, qualifications and/or
standards set by the Board, after unanimous recommendation by
the search committee.

SEC. 8. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall
regularly convene once every three (3) months. Whenever
necessary, the Chairperson of the Board may call, upon three (3)

days' prior written notice, a maximum of two (2) special meetings
within the same period.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,


however; That the Chairperson of the CHED or the President of
the College is among those present in the meeting.

In the absence of the Chairperson of the CHED, a
Commissioner of the CHED, duly designated by him/her, shall
represent him/her in the meeting with all the rights and
responsibilities of a regular member: Provided, however, That
during this meeting, the President of the College as Vice
Chairperson shall be the Presiding Officer: Provided, further,
That this proviso notwithstanding, the Chairperson of the CHED
is hereby authorized to designate a CHED Commissioner as the
regular Chair of the Board, in which case said CHED
Commissioner shall act as the Presiding Officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Congressional Committees
on Education shall not be able to attend the Board meeting, they
may duly designate their respective representatives to attend the
said meeting, who shall have the same rights and responsibilities
as a regular member of the Board.

The members of the Board shall not receive any salary but
shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and necessary
expenses incurred, either in their attendance to meetings of the
Board or in connection with other official business authorized by
resolution of the Board, subject to existing laws and regulations.

SEC. 9. The College President. — The College shall be
headed by a President, who shall render full-time service.
He/She shall be appointed by the Board, subject to the guidelines,
qualifications and/or standards set by the Board, upon
recommendation of a duly constituted search committee. He/She
shall have a term of four (4) years and shall be eligible for
reappointment for another term.

Pending the appointment of the first President of the College,
the Chairperson of the CHED shall appoint an Officer-in-Charge
of the College.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of
office of the incumbent President of the College, the Board shall
constitute the Search Committee for the Presidency (SCP).


In case of vacancy in the Office of the President by reason
of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause
or incapacity of the President to perform the functions of his/her
office, the Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge of the College
within six (6) months from the date of vacancy, pending the
appointment of a new President.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the President as
mentioned in the immediately preceding paragraph, his/her
successor or the Officer-in-Charge of the College shall serve only
the unexpired portion of the term.

:

The powers and duties of the President of the College, in
addition to those specifically provided in this Act, shall be those
usually pertaining to the Office of the President of similar colleges,
and those delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the College shall be in
accordance with the Revised Compensation and Position
Classification System and shall be comparable to that being
received by the Presidents of similar educational institutions.

The President of the College shall be assisted by a Vice
President for Academic Affairs, who shall be appointed by the
Board upon the recommendation of the President.

SEc. 10. The Administrative'Council. — There shall be
an Administrative Council consisting of the President of the College
as Chairperson, Vice Presidents, deans, directors and other
officials of equal rank as members, whose duty is to review and
recommend tothe Board the policies governing the administration,
management and development planning of the College.

SEC. 11. The Academic Council. ~ There shall be an
Academic Council to be composed of the President of the College,
who shall act as Chairperson, and all the academic staff with the
rank of at least an assistant professor, as members.

The Academic Council shall have the power to review and
recommend the curricular offerings and rules of discipline of the
College, subject to the approval of the Board. It shall fix the


requirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, subject to review and/or
approval by the Board'ithrough the President of the College. It
shall have the disciplinary power over students of the College and
shall formulate academic policies and rules and regulations on
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

SEc. 12. The Secretary of the College. — The Board shall
appoint a secretary, who shall serve as such for both the Board
and the College and shall keep all records and proceedings of the
Board. He/She shall serve upon each member of the Board the
appropriate notice of the Board meetings.

SEC. 13. The Treasurer of the College. — The Treasurer
of the Philippines shall be the ex officio treasurer of the College.

SEc. 14. The Faculty. — No political beliefs, gender
préference, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic origin,
and religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in
the appointment of faculty members of the College: Provided,
That said appointment shall be subject to the guidelines,
qualifications and/or standards set by the Board: Provided,
further, That no member ofthe faculty shall teach for or against
any particular church or religious sect.

SEC. 15. Scholarship:Program/Admission. — The College
shall provide a scholarship program and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify for
admission to the College.

No student shall be denied admission to the College by
reason of sex, religion, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic
origin.

SEC. 16. Authority to Loan or Transfer Apparatus/
Equipment/Supplies and Detail of Personnel. — The heads of
the bureaus and offices of the national government are hereby
authorized to loan or transfer, upon the request of the President
of the College, such apparatus, equipment or supplies as may be
needed by the College, and to detail employees for duty therein
when, in the judgment of the head of the bureau or office, such

ll

apparatus, equipment, supplies or services of such employees can
be spared without serious detriment to public service.

The employees so detailed shall pertornn such duties as
required of them by the President of the College, and the time so
employed shall be counted as part of their regular services.

SEC. 17. Campus Site/Assets. — The College shall have
an area of not less than five (5) hectares, at least three (3) hectares
of which are contiguous to the main campus, for its exclusive use
as campus site for its academic and instructional programs,
research and development activities and experimental and
laboratory facilities.

The Board shall forthwith recommend a suitable site within
the City of Talisay for this purpose. ;The parcel of land to be
occupied by the Talisay City State College is hereby declared to
be property of the College, and shali be titled under that name:
Provided, That should the College cease to exist or be abolished,
or should said parcel of land aforementioned be no longer needed
by the College, the same shall revert tothe LGU concerned.

SEC. 18. Tax Exemption on Importation and Donations.
— The importation of economic, technical and cultural books
and/or publications, which are for economic, technical, vocational,
scientific, philosophical, historical or cultural purposes made by
the Talisay City State College upon certification by the CHED,
shall be exempt from customs duties in accordance with the
provisions of the Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines, as
amended.

All donations in any form to the Talisay City State College
shall be exempt from the donor's tax and the same shall be
considered as allowable deduction from the gross income in the
computation of the income tax of the donor, in accordance with
the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as
amended.

Src. 19.. Appropriations. — The ‘oe necessary. to
carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment
into law and thereafter.


SEC. 20. Development Plan, Management Audit,
Organizational /Administrative/ Academic Structure. — Within
the period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of
this Act, the College shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget to the CHED, for corresponding
recommendation to the DBM;

(b) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the
CHED; and \ :

() Set up its organizational, administrative as well as
academic structure, including the appointment of the key officials
of the College.

SEc. 21. Filing of Report. — On or before the fifteenth
(15*) day of the second (2™) month after the opening of the regular
classes each year, the Board shall file with the Office of the
President of the Philippines, through the Chairperson of the
CHED, and with both Houses of Congress a detailed report on the
progress, conditions and needs of the College.

SEC. 22. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the "Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997", shall be an integral part of this Act
and shall serve as part.of the Governing Charter of the College.

SEC. 28. Parity Clause. — All other powers, functions
and privileges, responsibilities and limitations to state colleges
anWor their officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted.
to or imposed upon the College and/or its officials, whenever
appropriate.

SEC. 24. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the establishment or
conversion of the institution into a state college shall become
effective only upon the determination and declaration by the
CHED, based on the recommendation of a panel of experts, that
the institution has complied with the requirements for a college
status: The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly


provide technical assistance to the institution and monitor
compliance with the requirements of the Commission.

The CHED shall designate a panel of experts who shall
prepare a recommendation to the Chairperson of the CHED, on
whether the institution has substantially complied with the
requirements for the grant of college status.

The following are the operational requirements for a college:

(a) Level III accreditation or equivalent. atbider CHED
policies for at least four (4) of its undergraduate programs, one (1)
in liberal arts and one (1) in the sciences, and two (2) ofits graduate
programs;

(b) Ratio of qualified full-time faculty with requisite degrees
to number of students;

(©) Adequate library and laboratories;

@) Research and development output of practical and
commercial application to the community;

(e) Relevant linkages and outreach programs that are of
service to the community; and

() Relevant academic policies, systems and processes.

The institution shall retain its status prior to the effectivity
of this Act, unless in the meantime it is able to comply with the
requirements provided herein, within a period not exceeding
January 1; 2016.

SEC. 25. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Board, in consultation with the CHED, shall formulate the
comets to fully implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 26. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected thereby shall remain
in full force and effect.


SEC. 27. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed
or modified accordingly.

SEC. 28. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in two (2) newspapers of general
circulation.

LE Get BELMONTE JR.

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

   

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
on February 6, 2013 and February 4, 2013, respectively.

pe ea
EDW . BELLEN MARILYN rT

Acting Senate Secretary Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved: JUN 0 4 2013