S. No. 1198 H. No. 4241

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila Fifteenth Congress Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand twelve.

[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10380 ]

AN ACT PROVIDING FOR LOCAL ABSENTEE VOTING FOR MEDIA

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. – The State shall ensure the free exercise of the right of suffrage by all citizens of the Philippines not otherwise disqualified by law.

SEC. 2. Local Absentee Voting for Members of Media. – The Commission on Elections shall extend the right to vote under the local absentee voting system provided under existing laws and executive orders to members of media, media practitioners, including the technical and support staff, who are duly registered voters and who, on election day, may not be able to vote due to the performance of their functions in covering and reporting on the elections: Provided, That they shall be allowed to vote only for the positions of President, Vice President, Senators and Party-List Representative.

SEC. 3. Implementing Rules and Regulations. – The Commission on Elections shall, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, promulgate the implementing rules and regulations which shall include a system of accreditation and verification of the members of media, media practitioners, the technical and support staff, who are qualified to avail of local absentee voting.

SEC. 4. Appropriations. – The initial funding of this Act shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations or from any available savings of the Commission on Elections. Thereafter, such amount as may be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 5. Separability Clause. – If any part or provision of this Act shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid, other provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause. – All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, resolutions, rules and regulations, other issuances, and parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Sgd.) JUAN PONCE ENRILE President of the Senate

This Act winch is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1198 and House Bill No. 4241 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on January 22, 2013.

(Sgd.) MARILYN B. BARUA-YAP Secretary General House of Representatives

(Sgd.) EMMA LIRIO-REYES Secretary of the Senate

Approved: MAR 14 2013

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines