MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 75

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE

WHEREAS, the attainment of justice is an essential component of a genuine democracy, as injustice breeds popular discontent;

WHEREAS, the need for fundamental and comprehensive reforms in the system of administration of justice has been long-felt; and

WHEREAS, the accomplishment of these fundamental and comprehensive reforms in the system of administration of justice shall further consolidate the democratic gains of the February 1986 Revolution.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. There is hereby created the Presidential Task Force on the Improvement of the Administration of Justice composed of the following:

a) Chairman – Secretary of Justice

b) Co-Chairman designated by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court; and

c) Members:

1) Representative of the President of the Senate;

2) Representative of the Speaker of the House of Representatives;

3) Representative of the Secretary of Budget and Management;

4) Representative of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines;

5) Cabinet Secretary or his representative; and

6) Chief, Research and Law Reform Division, UP Law Center.

2. The Task Force shall have the following objectives:

a) To formulate short-term and medium-term plans to improve the system of administration of justice;

b) To review, prioritize and adopt proposals on the improvement of the system of administration of justice as may be submitted to it by the technical panels to be created for the purpose;

c) To recommend appropriate issuances for the consideration of the President, the Supreme Court or the Congress to implement such short-term and medium-term plans as may be necessary; and

d) To identify mechanisms that will sustain the efficient and effective performance of the reformed system of administration of justice.

3. The Task Force shall observe the following guidelines:

a) The Task Force is not a government office/agency/instrumentality, and the Chairman, Co-Chairman and Members thereof shall serve in ex-officio capacity; and

b) The Task Force shall ensure that the work-plans and the recommendation that it shall draw up shall promote the following ends:

1) a more democratic access to legal assistance services and the institutions of justice;

2) innovative but feasible alternatives to litigation;

3) promote understanding of the law toward popular empowerment; and

4) provide for more expeditious conditions for the attainment of justice.

4. The UP Law Center is hereby designated as the Secretariat of the Task Force with the following functions:

a) To oversee and monitor the activities of the technical panels and coordinate the meetings of the Task Force with the technical panels;

b) To document the proceedings of meetings of the technical panels and the Task Force; and

c) To provide technical assistance to the Task Force and the technical panels and such other support services as may be required by the technical panels and the Task Force.

5. The Task Force, with the assistance of the Secretariat, shall create technical panels to tackle specific areas of concern in the administration of justice. The panels shall be composed of recognized experts in the field and include, where relevant, representatives from non-government organizations (NGOs).

The technical panels shall have the following functions:

a) Review the findings and recommendations of previous studies done on the subject matter, specifically those which are appropriate, relevant and feasible, given the identified problems and concerns in the administration of justice. They shall not conduct new studies, unless such a study concerns a subject where no previous inquiries have been undertaken;

b) Conduct consultations with sectoral groups and relevant government agencies as may be necessary; and

c) Submit to the Task Force, through the Secretariat, a Final Report that shall include, among others, action plans, draft memorandas, circulars, orders and legislations in their areas of assignment that shall address the concerns.

6. The Office of the President shall allocate Two Hundred Thousand Pesos (P200,000.00) chargeable against its appropriations, subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedures, to support the activities of the Task Force.

7. The Task Force shall submit its recommendations to the President not later than 90 days from the date hereof.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.