MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 10

IMPLEMENTING THE ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER CREATING THE OFFICE FOR DEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, a separate Administrative Order has created the Office for Development Management (“ODM”);

WHEREAS, this Administrative Order is necessary to complete the initial organization of the ODM pursuant to the aforesaid Administrative Order;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the sovereign will of the Filipino people and the Freedom Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Attached Agencies . – The following agencies, together with all their activities, are hereby attached to the ODM:

(a) Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK) – Processing Center Authority;

(b) Technology Resource Center;

(c) Human Settlements Development Corporation;

(d) Philippine Human Resource Development Center;

(e) Sacobia Development Authority; and

(f) Southern Philippines Development Authority.

SEC. 2. Reorganization of Attached Agencies , – The ODM is hereby authorized to reorganize, rename the attached agencies, repeal or amend the characters, articles of incorporation or by-laws, if any, of the attached agencies, merge or consolidate any of the attached agencies, and dispose of such assets of the attached agencies as it may deem fit and expedient under the circumstances.

SEC. 3. Contracts, Agreements, Obligations . – All existing legitimate contracts, agreements, and other obligations entered into or incurred by the organizations, offices and/or programs listed in Section 1 above, shall continue to be in force, subject, insofar as the law may allow, to review by the ODM and to subsequent legal action as may be proper, just and fair.

SEC. 4. KKK-National Secretariat . – The KKK-National Secretariat, including all its projects and programs, is hereby transferred to the ODM as a constituent unit thereof. The transfer shall include the functions, appropriations, funds, records, equipment, facilities, choses in action, rights, other assets and liabilities, if any, of the transferred unit as well as the personnel thereof, as may be necessary, who shall, in a hold-over capacity, continue to perform their respective duties and responsibilities and receive the corresponding salaries and benefits unless in the meantime they are separated from government service pursuant to Executive Order No. 17 (1986) or Article III of the Freedom Constitution. Those personnel of the transferred unit whose positions are not included in the new position structure and staffing pattern approved and prescribed by the DES or who are not reappointed shall be deemed separated from the service and shall be entitled to the benefits provided for under existing laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 5. Pagkain ng Bayan Program . – The ODM is hereby authorized to administer, supervise, monitor and perform such other functions as may be necessary for the successful implementation of the Pagkain ng Bayan Program.

SEC. 6. New Structure and Pattern . – The new structure, organizational functions and staffing pattern of the ODM shall be approved and prescribed by the DES within sixty (60) days from the approval of this Administrative Order and the authorized positions created thereunder shall be filled with regular appointments by the DES or by the President as the case may be. Those incumbents of the organizations, offices and/or programs transferred to the ODM as above provided, whose positions are not included therein, or who are not appointed, shall be deemed separated from the service. Those separated from the service shall receive the benefits to which they may be entitled under existing laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 7. Periodic Performance Evaluation . – The DES is hereby required to formulate and enforce a system of measuring and evaluating periodically and objectively the performance of the ODM and submit the same annually to the President.

SEC. 8. Prohibition against Change . – No change in the reorganization herein prescribed shall be valid except upon prior approval of the President for the purpose of promoting efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of public service.

SEC. 9. Implementing Authority of the DES . – The DES shall issue such rules, regulations and other issuances as may be necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the provisions of this Administrative Order.

SEC. 10. Effectivity . – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of January in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.