MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 213

ESTABLISHING A ONE-STOP-SHOP FOR LIVELIHOOD IN EACH OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE REGIONS OF THE COUNTRY

WHEREAS, under the policy guidelines governing the implementation of livelihood programs and projects, the Departments of Agriculture, Trade and Industry, Labor and Employment, Environment and Natural Resources, Education, Culture and Sports, Interior and Local Government, and the Office of the President have been designated as the agencies primarily responsible for the implementation of livelihood programs and projects;

WHEREAS, individuals and organizations who desire to avail of the said services would best be served by establishing a simplified mechanism for the delivery of livelihood services in each of the administrative regions of the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Establishment of a One-Stop-Shop for Livelihood. There is hereby established in each of the administrative regions of the country a one-stop-shop for livelihood called the Tagpuan sa Kabuhayan Center, hereinafter referred to as the Kabuhayan Center, which shall bring under one roof the various government agencies and financial institutions concerned with livelihood programs and projects.

SECTION 2. The Kabuhayan Center. The Kabuhayan Center shall provide the following services:

a. Match the needs of applicants with available government livelihood assistance;

b. Provide information relative to the existing small and medium scale livelihood programs and projects;

c. Referral for technical assistance on preparation of major project requirements, as may be necessary; and

d. Facilitate the processing and action on applications/projects proposals for livelihood programs and projects.

SECTION 3. Organization and Mechanics of Operation of the Kabuhayan Center.

a. Each regional Kabuhayan Center shall be headed by one of the primary agencies/offices primarily responsible for the implementation of livelihood programs and projects. Initially, the following are hereby designated as lead coordinating agencies/offices:

b. The Kabuhayan centers shall be under the direct supervision of the Sub-Committee on Livelihood of the National Economic and Development Authority-Social Development Committee.

c. A Chief Acting Officer shall be provided by the lead coordinating agency in the region to which it is designated.

d. The primary agencies responsible for execution of livelihood programs and projects under the policy guidelines shall detail their respective personnel who shall serve as the Action Officers of the Kabuhayan Center. An information System Officer who shall be responsible for database computer operations and other support personnel, as may be necessary, shall be detailed from among these agencies/offices.

e. In order to ensure the smooth and efficient operations of the Kabuhayan Center, the designated Chief Action Officer and other personnel complement shall work on a full-time basis and thus, should be completely relieved from their regular duties and responsibilities in their respective offices.

f. The Chief Action Officer may call on Governors/Mayors in his/her jurisdiction to designate provincial/city/municipal action officer to provide link to the Kabuhayan Center as he/she may deem necessary.

SECTION 4. Manual of Operations. — A Manual of Operations shall be formulated to ensure fast and efficient service of each Kabuhayan Center. The general guidelines in the preparation of the Manual shall be prepared at the national level by the NEDA Board Social Development Committee — Sub-Committee on Livelihood while the details shall be formulated at the regional level to suit the requirements of the different regions.

SECTION 5. Monitoring and Evaluation. — Monitoring and evaluation of livelihood programs and projects processed by the Center shall be tied with the Regional Project Monitoring and Evaluation System [RPMES] under Executive Order No. 376, series of 1989.

SECTION 6. Operational Requirements. — The Department of Budget and Management is hereby authorized to allocate and release the amount as may be necessary for the initial operational requirement of the Kabuhayan Centers chargeable against the respective appropriations of the concerned agencies/offices. Thereafter, the funding requirement shall be included in the General Appropriations Bill to be submitted to Congress.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. — This Administrative Order shall take effect upon its approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.