MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 287

IMPOSING THE PENALTY OF REPRIMAND TO CORAZON L. BELMONTE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

This pertains to the administrative case filed by the Department of Foreign Affairs, hereinafter the “Department”, against Ms. Corazon L. Belmonte for misconduct and conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the service.

Investigation shows that respondent caused the circulation, which eventually led to the publication, of a note, dated 2 May 1990, from Executive Secretary Catalino Macaraig addressed to Secretary Raul S. Manglapus recommending the promotion of Ms. Cynthia Lim-Montoya, allegedly the daughter of General Alfredo Lim causing serious embarrassment to the Department.

Respondent admitted having photocopied and circulated the note among foreign service officers of the Department. She, however, justified her actuation and declared that she was motivated only by her desire to bring to the attention of the officers concerned the possible violation of the Foreign Service Law and Civil Service Law in connection with the promotion of Ms. Lim-Montoya.

Respondent’s justification for her acts is not well-taken. If, indeed, her only motivation for the circulation of the note was to prevent possible violation of Civil Service laws on account of the promotion of Ms. Montoya, she should have, rather than distribute copies of the note, referred the matter to, or called the attention in a confidential and discreet manner of senior officials of the Department.

Wherefore, in view of the foregoing, Ms. Corazon L Belmonte is hereby found guilty of the charges. Considering, however, that this is the first offense on record of respondent coupled by her good intention of improving the service, the penalty of REPRIMAND is hereby imposed on respondent.

DONE in the City of Manila this 2nd of June, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.