MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 4

PROVIDING INSTRUCTIONS TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS DURING THE TIME THAT THE PRESIDENT IS OUTSIDE THE PHILIPPINES

The following instructions are hereby issued for the conduct of public affairs during the absence of the President from the Philippines:

1. The President of the Philippines shall continue to exercise all the functions of her office as enjoined by the Constitution and the laws, in the same manner as when she is within the national territory. The Executive Secretary, shall, as heretofore, sign all papers that are ordinarily signed by him by or under the authority of the President and shall decide routine matters.

2. Each Minister shall attend to and decide matters which pertain to his Ministry and which under the law he may decide. On those matters which require approval of the President, in case urgent action is needed, such approval shall be obtained by the fastest and more convenient means of communications. On other ministry matters which, although within the jurisdiction of a Minister, are of such importance as to affect the general policies of the Government and, therefore, should be the subject of consultation with the President, the Minister concerned may communicate for such purpose with the President by the fastest and most convenient means of communication.

3. The Cabinet shall hold its regular meetings and shall meet at such other times as may be necessary. The Vice President shall preside over the meetings. Matters which have heretofore been acted upon by the Cabinet shall continue to be considered and decided by the Cabinet: Provided, however, That in the absence of unanimity of opinion on any important question submitted, no decision shall be taken until it shall have been submitted to the President.

4. All official communications to the President shall be transmitted through or by the Executive Secretary.

5. The Vice-President shall represent the President in social functions requiring the presence of the latter and shall preside over official ceremonies, receive and return the official calls of foreign dignitaries in behalf and in representation of the President, and on such occasions the Vice-President shall be entitled to the honors and courtesies due the President of the Philippines.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) FULGENCIO S. FACTORAN, JR. Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.