MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 38

ESTABLISHING THE GOVERNMENT PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (GPIP) AS A PRIORITY UNDERTAKING OF THE GOVERNMENT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the government’s immediate goal to accelerate economic recovery calls for a concerted and vigorous effort to improve productivity at, the least cost;

WHEREAS, improved productivity demands a judicious and optimum utilization of government resources, elimination of organizational and functional proliferations and overlaps, improvement of service delivery systems and rigid implementation of cost-saving measures in government operations;

WHEREAS, the government needs the cooperation and active participation of the private sector, particularly the non-governmental organizations and the general public, to implement effectively efforts to enhance productivity and improve the delivery of public services;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that a program to coordinate all efforts of both the government and the private sectors be established to attain efficiency, effectiveness and economy in the delivery of quality services to the people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Declaration of Policy . It is hereby declared the policy of the State to attain efficiency, effectiveness and economy in the delivery of quality services to the public in cooperation with, and with the participation of, the private sector.

Section 2. The Government Productivity Improvement Program (GPIP) . The Government Productivity Improvement Program (GPIP), hereinafter referred to as the Program, is hereby established and adopted as a priority undertaking of the Government to enhance overall productivity and to coordinate and/or integrate the program, projects and activities of the government in this endeavor with those in the private sector.

The Program aims to achieve the following objectives:

a. improve the quality of service and optimize the use of resources;

b. establish and set up productivity organizations at the national and regional levels;

c. operationalize and institutionalize productivity improvement activities in every department, agency and corporation; and

d. provide support mechanism that would sustain productivity efforts in the government.

Section 3. The Government Productivity Improvement Program Council (GPIP Council). There is hereby created a Government Productivity Improvement Program Council (GPIP Council), hereinafter referred to as the Council, which shall be the primary policymaking and overall coordinating body of the program. It shall be composed of the Secretary of Budget and Management as Chairman; and the President of the Development Academy of the Philippines, the Secretaries of Trade and Industry, Agriculture, Public Works and Highways, and Socio-Economic Planning, the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission, the Undersecretary of the Presidential Management Staff, and the Director of the Philippine Information Agency, as members.

The Council shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. formulate general policies and provide direction in the implementation of the Program;

b. organize a government-wide network of implementing units, committees and sub-councils as may be necessary to operationalize effectively and attain the objectives of the Program;

c. develop action plans and operating guidelines for program implementation;

d. undertake overall program supervision, coordination, monitoring and evaluation;

e. determine and identify critical service areas and agencies for priority program implementation;

f. seek the cooperation and participation of the private sector and the general public in the implementation and evaluation of the various productivity improvement projects; and

g. seek the support of local and international institutions in promoting and/or financing productivity improvement programs in the public service.

Section 4. Department/Agency Productivity Improvement Committee . Each department/agency/corporation shall organize a Productivity Improvement Committee which shall be responsible for the development and implementation of the agency’s Productivity Improvement Program. Lower level committees at the bureau or regional level may be created as necessary.

Section 5. Performance Responsibility . The Council members shall be jointly responsible for providing operating guidelines and overseeing the activities of the Program. The heads of all other departments, agencies and corporations shall extend assistance to the Council by initially submitting a report on the existing programs/projects oriented towards productivity improvement of their respective agencies, and making available such facilities and expertise as may be required for successful implementation of the Program.

Section 6. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source: Malacañang Records Office