MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 83

CREATING A TASK FORCE FOR METRO MANILA GREENING PROJECT

WHEREAS, industrialization and urbanization of various areas like those in Metro Manila and its environs have resulted in the alteration of life forms, climatic changes, natural cycles and ecosystems;

WHEREAS, as a consequence thereof, there is an urgent need to enforce a program to protect the Metropolitan Manila area and the inhabitants from environmental alterations to ensure proper dispersion of population and industries, pollution control, prevention of farmland encroachment, conservation of nature and the improvement of the living conditions of the people in the Metro Manila; and

WHEREAS, some of these policy measures, which will effectively address the problem, are on-site landscape development and maintenance, solid waste utilization program and greening of selected open spaces, public parks and historic districts in Metro Manila;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a “Task Force for Metro Manila Greening Project” composed of the following:

The Task Force shall have the following functions:

1. Prepare and formulate a comprehensive and integrated plan for greening of Metro Manila utilizing essentially available resources and manpower in Metro Manila;

2. Cause the implementation of the program and plans geared towards enhancing environmental quality of Metro Manila through landscaping development and management;

3. Initiate in securing local and foreign contributions for the greening program of Metro Manila;

4. Enlist and obtain assistance of any and all agencies and instrumentalities of the government in the successful accomplishment of the program; and

5. Perform such other related functions as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of AUGUST, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.