MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 55

PROVIDING FOR CABINET OFFICERS FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, the Government is committed to pursue a more active role in its relationship with the public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Cabinet Officers for Regional Development . In addition to a Cabinet Member’s regular duties he may be assigned to a Region to discharge, with respect to that Region, the functions, duties and responsibilities herein provided. The Member of the Cabinet so assigned shall be called the Cabinet Officer for Regional Development, hereinafter referred to as CORD.

SECTION 2. Functions, Duties and Responsibilities of the C ORD.

The CORD shall:

(a) Assist in articulating the Region’s concerns and perceptions in the Cabinet, with the other Departments, the Office of the President, and concerned agencies;

(b) Assist the President in the speedy, efficient, honest and orderly resolution of problems in government operations in the Region;

(c) Assist in identifying and clarifying the key development issues, priorities and projects in the Region;

(d) Support the development of the institutional capabilities of the Region’s administrative machinery;

(e) Formulate a plan of action, consistent with this Administrative Order, which plan of action shall be subject to the approval of the President;

(f) Go on regular visits to his Region of assignment;

(g) Function as Convenor during the Presidential Regional consultations;

(h) Submit a monthly report of his activities to the President. A standard format shall be adopted for this purpose; and

(i) Perform such other functions as may be determined by the President.

SECTION 3. Operational Relationships . – The CORD shall coordinate with the various agencies and local government units in the discharge of his functions, duties and responsibilities. The CORD shall not duplicate the regular functions of any government agency or body. He shall deal with the existing administrative bodies through their central offices when calling attention to specific matters of concern.

SECTION 4. Repealing Clause . – All orders, issuances, rules and regulations and other issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity . – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.