MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 271

DIRECTING THE FORMATION OF A MULTI-SECTORAL FINESSE NATIONAL COMMITTEE TO FORMULATE AND IMPLEMENT THE PHILIPPINE FINESSE NATIONAL PROGRAM

WHEREAS, there is a need to develop and maximize the use of indigenous energy resources pursuant to the country’s goal for energy self-reliance;

WHEREAS, renewable energy systems and energy conservation technologies can both play crucial roles and make significant contribution in achieving the above-mentioned goal;

WHEREAS, the development and utilization of environmentally-benign alternative energy sources, such as renewable energy, and the promotion of energy conservation are becoming imperative in view of the increasing worldwide concern for the protection of the environment;

WHEREAS, a multi-sectoral group from the Philippines has proposed a Financing Energy Services for Small-Scale Energy Users (FINESSE) Program Concept, which was well received by multilateral lending institutions led by the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the United Nations Development Program and bilateral donor agencies from the United States and the Netherlands during the FINESSE Workshop in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, on October 21 to 25, 1991;

WHEREAS, the above-mentioned lending agencies made commitments that funding would be made available, if the country can come out with a comprehensive, integrated and implementable FINESSE Program;

WHEREAS, the development and implementation of the FINESSE National Program can be expeditiously pursued with active involvement of both the government agencies and the private sector, including non-governmental organizations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested upon me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. FINESSE National Committee . A FINESSE National Committee shall be organized to be composed of representatives from government agencies, the private sector and non-governmental organizations, and to be charged with the implementation of the FINESSE National Program.

SEC. 2. Mandate . The FINESSE National Committee shall formulate, provide direction, and coordinate implementation of a FINESSE National Program. Such program will make available mechanisms for financing and provisions of support activities needed for the widespread use of viable renewable energy and energy conservation technologies.

SEC. 3. Tasks . The FINESSE National Committee shall be responsible for:

a) developing the implementation guidelines of the FINESSE National program;

b) identifying priorities of the program and formulating mechanisms for their implementation; and

c) monitoring and evaluation of the FINESSE National Program.

SEC. 4. Composition . The FINESSE National Committee shall be headed by the Executive Director of the Office of Energy Affairs, who shall be its Chairman. The Office of Energy Affairs, especially its Non-Conventional Resources Division and Conservation Divison, shall serve as the Secretariat.

The following government agencies, in addition to the Office of Energy Affairs, shall serve as the core group of the Committee:

–          National Power Corporation

–          National Economic Development Authority

–          National Electrification Administration

–          Department of Finance

–          Department of Trade and Industry

–          Development Bank of the Philippines

As may be determined by the Committee to be warranted and necessary in the peformance of its tasks, its membership may be expanded by the Committee to include representatives from other government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations, non-governmental organizations and private entities.

The Committee may further call upon any of these government agencies, non-governmental organizations and private entities for assistance as it may deem appropriate for more effective attainment of the objectives of the FINESSE National Program.

SEC. 5. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of March in the year of Our Lord, ninety hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.