MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 249

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE MANILA BAY TIDAL CONTROL STRUCTURE PROJECT AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, a tidal control structure across the entrance of Manila Bay from Cavite to Bataan, via Corregidor, has been identified as a potentially viable facility that would control the water level of the bay in order to effect significantly better drainage and flood control for the adjoining land areas in Metro Manila, Central Luzon, and neighboring localities, aside from providing a huge supply of water for drinking and industrial uses, irrigation, and fish culture, enabling navigation through the facility, as well as road transport on top of the structure, generating reclaimed lands for agricultural, commercial, industrial, and residential uses, and providing other related functions;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. An Inter-Agency Committee for the Manila Bay Tidal Control Structure Project is hereby created, composed of the Secretary of Public Works and Highways as Chairman, and the Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources, the Secretary of Interior and Local Government, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Transportation and Communications as members.

SEC. 2. The main tasks of the Committee are the following:

a. Conduct a prefeasibility/feasibility study of the proposed project, covering the various aspects mentioned above, including the necessary surveys, investigations, and engineering activities, to establish and confirm the technical, economic, social, environmental, financial, and operational viability of the project.

b. Coordinate and consult with all concerned agencies and groups, both government and private, in the conduct of such prefeasibility/feasibility study.

c. Based on the results of the said study, recommend or take the necessary follow-up steps to pursue the project implementation, including detailed design and construction, thru build-operate-and-transfer schemes and/or other appropriate arrangements.

SEC. 3. The Committee shall be assisted by the Administrator, Metropolitan and Sewerage Authority; Administrator, National Irrigation Administration; Administrator, Public Estates Authority; Director, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, and other concerned agencies of the Government as may be determined by the Committee.

SEC. 4. The expenses of the Committee for the conduct of the necessary studies and investigations shall be shared by the member-agencies from their respective budgets.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.