MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 282

RENAMING THE NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL LEARNING CENTER AS THE NATIONAL EDUCATORS ACADEMY OF THE PHILIPPINES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the quality of Philippine education, particularly at the basic education level, is highly dependent on the efficient and effective management of the school system and the educational processes;

WHEREAS, the development of the potentials of educational managers towards professional competence and management excellence can be best enhanced to the maximum through career-oriented development programs;

WHEREAS, the progressive development and attainment of the highest professional competence and management excellence among leaders in the educational bureaucracy can only be accelerated and sustained through an identifiable institution within the Department of Education, Culture and Sports;

WHEREAS, the National Education Learning Center (NELC) at the Teachers’ Camp, Baguio City – created under Letter of Instructions No. 1487 dated 10 December 1985 – to sustain gains derived from the Program for Decentralized Educational Development (PRODED) mainly addressed concerns related to the improvement of the school curricula and the development of better instructional materials, the reorientation and retraining of teachers and the improvement of the management capabilities of superintendents, supervisors and administrators at the elementary level;

WHEREAS, the State recognizes the need to identify an institution in the Department of Education, Culture and Sports that would respond to the demands for professional competency as well as management and leadership excellence in the educational community;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The National Education Learning Center (NELC) at the Teachers’ Camp, Baguio City, shall be renamed as the National Educators Academy of the Philippines (NEAP).

SEC. 2. The National Educators Academy of the Philippines shall, in addition to the present functions of the former National Education Learning Center, have the following objectives:

a. To provide continuing strategic human resource development programs for school managers and leaders within the context of emerging legitimate demands on scarce human and material resources;

b. To promote synergetic partnerships and linkages with centers of excellence locally and internationally, from both government and non-government sectors;

c. To develop programs that address career planning and pathing for potential educational managers and leaders;

d. To promote intellectual inquiry into non-traditional and innovative alternatives and strategies in educational management;

e. To serve as a venue and a forum for individual and institutional academic exchange; and

f. To initiate an assessment and evaluation mechanism to ensure the sustenance of quality development, recruitment, selection and promotion.

SEC. 3. The components of the National Educators Academy of the Philippines shall be modified to include the following:

a. Research and Program Development;

b. Training and Materials Development.

The Research and Program Development component shall encourage research-based strategic human resources development programs. It shall accommodate fellows from academic institutions in both government and non-government sectors.

The Training and Materials Development component shall develop print and non-print training materials for the identified programs of the Academy.

SEC. 4. The organizational structure and staffing pattern (Annex “A”)of the National Educators Academy of the Philippines shall be provided from the existing personnel complement of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, through staff redeployment and secondment from other DECS offices. The personnel of the Staff Development Division of the Human Resource Development Service of the DECS under the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Human Resource Development shall constitute the initial staff complement of the Academy.

SEC. 5. The phases of this Order requiring budgetary action shall be included in the 1993 budget while the aspects requiring no budgetary measure shall be implemented immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.