MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 36

PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF REGIONAL OFFICES IN THE CORDILLERA ADMINISTRATIVE REGION

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 220 dated July 15, 1987 created the Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR) out of the provinces of Abra, Mt. Province and Benguet, together with the chartered city of Baguio, which had comprised part of Region I and the provinces of Ifugao and Kalinga-Apayao which had comprised part of Region II;

WHEREAS, the Order justified the creation of the separate and common region for the Cordilleras as a measure to accelerate the economic and social growth and development of the units in the region;

WHEREAS, the Order also pointed out that national security and public order interest has made the immediate reorganization of the existing administrative structure in the Cordilleras an urgent need;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the Order the departments and other agencies of the National Government should now establish immediately their regional offices which shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the territorial coverage of the CAR;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby directed that the following measures be undertaken:

SECTION 1. Establishment of Regional Offices in CAR . The various departments and other agencies of the National Government that are currently authorized to maintain regional offices are hereby directed to establish forthwith their respective regional offices in the Cordillera Administrative Region with territorial coverage as defined under Section 2 of Executive Order No. 220 dated July 15, 1987, with regional headquarters at Baguio City.

SECTION 2. Appointment of Regional Offices’ Personnel . The Regional Directors shall be appointed immediately to facilitate the organization of the Regional Offices. In keeping with the spirit and intent of E.O. 220, preference shall be given to qualified natives of the Cordilleras in the appointment of the Regional Directors and their staff.

SECTION 3. Additional Funding . Such additional funding as may be necessary to establish the Regional Offices as hereinabove prescribed shall be provided from any applicable items in the General Appropriations Act as may be determined by the Secretary of Budget and Management.

SECTION 4. Repealing Clause . All previous administrative orders, memorandum orders and similar issuances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.