MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 263

TRANSFERRING THE CAGAYAN VALLEY EXPERIMENT STATION TO THE PHILIPPINE RICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 1061 dated November 5, 1985, as amended by Executive Order No. 60 dated November 7, 1986, created the Philippine Rice Research Institute to “develop x x x a national rice research program so as to sustain and further improve the gains already made in rice production, improve the income and economic condition of small farmers, expand employment opportunities in the rural areas, and ultimately promote the general welfare of the people through self-sufficiency in rice production”;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Rice Research Institute is a body corporate attached to the Department of Agriculture under Section 19 of Executive Order No. 116 dated January 30, 1987 to serve as the national coordinating and funding agency for rice and rice-based research and development programs;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Government to unify the efforts of various agencies and institutions working on rice research and development to generate an in-depth approach to the present and future problems on rice in the country; and

WHEREAS, Section 27 of Executive Order No. 116 requires prior approval of the President before changes could be made in the reorganized Department of Agriculture to promote efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of public services;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the transfer of the Cagayan Valley Experiment Station in San Mateo, Isabela, together with the existing plantilla positions, operational funds and the income derived from the rice seed production of the said station, to the Philippine Rice Research Institute, serving as the umbrella organization overseeing all aspects of rice research and development in the country.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.