MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 217

PROVIDING FOR THE REORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE BOARD

WHEREAS , pursuant to Section 7 of Executive Order No. 246, S. 1987, and Section 14, Title VIII, Book IV, of the Administrative Code of 1987, the National Intelligence Board (NIB) serves as the advisory body to the Director-General of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA) for the coordination and integration of intelligence activities in the Government, which Board may be reorganized at any time under to the President’s continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

WHEREAS , there is a need to further institutionalize the national intelligence effort up to the regional or local level to enhance the effectiveness of the intelligence community in detecting and monitoring threats to the stability of the state;

WHEREAS , it is in the national interest to widen and diversify the sources of intelligence information from the civilian and military sectors and intensify the coordination and integration of intelligence activities at all levels;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested upon me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The National Intelligence Board (NIB) shall be reorganized and expanded to include the membership of twelve civilian agencies and seven military offices as follows:

1. The National Intelligence Coordinating Agency

2. Department of Foreign Affairs;

3. The Department of National Defense;

4. The Department of Education, Culture and Sports;

5. The Department of Labor and Employment;

6. The National Economic and Development Authority;

7. The Department of Trade and Industry;

8. The Department of Interior and Local Government;

9. The Philippine National Police;

10. The National Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice;

11. The Bureau of Immigration and Deportation, Department of Justice;

12. The Economic Intelligence and Investigation Bureau, Department of Finance;

13. The Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence, J2, Armed Forces of the Philippines;

14. The Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff, G2, Philippine Army;

15. The Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff, A2, Philippine Air Force;

16. The Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff, N2, Philippine Navy;

17. The Intelligence Service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines;

18. The Counter-intelligence Command, Armed Forces of the Philippines;

19. The Presidential Security Group.

Sec. 2. The designated representatives of each of these member-agencies and offices shall, if possible, be of the rank of at least an Assistant Secretary or its equivalent.

Sec. 3. The Chairman of the NIB shall be the Director-General of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA), Office of the President.

Sec. 4. The National Security Director shall be present at all meetings of the Board and shall provide periodic guidance to the intelligence community.

Sec. 5. The Board shall serve as the advisory body to the Director-General of the NICA for the coordination and integration of all intelligence activities of the Government.

Sec. 6. The Board shall be assisted by the Regional Intelligence Coordinating Committees (RICCs) at all regions of the country. The objective of the RICCs is to integrate intelligence efforts of the Government at the regional and local levels to ensure efficient and effective coverage of all threats to national security. It shall be chaired by the Regional Director of the NICA field station and shall have as members, the regional counterparts of the NIB members. The RICC shall report to the Board periodically on their accomplishments and concerns.

Sec. 7. The Board shall have four inter-agency standing committees tasked to prepare intelligence directives, papers and plans prior to presentation, discussion and adoption by the Board. These committees shall also ensure that appropriate contributions are received from other agencies with delineated intelligence tasks.

These standing committees shall be:

1. The Joint Coordinating Committee on Operations, Production and Security

2. The Coordinating Committee on Operations

3. The Coordinating Committee on Production

4. The Coordinating Committee on Security

The NIB chairman shall designate the chairman for each committee, while the NIB members shall designate their regular representatives to each of the committees. The designated coordinating committee chairmen shall attend all meetings of the Board.

Sec. 8. The Board shall create other committees or ad-hoc working groups as required.

Sec. 9. The Board shall have a Secretariat responsible for disseminating agreements and other vital papers and all other technical and administrative matters affecting the Board. The Chairman may designate the Assistant Director-General for Production of the NICA as Board Secretary, who shall attend all meetings as a full-pledge member of the Board and who shall organize and supervise the Board Secretariat, pursuant to the approved Standard Operating Procedures and Terms of Reference of the Board.

Sec. 10. The Chairman may designate resource persons who may be invited to regularly participate in Board Meetings or as the need arises.

Sec. 11. The Board shall meet once a month or as often as necessary. The Chairman shall set the regular meetings of the Board in consultation with the National Security Director and the members of the Board.

Sec. 12. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.