MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 167

CREATING THE INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE ASIA-PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION (APEC) AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Philippines was a party to the ministerial Asia-Pacific Conference on economic cooperation, held in Canberra, Australia on November 5-7, 1989;

WHEREAS, the Philippines as a participating country has been tasked to Shepherd one of the thrust of the economic cooperation, i.e., “investment and technology transfer”;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish a body that shall formulate a national policy on Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) particularly on the matter of investment and technology transfer;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee on Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, hereinafter referred to as the APEC Committee, to be composed of representatives from the following agencies:

The representatives, who shall hold a position not lower than assistant secretary, shall be designated by their respective heads of offices.

Sec 2. The APEC Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. To formulate a national policy on investment and technology transfer for approval of the President;

b. To Study and recommend the role of the private as well as the foreign sectors in the transfer of technology;

c. To represent the country, individual or as a group, in all sub-ministerial conferences on APEC related matters;

d. To call upon the assistance of any department or agency in the performance of its assigned tasks;

e. To perform such other functions as the President may assign.

Sec 3. The Department of Foreign Affairs shall provide the Secretariat for the APEC Committee and the other member agencies may provide additional staff as the need arises.

Sec 4. Such amount as may be necessary for the operation of the APEC Committee, its Secretariat and attendance to conferences shall be charged equally against the applicable funds of the agencies represented in the said committee.

Sec. 5 This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.