MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 146

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION TO CONDUCT A FACT-FINDING INVESTIGATION OF THE 1989 REBELLION

WHEREAS, the latest attempt to overthrow the Philippine government is the boldest and bloodiest move against the new democracy;

WHEREAS, the loss of lives, destruction of properties and the social and economic damage brought about by the recent rebellion require a thorough investigation of all the facts and circumstances surrounding the rebellion;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a Presidential Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, to conduct a fact-finding investigation of the 1989 rebellion and the involvement of military and civilian officials, and private persons therein.

The Commission shall be composed of:

Section 2. The Commission is hereby granted the powers of an investigating body under Section 37, Chapter 9, Book I of the Administrative Code of 1987 including the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony or evidence relevant to the investigation, and to issue compulsory processes to produce documents, books, records and such other matters, in the performance of its functions.

Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to appear upon summons issued under the authority of the preceding paragraph or who, appearing before the Commission, refuses to take oath, give testimony or produce documents for inspection, when thereunto lawfully required, shall be subject to discipline as in the case of contempt of court upon application of the Commission before the proper court, in the manner provided for by law.

Section 3. The Commission is hereby authorized to engage the services of resource persons, professionals and other personnel which may be necessary to carry out its functions.

Section 4. The Office of the President shall establish a Special Secretariat for the technical and staff support of the Commission. For this purpose, the Executive Secretary is hereby authorized to detail any personnel from any government office to assist the Commission.

Section 5. The Commission is hereby authorized to deputize the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the National Bureau of Investigation, the Philippine Constabulary, and any other law enforcing agency to assist it in the performance of its functions.

Section 6. The departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities including government owned or controlled corporations are hereby directed to extend such assistance and cooperation as the Commission may need in the discharge of its functions.

Section 7. The Office of the President shall provide the necessary funds for the operations of the Commission.

Section 8. The Commission shall evaluate all the facts and circumstances surrounding the rebellion and submit its findings and recommendations to the President of the Philippines.

Section 9. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1989). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.