MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 81

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON THE PHILIPPINE AID PLAN

WHEREAS, there is a need to mobilize the international community’s support for economic recovery and sustained growth consistent with the framework of the updated Medium Term Philippine Development Plan, 1988-1992;

WHEREAS, it is to the best interest of the Government to take the lead role in coordinating efforts to effectively mobilize the aid and to ensure its successful implementation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Presidential Task Force on the Philippine Aid Plan . There is hereby created a Presidential Task Force on Philippine Aid Plan hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, to be composed of the following:

The Task Force is authorized to invite any individual or representative of non-government organizations, agriculture and industrial labor groups, and such other related associations to serve as Resource Person. It is likewise authorized to call on any government agency, corporation or instrumentality for appropriate assistance.

SECTION 2. Powers and Functions of the Task Force – The Task Force shall:

a. Serve as clearing house for all government positions and statements on the aid plan;

b. Formulate and recommend the guiding principles that will govern the aid offer;

c. Review and evaluate various options on the mobilization and utilization of the proposed aid upon due consultations with concerned sectors with the end in view of maximizing the benefits to be derived from such an offer;

d. As far as practicable conduct public hearings and consult line agencies/regional development councils/private sector to obtain necessary information/reactions from various sectors of the economy regarding the aid offer;

e. Develop the structures and the mechanisms to ensure that projects to be funded out of the Plan are implemented efficiently;

f. Provide technical assistance to the Preparatory Committee and other international bodies that may be created; and

g. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

SECTION 3. Technical Committee of the Task Force . – A Technical Committee composed of senior officials or representatives designated by the members of the Task Force is hereby created. Its principal functions include the preparation of technical reports for consideration of the Task Force and the review of proposals submitted for the approval of the Task Force.

SECTION 4. Secretariat Services . – Technical secretariat support to the Task Force and its Technical Committee shall be provided by the National Economic and Development Authority Secretariat while conference and other liaison activities shall be provided by the Office of the President (Cabinet Secretariat).

SECTION 5. Funding . – The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to immediately release the funds needed for the financial and operational requirements of the Task Force, chargeable against the funds of the Office of the President and subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedures.

SECTION 6. Effectivity . – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.