MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 338

CREATING THE ENERGY COORDINATING COUNCIL

WHEREAS, Section 14 of Executive Order No. 193 (Reorganization of the Office of the Energy Affairs) provides that: “The Energy Office shall coordinate with the Philippine National Oil Company, National Power Corporation and National Electrification Administration in the exercise of its functions particularly as these pertain to the formulation of energy sector policies, plans and programs”;

WHEREAS, for a more effective management of these resources, national energy plans, policies and programs should be developed and implemented in an integrated and coordinated fashion requiring consultations and coordination with major government energy agencies;

WHEREAS, to strengthen and institutionalize this mechanism and to provide a central focus for decision-making, a coordination machinery has to be set up.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the ENERGY COORDINATING COUNCIL . – There is hereby created an Energy Coordinating Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, under the Office of the President.

SEC. 2. Composition of the Council . – The Council shall be composed of the Executive Secretary, Office of the President, as Chairman, and the following as members:

1. Executive Director, Office of Energy Affairs 2. President, Philippine National Oil Company 3. President, National Power Corporation 4. Administrator, National Electrification Administration

SEC. 3. Powers and Functions of the Council . – The Council shall have the following powers and functions:

1. Review and formally ratify the energy plan, including the power expansion program of government agencies and corporations.

2. Make appropriate representations to the Investment Coordinating Committee or the government agency responsible for investment fund appropriations to ensure that energy sector investments are consistent with the approved energy plan.

3. Analyze, coordinate and, with the approval of the President, initiate major energy and power development projects requiring the utilization of funds available to the government.

4. Coordinate the implementation of approved projects to assist in their timely completion.

5. As the need arises, such as when there is a foreseen energy or power shortage, determine and recommend to the President the appropriate course of action thereon.

6. Such other powers and functions as the President may direct.

SEC. 4. Responsibility of the Office of Energy Affairs . – Consistent with its mandate under Executive Order No. 193, dated June 10, 1987, as the agency responsible for the formulation, planning, monitoring, implementation and coordination of policies and programs in the field of energy, the Office of Energy Affairs shall:

1. Prepare proposed plans in preliminary coordination with any agency involved before submission thereof to the Council.

2. Provide technical advice and support to the Council in the performance of its task.

3. Submit the plans, as approved/ratified by the Council, to the National Economic and Development Authority and see to it that said plans are included in the national economic and development plan.

SEC. 5. Assistance from Public and Private Sectors . – Whenever necessary, the Council may call on any public or private agency for assistance in the performance of its task. It may likewise create committees which may include private sector participation.

SEC. 6. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.