MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 115

REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL AND DEFINING ITS MEMBERSHIP, FUNCTION, AND AUTHORITY AND OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the formulation and adoption of integrated and rationalized national, foreign, military, political, economic, social and educational policies, programs, and procedures are vital to the security of the state;

WHEREAS, it is, therefore, in the national interest that an agency exist purposely to formulate and adopt policies, programs, and procedures on all matters pertaining to or affecting the national security so that judgments and actions thereon by the President may rest on sound advice and accurate information.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. The National Security Council (hereinafter referred to as the NSC) is hereby reorganized. It shall henceforth be composed of the President, the Vice-President and Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Executive Secretary,  Minister of National Defense, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Labor and Employment, the Minister of Local Government, the National Security Director, the Chief of Staff of the New Armed Forces of the Philippines, and such other government officials and private citizens as the President may designate from time to time.

SECTION 2. The NSC shall have an Executive Committee composed of the President, the Vice-President and Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Executive Secretary, the Minister of National Defense, the National Security Director, the Chief of Staff of the New Armed Forces of the Philippines and such other members or advisers as the President may designate from time to time.

The Executive Committee shall review national security and defense problems and formulate positions and/or solutions for consideration by the NSC. It shall determine the agenda and order of business of the NSC, and shall ensure that decisions of the NSC are clearly communicated to the agencies involved. It shall advise the President on the implementation of decisions.

To carry out the functions of the Executive Committee, the Chairman shall utilize the facilities and expertise of any of the government agencies and instrumentalities and shall promulgate rules and regulations to govern the operation of the Executive Committee.

SECTION 3. The NSC shall be the lead agency of the government for coordinating the formulation of policies, relating to or with implications on the national security.

SECTION 4. The President shall preside over the meetings of the NSC and the Executive Committee: Provided, that in his/her absence, he/she may designate a member of the Council to so preside in his/her stead.

SECTION 5. The Council shall have a permanent Secretariat which shall be under the supervision and control of the National Security Director. The National Security Director shall be assisted by a Deputy who, like the National Security Director, shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the President. The National Security Director shall attend and participate in meetings of the Cabinet and have the privileges of a member thereof.

SECTION 6. The National Security Director, in conjunction with the Minister of Budget and management, is hereby authorized to organize the Secretariat, prepare its plans, budget, staff and personnel. The National Security Director shall likewise promulgate the rules and regulations to govern the operation of both the Council and the Secretariat: PROVIDED, that the said budget and staffing pattern and the rules and regulations shall be effective only upon their approval by the President.

SECTION 7. Among other duties, the National Security Director shall advise the President on matters pertaining to national security and, whenever directed by the President, to see the implementation of decisions and policies adopted by the President and/or the National Security Council which have implementations on national security.

SECTION 8. In addition to such specific duties and responsibilities as the President may direct, it shall be the duty of the NSC –

1. to advise the President with respect to the integration of domestic, foreign, military, political, economic, social, and educational policies relating to the national security so as to enable all concerned ministries, departments, and agencies of the government to meet more effectively, problems and matters involving the national security;

2. to evaluate and analyze all information, events, and incidents in terms of the risks they pose or implications upon and/or threats to the overall security and stability of the nation, for the purpose of recommending to the President appropriate responses thereto and/or action thereon;

3. to formulate and coordinate the implementation of policies on matters of common interest to the various ministries, departments, and agencies of the government concerned with the national security, and to make recommendations to the President in connection therewith;

4. to insure that policies adopted by the NSC on national security are effectively and efficiently implemented;

5. to make such recommendations and/or render such other reports as the President may from time to time direct.

SECTION 9. The National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA), as now organized and existing shall give support and assistance to the NSC.

SECTION 10. All provisions of PD 1498 on the National Security Council of the New Society and all other laws, decrees, executive orders, letters of instructions, and like edicts which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed.

SECTION 11. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.