MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 103

CONSTITUTING THE NATIONAL RECONCILIATION AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AS A PRIORITY PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT AND FOR THE PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan adopted by the Government for 1987-1992 seeks achieve the board objectives of the alleviation of poverty, the generation of more and productive employment, the promotion of social justice, and the attainment of sustainable economic growth mainly through a labor-based, rural-oriented strategy;

WHEREAS, the nation is on the threshold of a new era characterized by a stronger bond among brother Filipino as one nation;

WHEREAS, the Government national reconciliation efforts have made it necessary to consolidate and refocus all support mechanism required to make such efforts fruitful;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy . – It is hereby declared the policy of the State to support individuals and families toward a peaceful and productive community life.

SECTION 2. The National Reconciliation and Development Program . – In pursuance of the aforestated policy, the National Reconciliation and Development Program (NRDP) is hereby established to coordinate and integrate the programs, projects and efforts of the government entities, non-government organizations and the private sector concerning national reconciliation as envisioned in the Philippine Development Plan.

SECTION 3. The National Reconciliation and Development Council (NRDC) . – The National Reconciliation and Development Council is hereby created to coordinate the National Reconciliation and Development Program. The National Reconciliation and Development Council shall be composed of the following:

SECTION 4. Powers and Functions of the National Reconciliation and Development Council . – The National Reconciliation and Development Council shall have the following powers and functions:

Formulate a comprehensive program for national reconciliation and development which shall build on all government programs and projects such as the Local Communities Program, Community Employment Development Program, National Assistance for Local Government Units, Regional Development Investment Program and other sectoral programs;

Formulate policies and guidelines for the National Reconciliation and Development Program;

Deputize government entities and officials as may be necessary for the National Reconciliation and Development Program;

Encourage participation of non-government organizations and the private sector in the National Reconciliation and Development Program;

(e) Identify additional sources of technical and financial assistance for the National Reconciliation and Development Program;

(f) Monitor and evaluate the progress of the National Reconciliation and Development Program.

SECTION 5. The Consultative Council . – All other government ministries or agencies and non-government organizations involved in the implementation of the Philippine Development Plan shall compose of the Consultative Council at the national level for the purpose of assisting the National Reconciliation and Development Council in the implementation of the National Reconciliation and Development Program. They shall be consulted individually or meet as a body as the need arises.

At the regional, provincial and municipal levels, the Regional Development Councils, the Provincial Development Councils and the Municipal Development Councils, respectively, shall be the consultative bodies.

SECTION 6. The Secretariat . – A Secretariat shall be created by the National Reconciliation and Development Council at the National level.

SECTION 7. Program Implementation and Coordination at the Regional Level . – A special Council, the Regional Reconciliation and Development Council (RRDC), shall be created under the Regional Development Council of every region except the National Capital Region. The Regional Reconciliation and Development Council shall be responsible for the coordination of the National Reconciliation and Development Program at the regional level.

The Regional Reconciliation and Development Council shall be composed of the representatives in the region of the members of the National Reconciliation and Development Council. The members shall elect a Chairman from among the members and create its own Secretariat.

The Regional Reconciliation and Development Council shall have the following powers and functions:

Coordinate programs and projects of the National Reconciliation and Development Program in the regions;

Enlist the support of and coordinate with other ministries or agencies for support mechanism;

Encourage the participation of non-government organizations and the private sector in its undertakings;

Monitor the National Reconciliation and Development Program activities and render periodic reports as may be required by the National Reconciliation and Development Council.

SECTION 8. Program Implementation and Coordination at the Provincial and the Municipal Levels . – The Provincial Reconciliation and Development Council (PRDC) and the Municipal Reconciliation and Development Council (MRDC) composed of but not limited to the Ministries of Social Services and Development, Local Government and National Defense shall be responsible for the implementation of the Reception and Processing Centers of the National Reconciliation and Development Program at the provincial and municipal levels, respectively.

The Provincial Reconciliation and Development Council and the Municipal Reconciliation and Development Council are authorized to act in behalf of the National Reconciliation and Development Council to deputize other government entities and officials as may be necessary for the effective implementation of its functions and to encourage the participation of non-government organizations and the private sector.

SECTION 9. Budgetary Support . – The Ministry of Budget and Management is hereby authorized to realign and/or release the necessary funding support to the National Reconciliation and Development Program.

SECTION 10. Separability Clause . – Any portion or provisions of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect the nullifying other portions or provisions hereof, as long as such remaining portions or provisions can still subsist and be given effect in their entirety.

SECTION 11. Repealing Clause . – All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations of parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 12. Effectivity. – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.