MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 53

INCREASING THE AMOUNT OF TRAVELLING ALLOWANCES OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES INCLUDING LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS AND GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND/OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS WHEN ON OFFICIAL TRAVEL WITHIN THE PHILIPPINES.

WHEREAS, the existing travel allowance rates established by Presidential Decree No. 344 in 1973 are no longer adequate to meet the expenses of government personnel who go on out-of-town assignments;

WHEREAS, the cost of food accommodation and other expenses incidental to travelling outside of one’s normal place of work have increased substantially since 1973;

WHEREAS, government personnel shall not be required to personally shoulder travelling expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their official duties;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Travelling Allowances . – The daily travelling allowances of government personnel shall be as follows:

Rate of Allowance

Senior Management positions and Equivalent

National

Assistant Ministers, Bureau Directors, Assistant Bureau Directors, Regional Directors, Ministry Service Chiefs; and other positions of equivalent rank.

Metro Manila – Manila, Quezon City, Caloocan City, Pasay City, Makati, Mandaluyong, San Juan, Pasig, Parañaque,

G overnment Corporations

Heads, Assistant Heads, Regional Directors, Chiefs of Departments and other positions of Equivalent rank

Local

Governors, City Mayors, Municipal Mayors, Vice-Governors, City Vice-Mayors, Municipal Vice-Mayors

Group II

Middle Management positions and equivalent

National

Chiefs of Divisions, and other positions of equivalent rank

Government Corporations

Chiefs of Divisions, and other positions of equivalent rank

Local

Members of Sanggunians Chiefs of departments/offices, Assistant chiefs of departments/offices, chiefs of divisions

Marikina, Las Pinas, Muntinlupa, Pateros

Other highly urbanized cities – Baguio City, Olongapo City Bacolod City, Iloilo City, Cebu City, Zamboanga City, Butuan City, Cagayan de Oro City, Davao City, Iligan City

G roup III

All other national, government-owned and/or controlled corporation and local government employees

SECTION 2. The daily travelling allowances authorized in Section 1 hereof, shall be inclusive of the per diem rates, daily allowances, incidental transportation and other related expenses while in. the field.

SECTION 3. The travelling allowances authorized herein shall apply to officials and employees of government owned and/or controlled corporations and no additional emoluments in the nature of per diems or travelling expenses within the country may be authorized by any governing board of government owned and/or controlled corporation including financial institutions.

SECTION 4. For CY 1986, ministries/agencies, government corporations and local government units shall live within their appropriated, budget for travel; hence, there shall be no increase in their appropriation for the purpose. For CY 1987, the total amount to be appropriated for travel allowance, exclusive of actual transportation cost such as plane/boat/bus fares, shall be based on the exigencies of the service and on the actual travel needs of the ministries/agencies, government corporations and local government units as shown in their actual expenditures incurred in the preceding year.

SECTION 5. Rules and Regulations . – The Ministry of -Budget and Management and the Commission on Audit shall Jointly issue the rules and regulations to implement the new rates for travelling allowances.

SECTION 6. Repeal of Inconsistent Laws . – All laws decrees, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended and modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity – This Executive Order shall take effect on November 1, 1986.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of October in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.