NEDA Secretariat

SECTION 8. The NEDA Secretariat.—The Secretariat of NEDA shall have the following functions:

(1) Serve as the research and technical support arm of the NEDA Board;

(2) Provide through its various organizational units, technical staff support and assistance, including the conduct of studies and development of policy measures and other recommendations, on the various aspects of the substantive functions of development planning and policy formulation, and coordination, evaluation and monitoring of plan implementation;

(3) Serve as the Secretariat of the NEDA Board; and

(4) Perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the NEDA Board to achieve its goals and objectives.

SECTION 9. Structural Organization.—The NEDA Secretariat shall be composed of the Director-General, three (3) Deputy Directors-General, five (5) Assistant Directors-General, the National Development Office, the Regional Development Office, the Central Support Office and the Regional Offices.

SECTION 10. Director-General.—The Director-General shall head the Secretariat and shall likewise serve as Vice-Chairman of the NEDA Board. He shall be appointed by the President and shall carry the rank and title of Secretary of Socio-Economic Planning and shall be a member of the Cabinet.

As Chief Executive Officer, he shall exercise general supervision and control over its technical and administrative personnel.

SECTION 11. Deputy Directors-General.—The Director-General shall be assisted by three (3) Deputy Directors-General to be appointed by the President, one to be responsible for the National Development Office, one, for the Regional Development Office and one, for the Central Support Office.

SECTION 12. Assistant Directors-General.—The Director-General shall also be assisted by five (5) Assistant Directors-General to be appointed by the President, who shall be assigned to assist the Deputy Directors-General in their tasks of coordinating and supervising their respective Offices.

SECTION 13. National Development Office.—The National Development Office shall provide technical staff support as may be required by the NEDA Board in coordinating the formulation of national and sectoral policies, plans and programs; monitor macro-economic and sectoral performances; prepare the necessary economic reports; conduct economic and development studies on macro-level plans and policies; and perform such other appropriate planning tasks as may be assigned by the Director-General.

It shall be composed of the following:

(1) National Planning and Policy Staff;

(2) Agriculture Staff;

(3) Trade, Industry and Utilities Staff;

(4) Infrastructure Staff;

(5) Social Development Staff; and

(6) Public Investment Staff.

SECTION 14. Regional Development Office.—The Regional Development Office shall provide technical staff support as may be required by the implementing agencies in the regions; monitor regional and inter-regional development policies, plans and programs; prepare integrated reports on regional planning; conduct studies on regional development policies; and perform such other planning tasks as may be assigned by the Director-General.

It shall be composed of the following:

(1) Regional Development Coordination Staff;

(2) Project Monitoring Staff; and

(3) Regional Offices.

In each of the administrative regions, there shall be a regional office which shall be headed by a Regional Director who shall report to the Deputy Director-General for Regional Development Office. The Regional Director shall be appointed by the President.

SECTION 15. Central Support Office.—The Central Support Office shall be responsible for providing technical assistance and support services to the Secretariat’s organizational units in the areas of development administration, internal management improvement, legal services, development information, administrative services, and perform such other support service tasks as may be assigned by the Director-General.

It shall be composed of the following:

(1) Management Staff;

(2) Legal Staff;

(3) Administrative Staff;

(4) Management Information System Staff; and

(5) Development Information Staff.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987