MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 467

DIRECTING MEASURES TO PREVENT UNREASONABLE INCREASES IN THE PRICES OF CERTAIN PRIME AND ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES IN AREAS AFFECTED BY THE ERUPTION AND OTHER VOLCANIC ACTIVITIES OF MT. PINATUBO

WHEREAS, certain measures must be undertaken to prevent unreasonable increases in the prices of certain prime and essential commodities in the areas affected by the eruption and other volcanic activities of Mt. Pinatubo;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Secretary of Trade and Industry is hereby directed to impose price ceilings on certain prime and essential commodities in the areas declared under a state of public calamity as a result of the continuing eruption and other volcanic activities of Mt. Pinatubo, and to take such measures as may be appropriate to ensure the availability of, and to maintain reasonable prices, of said commodities.

SEC. 2. The prime and essential commodities covered by this Executive Order are as follows:

A public hearing shall be conducted for the purpose of determining the coverage of the commodities under price control and their respective price ceilings. The list of prime and essential commodities and their price ceilings under price control shall take effect two (2) days after publication in a local newspaper or posting in at least three (3) conspicuous public places within the City/Municipality where the price ceilings shall be imposed.

SEC. 3. The Secretary of Trade and Industry is hereby authorized to review, adjust or revise the price ceilings of the aforesaid prime and essential commodities as may be warranted.

SEC. 4. Provincial and City Price Task Forces are hereby created in the areas declared under a state of public calamity as a result of the eruption and other volcanic activities of Mt. Pinatubo for the purpose of assisting the Secretary of Trade and Industry in the implementation of this Executive Order.

The Task Forces shall be composed of the following: the Provincial Governor or the City Mayor as Chairman of the Provincial or City Price Task Force, respectively; the Provincial Director of the Department of Trade and Industry as Vice-Chairman; and one representative each from the Department of Agriculture, National Food Authority and a Non-Governmental Organization concerned with consumer welfare, to be selected by the Task Force Chairman and Vice-Chairman.

SEC. 5. The Secretary of Trade and Industry, Provincial and City Price Task Forces are hereby authorized to mobilize and deputize all government agencies and instrumentalities including the Philippine National Police and other law enforcement agencies to strictly implement this Executive Order.

SEC. 6. The Secretary of Trade and Industry shall issue such guidelines as may be necessary for the effective implementation of this Executive Order.

SEC. 7. This Executive Order shall take effect upon publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Executive Order Nos. : 391 – 522]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.