Bureaus and Offices

SECTION 12. Bureau of Elementary Education.—The Bureau of Elementary Education shall have the following functions:

(1) Conduct studies and formulate, develop, and evaluate programs and educational standards for elementary education;

(2) Undertake studies necessary for the preparation of prototype curricular designs, instructional materials and teacher training programs for elementary education;

(3) Formulate guidelines to improve elementary school physical plans and equipment, and general management of these schools; and

(4) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law.

SECTION 13. Bureau of Secondary Education.—The Bureau of Secondary Education shall have the following functions:

(1) Conduct studies and formulate, develop and evaluate programs and educational standards for secondary education;

(2) Develop curricular designs, prepare instructional materials, and prepare and evaluate programs to upgrade the quality of the teaching and non-teaching staff at the secondary level;

(3) Formulate guidelines to improve the secondary schools physical plants and equipment, and general management of these schools; and

(4) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law.

SECTION 14. Bureau of Technical and Vocational Education.—The Bureau of Technical and Vocational Education shall have the following functions:

(1) Collaborate with other agencies in the formulation of manpower plans;

(2) Conduct studies, formulate, develop and evaluate post-secondary vocational technical staff, and formulate guidelines to improve the physical plant and equipment of post-secondary vocational-technical schools; and

(3) Develop curricular designs and prepare instructional materials, prepare and evaluate programs to upgrade the quality of teaching and non-teaching staff, and formulate guidelines to improve the physical plant and equipment of post-secondary, vocational/technical schools.

SECTION 15. Bureau of Higher Education.—The Bureau of Higher Education shall have the following functions:

(1) Develop, formulate and evaluate programs, projects and educational standards for higher education;

(2) Provide staff assistance to the Board of Higher Education in its policy and advisory functions;

(3) Provide technical assistance to encourage institutional development programs and projects;

(4) Compile, analyze and evaluate data on higher education; and

(5) Perform other functions provided by law.

SECTION 16. Bureau of Non-Formal Education.—The Bureau of Non-Formal Education shall have the following functions:

(1) Serve as a means of meeting the learning needs of those unable to avail themselves of the educational services and programs of formal education;

(2) Coordinate with various agencies in providing opportunities for the acquisition of skills necessary to enhance and ensure continuing employability, efficiency, productivity, and competitiveness in the labor market; and

(3) Serve as a means for expanding access to educational opportunities to citizens of varied interests, demographic characteristics and socio-economic origins or status.

SECTION 17. Bureau of Physical Education and School Sports.—The Bureau of Physical Education and School Sports shall have the following functions:

(1) Develop human resources through mass-based sports education;

(2) Improve the general fitness of the citizenry;

(3) Promote social and cultural integration through the revival of indigenous games and sports;

(4) Identify and nurture sports talents and promote excellence in sports, traditional games and other physical activities; and

(5) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987