MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 14-A

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 14

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 14 dated May 7, 1986 was issued vesting in the Sandiganbayan original and exclusive jurisdiction over all criminal and civil suits filed by the Presidential Commission on Good Government:

WHEREAS, there is a need to further clarify such Executive Order with respect to the scope and meaning of certain provisions therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 3 of Executive Order No. 14 dated May 7, 1986 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 3. The civil suits to recover unlawfully acquired property under Republic Act No. 1379 or for restitution, reparation of damages, or indemnification for consequential and other damages or any other civil actions under the Civil Code or other existing laws filed with the Sandiganbayan against Ferdinand E. Marcos, Imelda R. Marcos, members of their immediate family, close relatives, subordinates, close and/or business associates, dummies, agents and nominees, may proceed independently of any criminal proceedings and may be proved by a preponderance of evidence.”

SECTION 2. Section 4 of Executive Order No. 14 dated May 7, 1986 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 4. A witness may refuse on the basis of his privilege against self-incrimination, to testify or provide other information in proceeding before the Sandiganbayan if the witness believes that such testimony or provision of information would tend to incriminate him or subject him to prosecution. Upon such refusal the Sandiganbayan may order the witness to testify or provide information.

The witness may refuse to comply with the order on the basis of his privilege against self-incrimination; but no testimony or other information compelled under the order (or any information directly or indirectly derived from such testimony, or other information) may be used against the witness in any criminal case, except a prosecution for perjury, giving a false statement, or otherwise failing to comply with the order.”

SECTION 3. Section 5 of dated Executive Order No. 14 May 7, 1986 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 5. The Presidential Commission on Good Government is authorized to grant immunity from criminal prosecution to any person who provides information or testifies in any investigation conducted by such Commission to establish the unlawful manner in which any respondent, defendant or accused has acquired or accumulated the property or properties in question in any case where such information or testimony is necessary to ascertain or prove the latter’s guilt or his civil liability. The immunity thereby granted shall be continued to protect the witness who repeats such testimony before the Sandiganbayan when required to do so by the latter or by the Commission.”

SECTION 4. Section 7 Executive Order No. 14 dated May 7, 1986 is hereby amended as follows:

“SECTION 7. The provisions of this Executive Order shall prevail over any laws or parts thereof, or the Rules of Court as regards the investigation, prosecution, and trial of cases to recover the ill-gotten wealth accumulated by the persons mentioned in Executive Orders Nos. 1 and 2.”

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 18th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.