MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 204-A

FURTHER AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 58, AS AMENDED.

I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines do hereby order:

SECTION 1. No. 3 of Presidential Decree No. 58, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“3. The composition of the Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines System shall be as follows:

(a) The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports, as Chairman of the Board;

(b) The President of the University of the Philippines System as Vice-Chairman of the Board;

(c) The Chairman of the Senate Committee on Education;

(d) The Chairman of the House Committee on Education;

(e) The President of the U.P. Alumni Association, to serve for the duration of his term of office in the alumni association,

(f) One Regent representing the Faculty to be appointed by the President of the Philippines, to serve for one year;

(g) One Regent representing the Student Body to be appointed by the President of the Philippines, to serve for one year;

(h) Five other Regents appointed by the President of the Philippines, at least three of whom are alumni of the University.

Of the five other Regents first appointed as above provided, the President shall designate three to serve for one year and two to serve for two years. Thereafter, the successors of such Regents, shall hold office for a term of two years or until their successors are appointed.

In case of vacancy in the Board of Regents such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the President of the Philippines, and such appointee shall hold office for the unexpired term.”

SECTION 2. Act No. 1870 as amended, is hereby further amended accordingly.

SECTION 3. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 171-390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.