Agriculture

General Provisions

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy.—The State shall promote the well-being of farmers, including share tenants, leaseholders, settlers, fishermen, and other rural workers by providing an environment in which they can increase their income, improve their living conditions, and maximize their contributions to the national economy. Toward this end, the State shall accelerate agricultural development and enhance the production of agricultural crops, fisheries, and livestock by optimizing the use of resources and by applying modern farming systems and technology in order to attain food security for domestic use and expand and diversify agricultural production for export. It shall also encourage private initiative in agri-business ventures both in the production and in the exportation and importation of food and other allied commodities.

SECTION 2. Mandate.—The Department is the government agency responsible for the promotion of agricultural development by providing the policy framework, public investments, and support services needed for domestic and export-oriented business enterprises.

In the fulfillment of this mandate, it shall be the primary concern of the Department to improve farm income and generate work opportunities for farmers, fishermen, and other rural workers. It shall encourage people’s participation in agricultural development through sectoral representation in agricultural policy-making bodies so that the policies, plans, and programs of the Department are formulated and executed to satisfy their needs.

It shall ensure social justice, equity, productivity and sustainability in the use of agricultural resources.

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions.—The Department shall:

(1) Provide integrated services to farmers, fishermen, and other food producers on production, utilization, conservation, and disposition of agricultural and fishery resources;

(2) Be responsible for the planning, formulation, execution, regulation, and monitoring of programs and activities relating to agriculture, food production and supply;

(3) Promulgate and enforce all laws, rules and regulations governing the conservation and proper utilization of agricultural and fishery resources;

(4) Establish central and regional information systems to serve the production, marketing, and financing data requirements of the farmers as well as domestic and foreign investors in agri-business ventures;

(5) Provide comprehensive and effective extension services and training to farmers and other agricultural entrepreneurs on the production, marketing, and financing aspects of agricultural enterprises;

(6) Conduct, coordinate, and disseminate research studies on appropriate technologies for the improvement and development of agricultural crops, fisheries, and other allied commodities;

(7) Provide the mechanism for the participation of farmers, fishermen, and entrepreneurs at all levels of policy-making, planning and program formulation;

(8) Coordinate with and enlist other public and private agencies for cooperation and assistance on matters affecting the policies, plans and programs of the Department;

(9) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law.

SECTION 4. Organizational Structure.—The Department shall consist of the Department Proper, the Bureaus, and the Regional, Provincial, Municipal, and Barangay Offices.

The Department Proper shall consist of the Office of the Secretary, the Offices of the Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries and their immediate staffs as determined by them respectively, and the Department Services.

The Department Services and Bureaus shall be grouped as follows:

(1) Production Group;

(2) Research, Training and Extension Group;

(3) Agri-Business Group;

(4) Planning and Monitoring Group; and

(5) Support Group.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987