MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 3

REORGANIZING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the President of the Philippines is empowered to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen the Office of the President by defining the support systems, working relationships, and the allocation of tasks and responsibilities among the different offices therein;

WHEREAS, there is a need to systematize the various functions of the different offices and agencies under the Office of the President by abolishing, consolidating or merging units thereof and/or transferring functions from one unit to another.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Office of the Executive Secretary . The Office of the Executive Secretary is hereby created, which shall exercise administrative supervision over all the various offices presently under the Office of the President and who shall consolidate or merge, create or abolish, offices and/or transfer functions from one office to another.

SECTION 2. Appropriations . The existing budgets of the Office of the President including the balance of their unexpended appropriations for Calendar Year 1985 shall continue to be appropriated and programmed.

SECTION 3. Repealing CIause. All provisions of existing laws, proclamations, orders, decrees, instructions, rules and regulations or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

SECTION 4. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.