Education, Culture and Sports

General Provisions

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy.—The State shall protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality education at all levels and shall take appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all. Pursuant to this, the State shall:

1) Establish, maintain and support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education relevant to the needs of the people and society;

2) Establish and maintain a system of free public education in the elementary and high school levels. Without limiting the natural right of parents to rear their children, elementary education is compulsory for all children of school age;

3) Establish and maintain a system of scholarship grants, student loan programs, subsidies, and other incentives which shall be available to deserving students in both public and private schools, especially to the underprivileged;

4) Encourage non-formal, informal, and indigenous learning systems, as well as self-learning, independent, and out-of-school study programs particularly those that respond to community needs; and

5) Provide adult citizens, the disabled, and out-of-school youth with training in civics, vocational efficiency, and other skills.

SECTION 2. Mandate.—The Department shall be primarily responsible for the formulation, planning, implementation and coordination of the policies, plans, programs and projects in the areas of formal and non-formal education at all levels, supervise all educational institutions, both public and private, and provide for the establishment and maintenance of a complete, adequate and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development.

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions.—To accomplish its mandate and objectives, the Department shall have the powers and functions of formulating, planning, implementing and coordinating the policies, plans, programs and projects for the following:

(1) Elementary, secondary, physical and international education;

(2) Non-formal and vocational or technical education;

(3) Higher education;

(4) Development of culture;

(5) Foreign and locally assisted projects and other activities relative to Subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4); and

(6) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law.

SECTION 4. Organizational Structure.—The Department, aside from the Department Proper, shall consist of Bureau and Regional Offices.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987