MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 234

REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL

WHEREAS, improved quality of life is the ultimate goal of Philippine development and nutritional improvement is a critical component thereof;

WHEREAS, nutritional improvement involves a broad range of concerns involving various government and non-governmental agencies;

WHEREAS, there is need to strengthen the coordinative activities and programs of the various agencies which is being done by the National Nutrition Council;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the sovereign will of the Filipino people and the Constitution, do hereby order:

Section 1. Title . This Executive Order shall otherwise be known as the Reorganization Act of the National Nutrition Council (NNC).

Section 2. Attachment . The NNC shall be transferred from the Department of Agriculture and attached to the Department of Social Welfare and Development. The transfer shall include the appropriations, funds, records, equipment and facilities.

Section 3. Composition . The Council shall be composed of a Governing Board and a Secretariat. The Governing Board shall be composed of members representing the following:

(a) Department of Social Welfare and Development – Chairman;

(b) Department of Agriculture;

(c) Department of Health;

(d) Department of Education, Culture and Sports;

(e) Department of Local Government;

(f) Department of Science and Technology;

(g) Department of Budget and Management;

(h) Department of Labor and Employment;

(i) Department of Trade and Industry;

(j) National Economic and Development Authority; and,

(k) Three representatives from the private sector to be appointed by the President of the Philippines.

Section 4. Functions and Powers . The Council shall have the following functions and powers:

(a) To formulate national food and nutrition policies and strategies for nutritional improvement;

(b) To coordinate the planning and monitor and evaluate the implementation of the integrated national food and nutrition program;

(c) To coordinate the release of funds for nutrition programs and projects as well as the requests for grants and loans by governmental and non-governmental agencies involved in the food and nutrition program; and,

(d) To call on any department, bureau, office, agency and other instrumentalities of the government for assistance in the form of personnel, facilities and resources as the need arises.

Section 5. Secretariat . The Council shall have a Secretariat which shall serve as its Executive arm. The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Director who shall be assisted by two Deputy Executive Directors, all of whom shall be appointed by the President.

Section 6. Technical Committee . A Technical Committee shall be formed by the Governing Board to be composed of heads of major department bureaus and agencies involved in nutrition and appropriate non-governmental agencies as members. It shall provide technical assistance to the Secretariat and facilitate inter- and intra- agency coordination, supervision and monitoring, and implementation of nutrition policies and programs.

Section 7. New Structure and Pattern . Upon approval of this Executive Order, the officers and employees of the Council shall, in a hold-over capacity, continue to perform their respective duties and responsibilities and receive the corresponding salaries and benefits.

The new position structure and staffing pattern of the Council shall be approved and prescribed by the Chairman of the Governing Board within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the approval of this Executive Order and the authorized positions created thereunder shall be filled with regular appointments by him or by the President as the case may be. Those incumbents whose positions are not included therein or who are not reappointed shall be deemed separated from the service. Those separated from the service shall receive the retirement benefits to which they may be entitled under existing laws, rules and regulations. Otherwise, they shall be paid the equivalent of one (1) month basic salary for every year of service or the equivalent nearest fraction thereof favorable to them on the basis of the highest salary received, but in no case shall such payment exceed the equivalent of 12 months salary.

Section 8. Funding . Funds needed to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order shall be taken out of the appropriations of the Council in the current General Appropriations Act.

Section 9. Implementing Rules . The Council shall issue rules, regulations and issuances as may be necessary to ensure effective implementation of the provisions of this Executive Order.

Section 10. Repealing Clause . All laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, other issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 11. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

APPROVED in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 22nd day of July, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 171-390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.