MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 181

AUTHORIZING THE REORGANIZATION OF THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION AND ENHANCING ITS INDEPENDENCE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, under Article II, Section 1 of the Provisional Constitution, as adopted in Proclamation No. 3 dated March 25, 1986, the President shall give priority to measures to achieve the mandate of the people to completely reorganize the government;

WHEREAS, Article XVIII, Section 16, of the 1987 Constitution recognizes that the reorganization of the government shall be continued even after the ratification of the Constitution;

WHEREAS, under Article XVIII, Section 6, of the 1987 Constitution, the President shall continue to exercise legislative powers until the First Congress is convened;

WHEREAS, the independence of the Civil Service Commission as mandated under the 1987 Constitution must be enhanced to enable it to discharge effectively its powers and functions and thereby strengthen the career service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Reorganization . The total reorganization of the Civil Service Commission is hereby authorized: Provided , That the reorganization shall be done within the framework of its appropriations, and in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 2. Funding . Appropriations authorized for the Civil Service Commission shall be automatically released. The quarterly releases of funds by the Department of Budget and Management to the Civil Service Commission shall be based on its operating budget.

Funds needed to implement this Executive Order shall be drawn from salary lapses and savings of the Civil Service Commission. Subsequent funding requirements shall be incorporated in the annual appropriations of the Commission.

SEC. 3. New Structure and Pattern . Upon approval of this Executive Order, the officers and employees of the Commission shall, in a hold-over capacity, continue to perform their respective duties and responsibilities and receive the corresponding salaries and benefits.

The new position structure and staffing pattern of the Commission shall be approved and prescribed by the Chairman within one hundred twenty (120) days from the approval of this Executive Order and the authorized positions created thereunder shall be filled with regular appointments by him or by the President as the case may be. Those incumbents whose positions are not included therein or who are not reappointed shall be deemed separated from the service. Those separated from the service shall receive the retirement benefits to which they may be entitled under existing laws, rules and regulations. Otherwise, they shall be paid the equivalent of one-month of basic salary for every year of service or the equivalent nearest fraction thereof favorable to them on the basis of the highest salary received but in no case shall such payment exceed the equivalent of twelve (12) months salary.

SEC. 4. Repealing Clause . All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. Separability Clause . The provisions of this Executive Order are declared to be separable and if any provision or the application thereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of other provisions hereof shall not be affected.

SEC. 6. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 1st day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.