MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 332

RECONSTITUTING THE TASK FORCE ON INTERNATIONAL REFUGEE ASSISTANCE AND ADMINISTRATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, acting on the request for cooperation by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in the temporary lodging of refugees prior to their final resettlement in other countries, has created a Task Force on International Refugee Assistance and Administration (TFIRAA) pursuant to Executive Order No. 554 dated August 21, 1979;

WHEREAS, there is a need to reconstitute the composition of the Task Force on International Refugee Assistance and Administration (TFIRAA) and to introduce changes in the structure and functions thereof to give proper directions concerning international refugee assistance;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Task Force on International Refugee Assistance and Administration is hereby reconstituted and shall be composed of representatives from the following:

The Task Force on International Refugee Assistance and Administration shall be under the Department of Foreign Affairs.

SECTION 2. The Task Force shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a. To coordinate and cooperate with United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees efforts and activities relative to refugee assistance.

b. To formulate guidelines for a more efficient refugee assistance regarding the operation and management of all established refugee camps/centers in the Philippines and the disposition of funds and other assistance received from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international refugee-assistance institutions.

c. To assess, review and evaluate existing structures and policies of the government for the refugee assistance and management and make recommendations thereon to the President.

d. To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Philippine Government for such assistance as it may require in the performance of its duties and functions.

e. To submit reports to the President and to the United Nations, through the President, on its activities, including the disposition of funds and other assistance received from the United Nations and other international refugee-assistance institutions.

SECTION 3. The Task Force shall be assisted by a Secretariat to be headed by the Philippine Refugee Processing Center Administrator. The Philippine Refugee Processing Center Administrator may designate members of the Secretariat from among the member-agencies of the Task Force.

SECTION 4. The Philippine Refugee Processing Center shall continue to discharge its mandated functions per agreement between the Philippine Government and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The Administrator of the Philippine Refugee Processing Center, who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

a. Manage the day to day operation of such refugee camps/center in the Philippines as may be placed under his administration by the Task Force.

b. Implement all guidelines promulgated by the Task Force regarding the operation and management of all established refugee camps/centers in the Philippines.

c. Receive, administer and utilize funds, equipments and other forms of assistance provided by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other international refugee assistance institutions, foreign governments and other sources.

d. Submit to the Task Force quarterly reports of all its activities received from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international refugee-assistance institutions.

e. Hire and maintain such working groups, staffs or personnel as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Task Force on International Refugee Assistance and Administration (TFIRAA).

SECTION 5. Repealing Clause . The Western Command of the Armed Forces of the Republic of the Philippines (WESCOM) shall continue to discharge its mandated functions per agreement between the Western Command of the Armed Forces of the Republic of the Philippines and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Executive Order No. 554 dated August 21, 1979 is hereby repealed. All other orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of August , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.