MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 108

PROVIDING AN OFFICIAL LIST OF BARANGAYS IN REGION XII AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, a review of the legal and physical existence of the barangays in Region XII reveals the proliferation of the so-called “ghost” or uninhabited barangays started during the previous regime, including those created under dubious circumstances, thereby defrauding the government of million of pesos in terms of unwarranted barangay allotments and other fund releases and the commission on massive election irregularities in the voting centers within the said barangays.

WHEREAS, an inter-agency Committee was created pursuant to Presidential Memorandum Circular No. 12-A, dated May 27, 1986, to prepare an official list of barangays in Region XII and the said Committee had undertaken a verification of the legal and physical existence of each barangay in said region;

WHEREAS, a number of said barangays have failed to satisfy the basic requirements for their legal and physical existence which warrant their abolition and/or reversion to their former territorial status.

NOW , THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order as follows:

SECTION 1. The barangays named in the Official List of Barangays in Region XII which is hereto attached and forming part hereof as Annex A are hereby retained in their respective provinces.

SECTION 2. All other barangays in said region which do not appear in the aforementioned listing are hereby abolished and shall revert back to their respective mother barangays or, when impractical, shall merge with the contiguous barangay with the smallest population and which is most accessible to it.

SECTION 3. Any barangay abolished under the immediately preceding paragraph may, upon good cause shown, apply for a reconsideration with the Chief Local Government Officer in the province of the Ministry of Local Government within a period of ten (10) days from effectivity of this Executive Order. The Minister of Local Government shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations governing the form, procedure and disposition of all applications for reconsideration filed under this section.

SECTION 4. The Ministry of Local Government may call upon any ministry, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance it may require in the performance of the functions provided herein.

SECTION 5. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Reference: Annex A

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.