MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 511

CREATING AN INTERIM INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE TO PROVIDE FOR PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AGRO-INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AREAS

WHEREAS , there is an urgent need to integrate and replicate countryside development efforts in key Agro-Industrial Development Areas (AIDA) in order to implement the Countryside Agro-Industrial Development Strategy (CAIDS) as adopted by the government through Cabinet Resolution No. 39, series of 1989;

WHEREAS , it is the declared policy of the State to recognize the indispensable role of the private sector in national growth and development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There shall be an interim Inter-Agency AIDA Task Force, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, which is hereby authorized to provide for private sector participation in the establishment of Agro-Industrial Development Areas.

For this purpose, the Task Force shall be composed of:

SEC. 2. The Task Force shall:

a) Identify and allot foreign and local sources of funding for the establishment of family farm schools, rural development centers or other capability building centers, which will continuously provide the necessary values formation, managerial and technical training, cooperative development, savings promotion and other capability building programs;

b) Contract with non-government organizations (NGOs) and other private entities that will establish and operate the family farm schools and rural development centers. Funds for the operating expenses of these institutions are to be generated by these NGOs from their agro-industrial enterprises and other income generating projects in the AIDA; and

c) Monitor, coordinate and facilitate the development efforts of all AIDA participants to ensure full and proper implementation of the objectives of the AIDA program.

SEC. 3. The Task Force may provide direct and indirect grants to NGOs for the establishment and operation of family farm schools and rural development centers from whichever funds that it can generate from local and foreign sources. It may also enter into such agreements or contracts, which it may deem appropriate to effect the herein given mandate as may be warranted by circumstances relating to the source and use of funds, land ownership, corporate character of the contracting parties and other relevant matters.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture is hereby authorized to sign and execute, for and in behalf of the Task Force, agreements or contracts extending grants or other forms of assistance entered into by the Task Force.

SEC. 5. A Task Force Secretariat to be jointly formed by the CCPAP and Department of Agriculture shall assist the Task Force in the performance of its duties and functions.

SEC. 6. The Task Force shall facilitate and coordinate with the private sector for the establishment of agro-industrial facilities.

SEC. 7. The Task Force shall be authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or any instrumentality of government for material and manpower assistance as may be necessary in implementing the AIDA program.

SEC. 8. All rights, duties, obligations, powers and functions of the Task Force shall be transferred to the Department of Agriculture, effective June 30, 1992, or soon thereafter at the discretion of the President.

SEC. 9. If any provision of this Order is declared unconstitutional or illegal, the other provisions hereof shall remain effective.

SEC. 10. All administrative issuances, orders, circulars, and memoranda inconsistent with this Order are hereby modified, amended or repealed accordingly.

SEC. 11. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Executive Order Nos. : 391 – 522]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.