MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 393

RECONSTITUTING THE NATIONAL ACTION COMMITTEE ON ANTI- HIJACKING (NACAH)

WHEREAS, aircraft hijacking and other terroristic acts pose grave threats to civil aviation and the viability of the airline industry;

WHEREAS, the Philippines as a signatory to the convention on International Civil Aviation has recognized as necessary the adoption of the international standards, procedures and practices on aviation security for the safety and regularity of international air navigation;

WHEREAS, implementation of these international standards, procedures, and practices requires that the composition of the National Action Committee on Anti-Hijacking be revitalized to improve coordination of all activities related to aviation security;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The National Action Committee on Anti-Hijacking constituted under Letter of Instruction No. 399, dated April 28, 1976, shall be composed of the following:

SECTION 2. The Committee shall formulate plans to coordinate, integrate, direct, control and supervise all measures aimed at preventing or suppressing all forms of hijacking or kidnapping involving civil aviation and airline industry operations; ensuring the safe and continuous operation of the airline industry and civil aviation; and handling all incidents of hijacking and all other offensive and terroristic activities.

SECTION 3. The Committee shall adopt measures geared towards a “total approach” to the problem of preventing offensive and terroristic acts directed against the airline industry and civilian aviation. These measures shall include a provision for an adequate organization for planning and implementation at all the levels; organization of a control and coordinating center in each domestic and international airports throughout the country which can effect immediate response from all tasked units or agencies, with a clear delineation of their respective authority and functions; and formulation of guidelines for the mass media in reporting incidents of hijacking and other offensive and terroristic acts in order to prejudice the effectiveness of anti-hijacking plans and operations.

SECTION 4. The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon other departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government and the civilian airlines for assistance in the effective implementation of this Executive Order.

SECTION 5. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as diminishing or altering the powers and functions of the Airport Security Center under Section 14(b) of Executive Order No. 125, “Reorganizing the Ministry of Transportation and Communications, Defining Its Powers and Functions and For Other Purposes”, as amended.

SECTION 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Executive Order Nos. : 391-522]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.