National Security Council

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policies.—(1) The formulation of integrated and rationalized national, foreign, military, political, economic, social and educational policies, programs, and procedures is vital to the security of the state.

(2) The national interest requires that an agency exist to formulate and adopt policies, programs, and procedures on all matters pertaining to or affecting the national security so that judgments and actions thereon by the President may rest on sound advice and accurate information.

SECTION 3. Mandate.—The National Security Council shall serve as the lead agency of the government for coordinating the formulation of policies, relating to or with implications on the national security.

SECTION 4. Composition.—The National Security Council, hereinafter referred to as Council, shall be composed of the President as Chairman, the Vice-President, the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, the Executive Secretary, the Secretary of National Defense, the Secretary of Justice, the Secretary of Labor and Employment, the Secretary of Local Governments, the National Security Director, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), and such other government officials and private individuals as the President may appoint.

SECTION 5. Powers and Functions.—In addition to such specific duties and responsibilities as the President may direct, the Council shall:

(1) Advise the President with respect to the integration of domestic, foreign, military, political, economic, social, and educational policies relating to the national security so as to enable all concerned departments and agencies of the government to meet more effectively, problems and matters involving the national security;

(2) Evaluate and analyze all information, events, and incidents in terms of the risks they pose or implications upon or threats to the overall security and stability of the nation, for the purpose of recommending to the President appropriate action thereon;

(3) Formulate and coordinate the implementation of policies on matters of common interest to the various departments, and agencies of the government concerned with the national security, and make recommendations to the President in connection therewith;

(4) Insure that policies adopted by the Council on national security are effectively and efficiently implemented; and

(5) Make such recommendations or render such other reports as the President may from time to time require.

SECTION 6. Executive Committee.—The Council shall have an Executive Committee composed of the President as Chairman, and the Vice-President and Secretary of Foreign Affairs, the Executive Secretary, the Secretary of National Defense, the National Security Director, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and such other members or advisers as the President may appoint from time to time.

The Executive Committee shall review national security and defense problems and formulate positions or solutions for consideration by the Council. It shall determine the agenda and order of business of the Council, and shall ensure that decisions of the Council are clearly communicated to the agencies involved. It shall advise the President on the implementation of decisions.

To carry out the functions of the Executive Committee, the Chairman shall utilize the facilities and expertise of any of the government agencies and instrumentalities and shall promulgate rules and regulations to govern the operations of the Executive Committee.

SECTION 7. Secretariat.—The Council shall have a permanent Secretariat which shall be under the supervision and control of the National Security Director. The National Security Director shall be assisted by a Deputy who, like the National Security Director, shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the President. The National Security Director shall attend and participate in meetings of the Cabinet and have the privileges of a member thereof.

SECTION 8. Duties of Director.—Among other duties, the National Security Director shall advise the President on matters pertaining to national security and, whenever directed by the President, see to the implementation of decisions and policies adopted by the President or the National Security Council which have implications on national security.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987