MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 77

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 755, AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide combat clothing in kind to officers assigned or detailed with units engaged in actual combat operations or with the field headquarters of combat units in the same manner that enlisted personnel, draftees and trainees of the New Armed Forces of the Philippines (NAFP) similarly situated are granted such incentive under Executive Order No. 755, as amended:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Paragraph 1 of Executive Order No. 755, dated December 21, 1981, as amended by Executive Order No. 1003, dated January 25, 1985, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“1. Combat clothing in kind shall be granted to officers, enlisted personnel, draftees, and trainees of the New Armed Forces of the Philippines (NAFP) while they are assigned or detailed with units engaged in actual combat operations or with the field Headquarters of combat units. Said combat clothing shall be over and above that authorized by existing laws and regulations and to be issued once a year: Provided , That before any of the above military personnel can be entitled to the said combat clothing, he must have completed at least six (6) months service with a combat unit: Provi ded , further, That the Minister of National Defense, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Staff, NAFP, shall prescribe the items of combat clothing and the quantity of each item to be issued.”

SECTION 2. The Minister of National Defense is hereby authorized to promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Executive Order.

SECTION 3. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.