MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 403

ESTABLISHING THE TRIPARTITE INDUSTRIAL PEACE COUNCIL

WHEREAS, industrial peace is a fundamental requisite of national growth and development;

WHEREAS, industrial peace can be attained through meaningful tripartite consultations among the Labor, Employer and Government sectors in the formulation and implementation of the labor and social policies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby established the Tripartite Industrial Peace Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, composed of the Secretary of Labor and Employment as Chairman and twelve (12) representatives each from the tripartite sectors, to be designated by the President. The President may increase the number of the representatives of the tripartite sectors from time to time as the circumstances may warrant.

SECTION 2. The Secretary of Labor and Employment, as Chairman of the Council, shall convene the same at his own initiative or at the request of either or any of the sectors represented in the Council.

SECTION 3. The Council shall have the following functions:

1. To monitor the full implementation and sectoral compliance with the provisions of the Industrial Peace Accord (IPA);

2. To assist in the preparation and conduct of national tripartite conferences which the President of the Philippines or the Secretary of Labor and Employment may call from time to time to review existing labor and social policies and to evaluate local and international developments affecting them;

3. To formulate for submission to Congress tripartite views on labor and social concerns, as well as present tripartite position and views on pending relevant legislative proposals;

4. To advise the Secretary of Labor and Employment on major policies affecting labor and employment.

SECTION 4. The Department of Labor and Employment shall provide the Council with secretariat and technical services.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Executive Order Nos. : 391 – 522]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.