Budget Authorization

SECTION 23. Content of the General Appropriations Act.—The General Appropriations Act shall be presented in the form of budgetary programs and projects for each agency of the government, with the corresponding appropriations for each program and project, including statutory provisions of specific agency or general applicability. The General Appropriations Act shall not contain any itemization of personal services, which shall be prepared by the Secretary after enactment of the General Appropriations Act, for consideration and approval of the President.

SECTION 24. Prohibition Against the Increase of Appropriation.—The Congress shall in no case increase the appropriation of any project or program of any department, bureau, agency or office of the Government over the amount submitted by the President in his budget proposal. In case of any reduction in the proposed appropriation for a project or program, a corresponding reduction shall be made in the total appropriation of the department, office or agency concerned and in the total of the General Appropriations Bill.

SECTION 25. Prohibition Against Enactment of Additional Special Provisions.—The Congress shall not add special provisions in the budget earmarking the use of appropriations for specific programs or activities nor shall it increase the amounts specified in special provisions, beyond those proposed by the President.

SECTION 26. Automatic Appropriations.—All expenditures for (1) personnel retirement premiums, government service insurance, and other similar fixed expenditures, (2) principal and interest on public debt, (3) national government guarantees of obligations which are drawn upon, are automatically appropriated: Provided, that no obligations shall be incurred or payments made from funds thus automatically appropriated except as issued in the form of regular budgetary allotments.

SECTION 27. Supplemental Appropriations.—All appropriation proposals shall be included and considered in the budget preparation process. After the President shall have submitted the Budget, no supplemental appropriation measure supported from existing revenue measures shall be passed by the Congress. However, supplemental or deficiency appropriations involving the creation of new offices, programs or activities may be enacted if accompanied and supported by new revenue sources.

SECTION 28. Reversion of Unexpended Balances of Appropriations, Continuing Appropriations.—Unexpended balances of appropriations authorized in the General Appropriation Act shall revert to the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund at the end of the fiscal year and shall not thereafter be available for expenditure except by subsequent legislative enactment: Provided, that appropriations for capital outlays shall remain valid until fully spent or reverted: Provided, further, that continuing appropriations for current operating expenditures may be specifically recommended and approved as such in support of projects whose effective implementation calls for multi-year expenditure commitments: Provided, finally, that the President may authorize the use of savings realized by an agency during a given year to meet non-recurring expenditures in a subsequent year.

The balances of continuing appropriations shall be reviewed as part of the annual budget preparation process and the preparation process and the President may approve upon recommendation of the Secretary, the reversion of funds no longer needed in connection with the activities funded by said continuing appropriations.

SECTION 29. Loan Proceeds.—Expenditures funded by foreign and domestic borrowings shall be included within the expenditure program of the agency concerned. Loan proceeds, whether in cash or in kind, shall not be used without the corresponding release of funds through a Special Budget as herein provided.

SECTION 30. Contingent Liabilities.—Government agencies, particularly government-owned or controlled corporations, shall periodically report to the Secretary of Finance and the Secretary of Budget on the status of obligations they have entered into and which are the subject of government guarantees.

SECTION 31. Liability for Unauthorized Printing Press Revisions.—It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized revision of any figure, text or provision in the General Appropriations Act and in the other budget documents during or in the process of the printing. Any unauthorized change made either by addition, modification or deletion, shall be null and void.

Persons who, in violation of this section, make any unauthorized revision in the budget documents, shall be criminally liable for falsification of legislative documents under the Revised Penal Code. When the offender is a government official or employee, he shall, in addition to criminal prosecution, be dismissed from the service.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987