Field Offices

SECTION 16. Office for National Field Operations.—The Office for National Field Operations, through an Executive Committee, shall supervise the operations of the various Regional Field Offices and the National Health Facilities, as enumerated in Section 17(3) and further described in Sections 18, 19 and 20 hereof.

SECTION 17. Department Field Offices.—The Department field offices, under the supervision and control of the Executive Committee for National Field Operations, shall be composed of the following:

(1) Regional Health Offices (other than the National Capital Region) and subordinate units that include regional medical centers, regional hospitals, provincial health offices including component hospitals and district health offices, city health offices;

(2) Regional Health Office for the National Capital Region: Municipal Health Offices of Makati, Mandaluyong, Pasig, Marikina, Las Piñas, Muntinlupa, San Juan, Valenzuela, Navotas, Malabon, Parañaque, Taguig, Pateros;

(3) National Health Facilities which are health facilities classified as National Health Resources because their services and activities accrue to the whole country’s health care and infrastructure. These facilities are of two classifications: National Medical Centers and the Special Research Centers and Hospitals, which are attached to the Department:

(a) National Medical Centers: San Lazaro Hospital, Tondo Medical Center, Jose Fabella Memorial Hospital, Quirino Memorial Hospital, Rizal Medical Center, National Children’s Hospital, Jose Reyes Memorial Medical Center, and the East Avenue Medical Center.

(b) Special Research Centers and Hospitals: Philippine Heart Center, Lung Center of the Philippines, National Orthopedic Hospital, National Center for Mental Health, Research Institute for Tropical Medicine, National Kidney Institute, and the Philippine Children’s Medical Center.

SECTION 18. Regional Health Offices.—The Department is authorized to establish, operate, and maintain a Department-wide Regional Office, in each of the administrative regions of the country, under the supervision of an Executive Committee chaired by the Secretary. Each Regional Office shall be headed by a Regional Director to be appointed by the President, and supported by an Assistant Regional Director. The appointment of the Regional Director and Assistant Regional Director shall be to the Department-at-large and assignment shall be by administrative issuances of the Secretary. The Regional Health Office shall be responsible for the field operations of the Department in its administrative region and for providing the region with efficient and effective health and medical services. It shall supervise all Department agencies in its administrative region including whatever medical centers, regional hospitals, sanitaria, provincial health offices and city health offices are located in the region except those placed under the Department Proper.

In addition to the foregoing, a Regional Office shall have within its administrative region, the following functions:

(1) Implement laws and rules, regulations, policies, plans, programs and projects of the Department in the region;

(2) Provide efficient and effective health and medical services to the people;

(3) Coordinate with regional offices of other departments, offices, and agencies in the region;

(4) Coordinate with local government units; and

(5) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law.

SECTION 19. Provincial Health Office.—The Provincial Health Office shall be the Department agency in the province. It shall exercise supervision and control over district health offices and other field units of the department in the province, except those otherwise placed under the Department Proper or directly under the Regional Health Office.

The Provincial Health Office shall be headed by a Provincial Health Officer. Depending on the size, population, and health facilities of the province as well as budgetary provisions, a province may have one Assistant Provincial Health Officer assisting the Provincial Health Officers, or two Assistant Provincial Health Officers, one assisting the Provincial Health Officer in public health activities and the other assisting in hospital operations. The Provincial Health Officers and Assistant Provincial Health Officers shall be appointed by the Secretary to a region, and their assignment to a province shall be made by the Secretary on recommendation of the Regional Health Director.

SECTION 20. District Health Office.—The District Health Office shall exercise supervision and control over district hospitals, municipal hospitals, rural health units, barangay health stations and all other Department units in the health district, except those otherwise placed directly under the Provincial Health Office, or Regional Health Office, or the Department Proper.

The District Health Office shall be headed by a District Health Officer who shall also serve as the Chief of the district hospital as well as the head of all field units in the district. District Health Officers shall be appointed by the Secretary to a region, and their assignments shall be made by the Secretary on the recommendation of the Regional Health Director.

SECTION 21. Local Health Agencies.—The Department shall review and monitor the establishment, operation and maintenance of health agencies funded by local governments. Proposals for integrating locally funded health agencies under the supervision and control of the Department without regard to the sourcing of funds shall be made by the Department for the appropriate local government’s approval. Any such agreement shall be allowed and, whenever possible, funding from national sources may be extended to achieve a nationally integrated government health service under the Department.

SECTION 22. City Health Officers.—The City Health Officers and Assistant City Health Officers shall be appointed by the Secretary. Their compensation shall be paid out of national funds.

SECTION 23. Delegation of Power by Secretary.—The Secretary shall have the authority to delegate such substantive and administrative powers and authority as may be necessary to the heads of the Regional Health Offices, in addition to such administrative authority as have been mandated for delegation for all Departments by the President. The Secretary shall also delegate such powers and authority to the heads of the Provincial Health Offices and those of other subordinate units of the Regional Health Offices as in his sound judgment would make for a more efficient and effective administration of health and medical services.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987