Passport

SECTION 48. Definition.—A Philippine passport is an official document of identity of Philippine citizenship of the holder issued for travel purposes.

SECTION 49. Persons Entitled.—Only citizens of the Philippines may be issued passports. A minor may, upon his own application, be issued a passport, except when his natural or legal guardian requests that the application be denied.

SECTION 50. Authority to Issue, Restrict, Withdraw or Cancel.—The Secretary shall have authority to withhold the issuance or order the cancellation or restriction of passports upon lawful order of the court or when he deems it necessary in the interest of national security, public safety or public health, or in cases when a passport was secured through misrepresentation or fraud.

SECTION 51. Period of Validity, Extension and Renewal.—The original period of validity of a Philippine passport is two (2) years. It may be extended for another two (2) years provided that the application for extension is made before the expiration of four (4) years from the date of original issue of the passport. However, the validity of a passport may be limited for a certain period or for a definite purpose.

SECTION 52. Supplementary Regulation.—The Secretary may prescribe supplementary regulations for the issuance, extension or amendment of all kinds of passports.

SECTION 53. Amendments.—Upon application, an unexpired passport may be amended to reflect the new civil status or new name or surname of the holder, or to add more pages, or to modify a condition or restriction therein.

SECTION 54. Fees.—The Secretary shall prescribe uniform fees for the issuance, extension and amendment of passports, and such other services that may be rendered by the Department relating to passports. However, no fee shall be collected for the issuance of passports to government officials proceeding abroad in the discharge of their official duties attested by regular travel orders or for those issued to immediate members of their families on official travel.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987