MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 60

AMENDING SECTION 4 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1061 ENTITLED “ESTABLISHING THE PHILIPPINE RICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE (PRRI)”

WHEREAS, the Philippine Rice Research Institute was established to develop. In caordination with the university of the philippines, a national rice research program so as to sustain and further improve the gains already made in rice productions improve the income and economic condition of small rice farmers. Expand employm ent opportunities in the rural areas and ultimately promote the general welfare or the people through self-sufficiency in rice production;

WHEREAS, a definite tenure or office for the members of the Board of Trustees and a broader representation from all sectors in the rice industry is necessary in order that the Philippine Rice Research Institute can effectively accomplish its purposes and objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Republic of the Philippines. Do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 4 of Executive Order No. 1061 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 4. Board of Trustees , the corporate powers of the Institute shall be exercised, and, all its business activities and properties shall be controlled by a Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the board, composed of the Minister of Agriculture and food as ex-officio chairman and twelve (12) other members to be appointed by the president of the Philippines upon recommendation of the minister of agriculture and food, the appointive members of the board shall serve for two (2) years,

The Board shall meet regularly at least once a quarter or as often as the exigencies of the service demand. The presence of at least seven (7) members shall constitute a quorum, and the majority vote of the members present, there being a quorum shall be necessary for the adoption of any resolution, rule, regulation, decision or any other act of the board.

The Members of the Board, including the Chairman, shall receive per diem, as the board may determine, for each board meeting actually attended; Provided , that such per diem shall not exceed two thousand pesos (P2,000.00) during any one month for each member. The said members shall also be entitled to reimbursable transportation and representation allowances in going to and coming from board meetings and transacting official business for the Institute.”

SECTION 2. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7 th of November, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.