MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 56

AUTHORIZING THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENT TO TAKE PROTECTIVE CUSTODY OF CHILD PROSTITUTES AND SEXUALLY EXPLOITED CHILDREN, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS , for those who fall prey to prostitution and other forms of sexual exploitation due to their fragile age, immediate protection must be accorded by the government to arrest their moral decline and lead them back to the path of morality;

WHEREAS , in pursuance of its responsibility over the welfare of the youth, the Ministry of Social Services and Development must be given more powers to implement effectively the government’s commitment against child prostitution and exploitation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO , President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any minor who is apprehended or taken into custody by any peace officer of by the duly authorized officers of the Ministry of Social Services and Development for engaging in prostitution or other illicit conduct punished under existing laws shall, immediately from such apprehension, be delivered by the arresting officer to the Ministry of Social Services and Development or to its duly authorized office or agency within a particular territorial jurisdiction for protective custody.

The Ministry of Social Services and Development shall be responsible for the appearance of the minor under its protective custody in court or any administrative agency whenever required.

For the purpose of this Executive Order, a minor shall refer to any person below sixteen (16) years of age.

SECTION 2. The Ministry of Social Services and Development shall provide suitable programs for the full rehabilitation of the minors under its custody which shall, among others, include the appreciation of proper moral values, psychological or psychiatric treatment, education in the probable physical ailment or disease which they may contract or the dangers of unwanted pregnancy, and appropriate training for work-skills to prepare them for a decent living.

SECTION 3. The custody of persons, other than the apprehended minor, shall be in accordance with the ordinary criminal procedure as prescribed by the Rules of Court and other laws.

SECTION 4. The Ministry of Social Services and Development shall notify the mayors of the municipalities and cities of the business establishments, clubs, or houses, used or allowed to be used for prostitution of minors, and petition for the immediate forfeiture of their business licenses and closure of their business establishments.

SECTION 5. The sum of Three Million Pesos (P3,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated out of any available funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to defray the expenses of the Ministry of Social Services and Development in the implementation of this Executive Order. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for this purpose shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 6. The Ministry of Social Services and Development is hereby authorized to call upon any ministry, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for assistance in the implementation of this Executive Order.

SECTION 7. The Ministry of Social Services and Development shall, in coordination with the Ministry of Justice, promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Executive Order.

SECTION 8. All laws, orders, issuances and rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.