Bureaus and Offices

SECTION 18. Bureau of Animal Industry.—The Bureau of Animal Industry shall:

(1) Formulate programs for the development and expansion of the livestock, poultry, and dairy industries to meet the requirements of the growing populace;

(2) Recommend the specific policies and procedures governing the flow of livestock products through the various stages of marketing, as well as the proper preservation and inspection of such products;

(3) Coordinate and monitor the activities and projects relating to livestock and allied industries;

(4) Prescribe standards for quality in the manufacture, importation, labelling, advertising, distribution, and sale of livestock, poultry, and allied industries; and

(5) For its own sector, recommend plans, programs, policies, rules and regulations to the Secretary and provide technical assistance in the implementation of the same.

SECTION 19. Bureau of Plant Industry.—The Bureau of Plant Industry shall:

(1) Be responsible for the production of improved planting materials, protection of agricultural crops from pests and diseases, and development and improvement of farm equipment and other structures related to the plant industry;

(2) Prepare a program for the selection, production and certification of improved planting materials as well as guidelines for its implementation;

(3) Recommend plant quarantine policies, and prescribe rules and regulations for the prevention, control, and eradication of pests, diseases, and injuries to plants and plant products; and

(4) For its own sector, recommend plans, programs, policies, rules and regulations to the Secretary and provide technical assistance in the implementation of the same.

SECTION 20. Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources.—The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources shall:

(1) Formulate plans for the proper management, accelerated development, and proper utilization of the country’s fishery and aquatic resources;

(2) Undertake studies on the economics of the various phases of the fishing industry, which studies shall form the bases for the formulation of policies and programs on fisheries and aquatic resources;

(3) Render technical assistance and advisory services in the proper procurement, construction and operation of the fishing vessels as well as determination and designation of fish landing points for all commercial fishing boats; and

(4) For its own sector, recommend plans, programs, policies, rules and regulations to the Secretary and provide technical assistance in the implementation of the same.

SECTION 21. Bureau of Soils and Water Management.—The Bureau of Soils and Water Management shall:

(1) Advise and render assistance on matters relative to the utilization and management of soils and water as vital agricultural resources;

(2) Formulate measures and guidelines for effective soil, land, and water resource utilization, as well as soil conservation in croplands and other agricultural areas;

(3) Undertake soil research programs;

(4) Coordinate with the relevant government agencies in resettlement areas and prepare the necessary plans for the provision of technical assistance in solving soil impounding and the prevention of soil erosion, fertility preservation, and other related matters;

(5) Engage in rainmaking projects for agricultural areas and watersheds to solve the problem of prolonged droughts and minimize their effects on standing agricultural crops; and

(6) For its own sector, recommend plans, programs, policies, rules and regulations to the Secretary and provide technical assistance in the implementation of the same.

SECTION 22. Bureau of Agricultural Research.—The Bureau of Agricultural Research shall:

(1) Ensure that all agricultural research is coordinated and undertaken for maximum utility to agriculture;

(2) Tap farmers, farmers’ organizations, and research institutions, especially the state colleges and universities, in the conduct of research for use of the Department and its clientele, particularly the farmers, fishermen and other rural workers.

SECTION 23. Bureau of Agricultural Cooperatives and Development.—The Bureau of Agricultural Cooperatives and Development shall:

(1) Formulate an integrated system for development and evaluation of agricultural cooperatives;

(2) Provide advice and assistance in the establishment of agricultural cooperatives in the rural communities; and

(3) Evolve a program to promote the economic viability of agricultural cooperatives.

The Bureau shall include in its area of responsibility non-agricultural cooperatives.

SECTION 24. Bureau of Agricultural Statistics.—The Bureau of Agricultural Statistics shall:

(1) Be mainly responsible for the collection, compilation, and official release of agricultural statistics;

(2) Exercise technical supervision over data collection centers;

(3) Coordinate all agricultural statistics and economic research activities of all bureaus, corporations and offices under the Department.

SECTION 25. Agricultural Training Institute.—The Agricultural Training Institute shall:

(1) Be responsible for the training of all agricultural extension workers and their clientele, who are mostly farmers and other agricultural workers;

(2) Ensure that training programs address the real needs of the agricultural sectors; and

(3) Ensure that the research results are communicated to the farmers through the appropriate training and extension activities.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987