Promotions

SECTION 39. Merit Promotion System.—The Board of the Foreign Service shall establish a merit promotion system for all officers and employees of the Department.

SECTION 40. Requirements for Promotion in the Career Service.—(1) For promotion to Chief of Mission Class I, the candidate must have served as a Chief of Mission Class II and rendered continuous service as Foreign Service Officer for at least twelve (12) years;

(2) For promotion to Chief of Mission Class II, the candidate must have served as a Foreign Service Officer Class I and rendered continuous service as Foreign Service Officer for at least ten years;

(3) For promotion to Foreign Service Officer Class I, the candidate must have served as a Foreign Service Officer Class II, and rendered continuous service as Foreign Service Officer for at least eight years;

(4) For promotion to Foreign Service Officer Class II, the candidate must have served as a Foreign Service Officer Class III, and rendered continuous service as Foreign Service Officer for at least six years;

(5) For promotion to Foreign Service Officer Class III, the candidate must have rendered continuous service as a Foreign Service Officer Class IV for at least two years.

SECTION 41. Promotion of Foreign Service Officers.—(1) Promotions of Foreign Service Officers from one class to the next higher class shall be made by the President upon the recommendation of the Secretary. All promotions shall be to the lowest grade of the class.

(2) Promotion in grade within the class shall be made by the Secretary upon the recommendation of the Board of Foreign Service Administration.

SECTION 42. Promotion of Foreign Service Staff Officers, Foreign Service Staff Employees and Alien Employees.—Promotions of foreign service staff officers and employees and alien employees shall be made by the Secretary, upon recommendation of the Board of the Foreign Service Administration in accordance with the promotion system.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987