MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 291

GRANTING POSTAL PRIVILEGES FOR THE BLIND, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the State is constitutionally mandated to encourage non-formal, informal and indigenous learning systems as well as self-learning, independent and out-of-school study programs and to provide the disabled training in civics, vocational efficiency and other skills;

WHEREAS, insofar as the blind are concerned, the aforesaid mandate can be pursued by facilitating the dissemination of certain articles and literature for the blind by exempting them from postal charges;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The following shall be exempted from postal charges:

a) Articles and literature for the blind sent by mail within the Philippines or abroad;

b) Aids and appliances for the blind sent abroad by mail for repair;

For purposes of this Executive Order, articles and literature for the blind shall be limited to:

1. Books and periodicals in braille, 14 point type or larger and sound recordings;

2. Unsealed letters in the above media; and

3. Writing or listening devices for “reading” of the above media;

Provided , That commercial advertising shall be excluded.

SEC. 2. Each letter or parcel mailed pursuant hereto shall, in lieu of stamps, bear the words “Free Matter for the Blind” on its envelope or wrapper and the address of the officially recognized institution to which the mail matter is sent and/or from which the same comes from.

SEC. 3. Personal correspondence among the blind shall likewise be exempted from postal charges; Provided , That the sender and/or the addressee has been granted individual exemption by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Postal Services. To avail himself of the exemption, the sender and/or addressee shall present to the post office the official document evidencing such exemption; otherwise, the appropriate charges shall be collected from the sender or the addressee.

SEC. 4. Local or foreign organizations for the blind that may wish to avail themselves of the exemption granted herein shall register with and seek accreditation from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Postal Services in accordance with the standards, rules and regulations set by the Secretary of Transportation and Communications.

SEC. 5. The Secretary of Transportation and Communications shall promulgate the rules and regulations to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Executive Order.

SEC. 6. Any person who uses the privilege granted herein without proper authority or in contravention of the provisions hereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding ten thousand (P10,000.00) pesos or imprisonment of not more than three (3) years or both.

SEC. 7. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.