MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 75

UPGRADING THE SALARY OFFICERS OF THE SCALES OF FORESTERS AND LEGAL MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES

WHEREAS, there is a need to motivate foresters and legal officers of the Ministry of Natural Resources in the discharge of their duties;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The basic salary of all forestry positions in the Ministry of Natural Resources and its bureaus and attached agencies requiring the minimum qualification of a degree in forestry, shall be upgraded by four (4) steps in the government salary scale or approximately equivalent to twenty (20) percent.

SEC. 2. The basic salary of all legal officers of the Ministry of Natural Resources shall be upgraded or adjusted to the same salary scale granted to legal officers of the Ministries of Agrarian Reform, Justice, and Labor and Employment under Executive Order No. 1059 pursuant to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1726.

SEC. 3. Notwithstanding the salary adjustments in Sections 1 and 2 hereof, positions in the Career Executive Service and their equivalents shall continue to be paid in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Career Executive Service and are not to be exceeded or equalled by subordinates.

SEC. 4. Adjustments of salary shall be subject to the condition that no subordinate shall be paid higher than the immediate supervisor.

SEC. 5. The procedures, rules and regulations necessary to carry out this Executive Order shall be formulated and issued by the Office of Budget and Management.

SEC. 6. The amounts necessary to cover the salary increases as herein provided shall be charged against salary lapses and other personal services savings in the respective appropriations of the bureaus, offices, and agencies of the Ministry of Natural Resources.

SEC. 7. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

SEC. 8. The salary increases shall be effective on the date of the approval of this Executive Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of November , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.