Department Proper

SECTION 5. Offices Under the Direct Supervision of the Secretary.—The Secretary shall exercise direct supervision over the following:

(1) Foreign Service Institute.—The Foreign Service Institute shall continue to operate under its charter, and shall have the following main objectives and responsibilities:

(a) Program, implement, and manage the Career Foreign Service Development Program (CFSDP) in all of its main components for the purpose of upgrading the professional Career Foreign Service Corps;

(b) Program, implement and manage complementary organizational development programs for the Department as well as other training and educational programs for both its career and non-career personnel, and personnel of other government agencies assigned to foreign missions;

(c) Program, implement and manage the necessary supportive plans and operating systems for the Career Foreign Service Development Programs and complementary programs;

(d) Develop its own policies, and rules, program of activities, core staff and consultants, administrative structure, operating systems and resources, in order to enable it to accomplish competently its activities.

It shall be revitalized as the training, research, and career development arm of the Department, in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed by the Secretary. The Institute shall be an integral participant in the planning review process in the Department.

(2) UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines.—The United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) National Commission of the Philippines shall, in coordination with the Office of United Nations and other international organizations, advise the Philippine Government and the Philippine delegation to the UNESCO Conference, on matters relating to UNESCO, and shall function as a liaison agency on matters pertaining to the Commission.

(3) Technical Assistance Council.—The Technical Assistance Council shall continue to perform its present functions including the conduct and expansion of its programs.

SECTION 6. Undersecretaries.—The Secretary shall be assisted by two (2) Undersecretaries, who shall be appointed by the President, upon the recommendation of the Secretary. The Secretary shall determine and assign the respective functions and responsibilities of the Undersecretaries. The Secretary shall designate one of the Undersecretaries as Acting Secretary in his absence.

SECTION 7. Assistant Secretaries.—The Secretary shall be assisted by six (6) Assistant Secretaries who shall be appointed by the President upon recommendation by the Secretary. The Secretary shall delineate the respective areas of responsibility of each Assistant Secretary.

SECTION 8. Home Offices.—(1) Geographical Offices.—The following offices shall be responsible for providing staff support and policy guidance in the coordination, supervision, monitoring, integration, and reporting of the activities and operations of Philippine diplomatic missions and establishments within their geographic coverage:

(a) Office of Asian and Pacific Affairs: Japan and Northeast Asia, China, Central Asia, Southeast Asia, South Asia and Pacific countries; (b) Office of Middle East and African Affairs: the Gulf States, Middle East and North Africa, West Africa, and East Africa; (c) Office of American Affairs: United States of America, Canada, Mexico, the Central American and Caribbean countries, and South America; (d) Office of European Affairs: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Western Europe, Eastern Europe and Central Europe.

(2) Office of ASEAN Affairs.—The Office of ASEAN Affairs shall be responsible for Philippine participation and negotiation, as well as providing staff support and policy guidance in the coordination, supervision, monitoring, integration, reporting and operations of the Philippine Government in the ASEAN.

(3) Office of the United Nations and Other International Organizations.—The Office of the United Nations and other International Organizations shall be responsible for Philippine participation and negotiation as well as providing staff support and policy guidance in the coordination, supervision, monitoring, integration, reporting and operations of the Philippine Government in the United Nations, its specialized agencies and other international organizations. It shall also serve as the secretariat of all Philippine National Commissions and Councils created pursuant to commitments in the United Nations and its specialized agencies.

(4) Office of International Economic Affairs and Development.—The Office of International Economic Affairs and Development shall be responsible for conducting programs and activities of the Department in the fields of international trade, finance and economics; coordinate with the regional offices and the Office of United Nations and International Organizations; and, in coordination with the Department of Trade and Industry, conduct trade and investment promotion activities of the Department.

(5) Office of Cultural Affairs and Public Information Services.—The Office of Cultural Affairs and Public Information Services shall be responsible for promoting the cultural and information program of the Government abroad and for the development and dissemination of information and the coordination of information activities on the Government’s foreign and domestic policies.

(6) Office of Personnel and Administrative Services.—The Office of Personnel and Administrative Services shall be responsible for the efficient management of human resources and administrative support services, and shall make appropriate recommendations, including those concerning job classification, salary administration, benefits, retirement, and awards to deserving members of the Foreign Service.

(7) Office of Financial Management Services.—The Office of Financial Management Services shall be responsible for budgetary, financial and accounting services in the Department and the Foreign Service.

(8) Office of Consular Services.—The Office of Consular Services shall be responsible for the efficient and effective delivery of passport, visa and authentication services. It shall also extend assistance to Filipino nationals both here and abroad.

SECTION 9. Advisory Boards and Committees.—The Secretary may create such advisory boards and committees as he may deem necessary to assist and provide him with advice in the formulation of policies, as well as designate as special advisers such Chiefs of Mission who are on home assignment on specific areas of their expertise.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987