MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 188

FURTHER AMENDING SECTION 5 OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 492, AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC), under Section 4 of Executive Order No. 125, series of 1987, is mandated as the primary policy, planning, programming, coordinating, implementing, regulating and administrative entity of the Executive Branch of the government in the promotion, development and regulation of dependable and coordinated networks of transportation and communications systems, as well as in the fast, safe, efficient and reliable postal, transportation and communications services;

WHEREAS, in line with the aforesaid mandate and the government thrust of rationalizing the transportation system in Metropolitan Manila, there is an imperative need to amend further the provisions of Section 5, Presidential Decree No. 492, as amended;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 5 of Presidential Decree No. 492, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Section 5. Board of Directors . The Corporation shall be governed and its activities shall be directed, controlled and managed by a Board of Directors that shall be composed of seven (7) ex-officio members, namely: the Secretary of Transportation and Communications, who shall act as Chairman; the General Manager or Governor of the Metropolitan Manila Commission, who shall act as Vice-Chairman; the Secretary of National Defense; the Secretary of Trade and Industry; the Secretary of Finance; the Secretary of Public Works and Highways; and the Chairman of the Development Bank of the Philippines.

The Ex-officio members of the Board shall designate any official in their office who shall serve as alternate members. They shall attend the meetings of the Board whenever their principals are absent or the said positions are vacant.”

SECTION 2. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.