MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 377

PROVIDING ARRANGEMENTS FOR COORDINATING THE HANDLING OF THE BASES ISSUE AND CREATING THE PRESIDENT’S COMMITTEE ON THE BASES FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, the complexity of the bases issues requires many actions and decisions involving many departments and offices of the Executive Branch;

WHEREAS, the bases issue requires due consideration of the views of Congress, the communities directly affected by the disposition of the bases, and various sectoral groups concerned with the impact of foreign military facilities on national development;

WHEREAS, the Constitutional provision, Article XVIII, Section 25, that:

“After the expiration in 1991 of the Agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and the United States of America concerning Military Bases, foreign military bases, troops, or facilities shall not be allowed in the Philippines except under a treaty duly concurred in by the Senate and, when the Congress so requires, ratified by a majority of the votes cast by the people in a national referendum held for that purpose, and recognized as a treaty by the other contracting State”, requires urgent action by the government:

WHEREAS, to assure that the entire Executive Branch responds to these matters with efficiency and effectiveness for the protection of national sovereignty and the interests of the Filipino people, it is necessary to provide arrangements to address the bases issue;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation . — There is hereby created the President’s Committee on the Bases, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, composed of the following:

SEC 2. Functions . — The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To plan the comprehensive action response of the government to the bases issue, ensuring that the multiple questions raised by the foreign military facilities are addressed in the light of national interest;

2. To provide mechanisms for obtaining the views of Congress, other agencies of government, the communities directly affected by the disposition of foreign military facilities, and all other sectors concerned with the bases issue;

3. To receive and review the recommendations presented by the Legislative-Executive Bases Council for the purpose of their implementation;

4. To prepare the government to implement whatever decisions are reached in the exploratory talks; and

5. To carry out such other functions that the President may assign from time to time.

SEC 3. Secretariat . — The Office of the Peace Commissioner shall act as the Secretariat for the Committee.

SEC 4. Budget . — The Office of the President shall allocate the funds necessary for the operations of the Committee chargeable against its appropriations, subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC 5. Effectivity . — This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1989). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.