MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 17

DIRECTING THE SURRENDER OF ALL UNLICENSED FIREARMS AND AMMUNITIONS

WHEREAS, to bolster up the resistance movement against the Japanese invader, a considerable number of firearms was distributed among our citizenry, the provisions of the law regarding possession of firearms and ammunitions notwithstanding;

WHEREAS, heretofore, the Government has purposely refrained from enforcing said law in order that the inhabitants could protect themselves, their families and their respective communities from Japanese stragglers;

WHEREAS, the surrender of Japan has brought about the cessation of hostilities in the Philippines and the conditions justifying possession of unlicensed firearms and ammunitions have ceased to exist; and

WHEREAS, the restoration of normal conditions and of the constitutional functions of Government, as well as the maintenance of peace and order, require that all laws, more particularly, said law concerning possession of firearms and ammunitions, be fully observed and enforced;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby ordain and direct:

That any person holding or possessing firearms or ammunitions without a permit or license therefor previously issued by the Provost Marshal General of the Philippine Army shall surrender the same to the Military Commander of the province, or the Chief of Police of the municipality, in which such holder or possessor resides, within thirty days from the date of the proclamation by the respective Provincial Governor of this Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 26th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Proclamation Nos. : 1W – 39]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.