MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 18

DECLARING OCTOBER TWENTIETH, NINETEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE, A SPECIAL NATIONAL HOLIDAY

On the twentieth day of October, nineteen hundred and forty-four, the troops of the United States Armed Forces landed on the shores of Leyte. Thus began the military operations which carried the liberation forces to final victory over the Japanese invaders.

Through the long years of war, our resistance to the enemy never faltered. The whole world knew that, amid privation and humiliation, our spirit was firm and proud. We welcomed the liberators when they arrived, and we fought through to final victory side by side with them.

The Philippine liberation campaign, launched one year ago, will long be remembered for its heroic redemption of a nation which had undergone the deepest tragedies of enemy occupation.

It is only fitting that the Filipino people, on this anniversary, should do honor to the brave men who fought for freedom in our land.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim the twentieth day of October, nineteen hundred and forty-five, the first anniversary of the landings of the American forces of liberation on Philippine soil, to be a special national holiday, and I call upon all the people of the Philippines to observe this day in a spirit of humility before God and pay fulsome tribute to those who fought and suffered and died in the cause of liberty.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington, D. C. (for the City of Manila, Philippines), this 17th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Proclamation Nos. : 1W – 39]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.