MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 23

CALLING THE CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES IN SPECIAL SESSION

WHEREAS, in accordance with the provisions of the Tydings-McDuffie Act, as amended, the independence of the Philippines will be proclaimed not later than July 4, 1946;

WHEREAS, the term of office of the present Congress of the Philippines, unless legally extended, will expire on December 30, 1945;

WHEREAS, the term of office of the present incumbent of the office of President of the Philippines will continue until such time as his successor shall have been elected and qualified; and

WHEREAS, in order that the constitutional processes of government be completed before the proclamation of independence, it is essential that the election of the members of the Congress, the President, and the Vice President be provided for so that the newly elected Congress, together with the newly elected President and Vice President, be installed in office before July 4, 1946;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby call the Congress of the Philippines in special session for a period of three days commencing on the third day of December, 1945, at 4 o’clock in the afternoon, for the purpose of enacting legislation fixing the date of the election for national offices to be held not later than April 30, 1946, and making the necessary provisions to that effect.

All persons entitled to sit as members of the Congress of the Philippines are requested to take notice of this proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 26th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Proclamation Nos. : 1W – 39]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.