MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 8

DESIGNATING SUNDAY, THE THIRTIETH DAY OF MAY, NINETEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE, AS A DAY OF NATIONAL PRAYER

I, Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the following proclamation issued today by the President of the United States setting aside Sunday, May thirteenth, nineteen hundred and forty-five, to be a day of prayer:

“BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

“A Proclamation

“The Allied Armies, through sacrifice and devotion and with God’s help, have won from Germany a final and unconditional surrender. The Western world has been freed of the evil forces which for five years and longer have imprisoned the bodies and broken the lives of millions upon millions of free-born men. They have violated their churches, destroyed their homes, corrupted their children and murdered their loved ones. Our armies of liberation have restored freedom to these suffering peoples, whose spirit and will the oppressors could never enslave.

“Much remains to be done. The victory won in the West must now be won in the East. The whole world must be cleaned of the evil from which half the world has been freed. United, the peace-loving nations have demonstrated in the West that their arms are stronger by far than the might of dictators or the tyranny of military cliques that once called us soft and weak. The power of our peoples to defend ourselves against all enemies will be proved in the Pacific as it has been proved in Europe.

“For the triumph of spirit and of arms which we have won, and for its promise to peoples everywhere who join us in the love of freedom, it is fitting that we, as a nation, give thanks to Almighty God, who has strengthened us and given us victory.

“Now, therefore, I, Harry S. Truman, President of the United States of America, do hereby appoint Sunday, May thirteenth, nineteen hundred and forty-five, to be a day of prayer.

“I call upon the people of the United States, whatever their faith, to unite in offering joyful thanks to God for the victory we have won and to pray that He will support us to the end of our present struggle and guide us into the way of peace.

“I also call upon my countrymen to dedicate this day of prayer to the memory of those who have given their lives to make possible our victory.

“In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington, this eighth day of May, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the independence of the United States of America the one hundred and sixty-ninth.

“HARRY S. TRUMAN

“By the President:

“EDWARD R. STETTINIUS, Jr. “Acting Secretary of State”

It is only fitting that the day be also observed in the Philippines as in the United States and I do hereby enjoin the inhabitants of the Philippines to offer thanks to the Almighty God for the victory achieved and pray for His inspiration and guidance so that the war in the Pacific may be won as in the West, and may guide us through the path of justice, peace and lasting security.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington, this eight day of May, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines the tenth.

SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Proclamation Nos. : 1W – 39]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.