MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 13

DECLARING SUNDAY, AUGUST TWENTY-SIX, NINETEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE, A DAY OF PRAYER

WHEREAS, with the unconditional surrender of Japan as demanded by the United Nations, the war has come to an end;

WHEREAS, the people of the Philippines have received this announcement of Japan’s defeat with deep gratification, because it represents not only the complete victory of the forces of Democracy over fascism, feudalism and aggression, but also the beginning of a new era of world peace;

WHEREAS, so that we may give the full measure of our gratitude for this blessing bestowed on the peace-loving people of the earth, it is fitting that we unite in giving joyful thanks to the Supreme Ruler of the Universe;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim Sunday, August 26, 1945, a day of prayer for the proper observance of the great Allied victory in which our people have their rightful share.

I call upon the people of the Philippines of all faiths to pray in eternal gratitude to God for preserving the moral strength of our people through the years of our suffering and for giving us the victory which will bring about a new world order of peace, security and righteousness. We shall all pray so that He may guide the victorious nations into the paths of peace, and we may dedicate the day to the memory of those who have fallen in the night to make possible the total victory that we are celebrating.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 21st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Proclamation Nos. : 1W – 39]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.