MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 1180

DECLARING THE MONTH OF JULY OF EVERY YEAR AS THE
“NATIONAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING INPERSONS AWARENESS MONTH”

WHEREAS, Section 11, Article Il of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to value the dignity of every human person and guarantee full respect for human
rights;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9208 or the “Anti-Trafficking in
Persons Act of 2003,” as amended by RA No. 10364 or the “Expanded Anti-Trafficking
in Persons Act of 2012,” provides that the State shall give highest priority to the
enactment of measures and development of programs that will promote human dignity,
protect the people from any threat of violence and exploitation, eliminate trafficking in
persons, and mitigate pressures for involuntary migration and servitude of persons, not
only to support trafficked persons but more importantly, to ensure their recovery,
rehabilitation and reintegration into the mainstream of society;

WHEREAS, under Section 21(a), (c) and (e) of RA No. 9208, as amended, the
Inter-Agency Council Against Trafficking (IACAT) shall formulate a comprehensive and
integrated program to prevent and suppress trafficking in persons, and conduct massive
information dissemination and campaign on the various issues and problems attendant
to trafficking through local government units, concerned agencies and non-government
organizations;

WHEREAS, based on the 2020 United Nations Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, a total of 49,032 victims of trafficking in persons had been reported in 148
countries, and as of March 2021, a total of 1,608 victims of trafficking based on
convictions had been recorded in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, as signatory to the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime, including its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, the country observes the 30
of July of every year as the World Day Against Trafficking and conducts relevant
programs, campaigns and activities in observance thereof; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen awareness against trafficking in

persons, instill social consciousness among the general public, and mobilize more
advocates, especially those from vulnerable communities;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby declare the month of July of every year as the “National Anti-
Trafficking in Persons Awareness Month.”

For this purpose, the IACAT, in coordination with concerned agencies, shall lead
the observance and implementation of the National Anti-Trafficking in Persons
Awareness Month. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Proclamation shall be charged against the available appropriations of the IACAT.
Funding requirements for the succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget
proposal of the IACAT, subject to the usual budget process and relevant laws, rules and
regulations.

All other agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and state universities and colleges, are
hereby enjoined, and all local government units, the private sector, and relevant non-
government organizations and civil society groups, are hereby encouraged, to actively
participate and render the necessary support and assistance to the IACAT for the
effective implementation of this Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 6th dayof July inthe year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty-One.

 

By the President:

a ry
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDE

Executive Secretary

 

 

Office of the Preskient «SY
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE
vp vole = Or7ee3 CERTIFIER COPY

AvTY. CONCERCI mC-ERAD