MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 906
DECLARING A STATE OF CALAMITY IN REGION IV-A (CALABARZON)

WHEREAS, on 12 January 2020, Taal Volcano spewed volcanic steam and
ashes, causing the drifting and spread of volcanic particles over Tanauan and Talisay,
Batangas; Tagaytay, Cavite; and Sta. Rosa, Laguna and of volcanic ashes across
provinces, cities, and municipalities in Luzon, including Dasmarinas, Bacoor, and
Silang, Cavite; Malolos, San Jose del Monte, and Meycauayan, Bulacan; Antipolo,
Rizal; and the cities of Muntinlupa, Las Pifas, Marikina, Paranaque, Pasig,
Mandaluyong, San Juan, Quezon, Manila, Makati, and Taguig in Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, the volcanic activity of Taal Volcano has caused widespread
damage to properties and poses great risks and danger to the health and safety of the
people living near the region around Taal Volcano;

WHEREAS, about 129,171 families or 483,389 persons in the Provinces of
Batangas, Quezon, Laguna, and Cavite were affected by the Taal Volcano eruption;

WHEREAS, while the Department of Science and Technology-Philippine
Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (DOST-PHIVOLCS) lowered Taal Volcano’s
alert status from Alert Level 4 to Alert Level 3 on 26 January 2020 and has since
maintained said alert status, stream-driven explosions, volcanic earthquakes, ashfall,
and lethal volcanic gas expulsions can still occur and threaten areas within the Taal
Volcano Island and nearby lakeshores;

WHEREAS, as of 1:58 a.m. of 05 February 2020, a total of 2,070 volcanic
earthquakes have been recorded in the regions surrounding Taal Volcano and the
DOST-PHIVOLCS has strongly recommended that entry into the Taal Volcano Island
as well as into areas over Taal Lake and communities west of the island within a seven
(7)-km. radius from the main crater be strictly prohibited;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Republic Act No. 10121, or the “Philippine Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010,” the National Disaster Risk Reduction
and Management Council has recommended the declaration of a State of Calamity in
Region IV-A;

WHEREAS, the declaration of State of Calamity will hasten the rescue, relief,
and rehabilitation efforts of the government and the private sector, including any

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Ke

 

international humanitarian assistance, and will effectively control the prices of basic
goods and commodities for the affected areas; and

WHEREAS, this declaration will, among others, afford the National
Government, as well as local government units (LGUs), ample latitude to utilize
appropriate funds for the rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation of, and to continue
to provide basic services for, affected populations, in accordance with law;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby declare a State of Calamity in Region IV-A (CALABARZON).

All departments and other concerned government agencies are hereby directed
to implement and execute rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation work in
accordance with pertinent operational plans and directives.

All departments and other concerned government agencies are also hereby
directed to coordinate with, and provide or augment the basic services and facilities
of, affected LGUs.

Law enforcement agencies, with the support from the Armed Forces of the
Philippines, are hereby directed to undertake all necessary measures to ensure peace
and order in affected areas, as may be necessary.

The State of Calamity shall remain in force and effect for one (1) year unless
sooner lifted in accordance with law.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this21stday of February in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

8

, a
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDE?A

Executive Secretary

 

PRRD 2016 - 014150