(es

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 922

DECLARING A STATE OF PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY
THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Under Section 15, Article II of the Philippine Constitution, it is the
State's Policy to protect and promote the right to health of the people;

WHEREAS, Section 23, Article VI of the Philippine Constitution provides that
in times of national emergency, the Congress may, by law, authorize the President,
for a limited period and subject to such restrictions as it may prescribe, to exercise
powers necessary and proper to carry out a declared national policy;

WHEREAS, Section 7 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11332 provides that the
President of the Republic of the Philippines shall declare a State of Public Health
Emergency in the event of an epidemic of national and/or international concern
which threatens national security in order to mobilize governmental and
nongovernmental agencies to respond to the threat;

ee

 
 
   
   

: WHEREAS, the Secretary of Health has confirmed the local transmission of
Corona Virus Disease (Covid-19) in the Philippines;

i

 
      
 

WHEREAS, the outbreak of Covid-19 constitutes an emergency that
t national security W requires a whole-of-government response aligned
1 the Four-Door Fram for Covid-19 of the Department of Health (DOH) and
efforts of all concern mment agencies and local government units

       
    
    
   
   

WHEREAS, such | ate the implementation of the
it provisions of RA Ne J 1-19 threat, including but not

) mandatory repor ] response and measures, and
antine and dise mei

Section 1. There is hereb i
. y declared a State of Public Health Emergenc
throughout the Philippines due to Covid-19. sii

Section 2. All government agencies and LGUs are hereby enjoined to render
full assistance and cooperation and mobilize the necessary resources to undertake

critical, urgent, and appropriate response and measures in a timely manner to curtail
and eliminate the Covid-19 threat.

Section 3. The Secretary of Health may call upon the Philippine National Police

and other law enforcement agencies to provide assistance in addressing the Covid-19
threat.

Section 4. All citizens, residents, tourists and establishment owners are urged
to act within the bounds of the law and to comply with the lawful directives and
advisories to be issued by appropriate government agencies to prevent further
transmission of the Covid-19 and ensure the safety and well-being of all.

Section 5. The State of Public Health Emergency shall remain in force and
effect until lifted or withdrawn by the President.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the city of Manila, this sth day of March in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

de

By the President:
SALVADOR C.MEDIALDEA Pe

Executive Secretary

  
 

ER Se re

CERTIFIED COPY