MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 572

REVOCATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE AD HOC
COMMITTEE RESOLUTION NO. 2(#1) DATED JANUARY 31, 2011 INSOFAR AS
IT GRANTED AMNESTY TO FORMER LTSG ANTONIO TRILLANES IV

WHEREAS, Section 19, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution expressly
authorizes the President of the Republic of the Philippines to grant amnesty;

WHEREAS, by virtue of Proclamation No. 75, series of 2010, an amnesty was
granted to all active and former personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and
Philippine National Police as well as their supporters who have or may have
committed crimes punishable under the Revised Penal Code, the Articles of War or
other laws in connection with, in relation or incident to, the July 27, 2003 Oakwood
Mutiny, the February 2006 Marines Stand-Off and the November 29, 2007 Manila
Peninsula Incident who shall apply therefor, provided that amnesty shall not cover
rape, acts of torture, crimes against chastity, and other crimes committed for
personal ends;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Proclamation No. 75, series of 2010, an Ad Hoc
Committee of the Department of National Defense (DND) was tasked with receiving
and processing applications, including opposition thereto, if any, for amnesty
pursuant to this proclamation and determining whether applicants are entitled to
amnesty pursuant to this proclamation. The final decisions or determination of the
DND shall be appealable to the Office of the President by any party to the

application;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 75, series of 2010 provides that the concerned
AFP and PNP personnel and their supporters are required to file an application for
amnesty under oath with the Department of National Defense (DND) ad hoc

Committee;

WHEREAS, Sections 5, 6 and 11 of the DND Amnesty Committee (DND-AC)
Circular No. 1 dated December 21, 2010, “The Rules and Procedures in the
processing of Amnesty Applications pursuant to Proclamation No. 75, series of
2010,” requires the applicants to personally fill up and file the Official Amnesty
Application Form and expressly admit their guilt for the crimes committed during the
Oakwood Mutiny, the Marines Stand-Off, and the Manila Peninsula Incident. DND-
AC Circular No. 1 further requires the applicants to recant all previous statements
inconsistent with the requirement of admission of that guilt;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 14 of DND-AC Circular No. 1 mandates the Deputy Chief
of Staff for Personnel, JI, AFP, to provide and create a Secretariat to provide
administrative assistance io the Committee in receiving and processing of
applications for amnesty and any opposition thereto and the recording of minutes,
reception of evidence and other documents presented during deliberations and

hearings;

WHEREAS, the Supreme Court in the case of People of the Philippines vs.
Vera, et al,! declared that “a previous admission of guilt is necessary in amnesty
since the invocation of amnesty is in the nature of a plea of confession and
avoidance, which means that the pleader admits the allegations against him but
disclaims liability therefor on account of intervening facts which, if proved, would
bring the crime charged within the scope of the amnesty proclamation”;

WHEREAS, at the time Proclamation No. 75, Series of 2010 was issued
former LTSG Antonio Trillanes IV, O-11797 PN, was facing trial for a non-bailable
offense of coup d e’tat in Criminal Case No. 03-2784 pending with the Regional Trial
Court, Makati City, Branch 148;

WHEREAS, at the time Proclamation No. 75, Series of 2010 was issued
former LTSG Antonio Trillanes IV, O-11797 PN, was also facing trial before the
Military Tribunal for Mutiny or Sedition, Conduct Unbecoming an Officer and
Gentleman, and all disorders and neglects to the prejudice of good order and military
discipline, and all conduct of a nature to bring discredit upon the military service
defined and penalized under Commonwealth Act No. 408, as Amended, otherwise
known as the Articles of War;

WHEREAS, former LTSG Antonio Trillanes IV, O-11797 PN, a grantee under
Proclamation No. 75, did not file an Official Amnesty Application Form as per the
Certification dated August 30, 2018 issued by Lt. Col. Thea Joan N. Andrade, Chief,
Discipline, Law and Order Division of the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for
Personnel, J1, stating that “there is no available copy of his application for amnesty
in the records”;

WHEREAS, former LTSG Antonio Trillanes IV, O-11797 PN, never expressed
his guilt for the crimes that were committed on occasion of the Oakwood Mutiny and
Peninsula Manila Hotel Siege, stating that “they were not admitting guilt to the mutiny
and coup d’etat charges lodged against them both in the civil and military courts” and
“| would like to qualify that we did not admit to the charge of coup d’etat or ain
na i-finile sa amin kasi we believe na hindi iyon and nararapat na i-charge sa amin®

WHEREAS, despite former LTSG Trillanes IV's failure to apply for amnesty
and refusal to admit his guilt, his name was nonetheless included among those
granted amnesty pursuant to DND Ad Hoc Committee Resolution No. 2 approved by
former Secretary of National Defense Voltaire T. Gazmin;

: GR. No. L-26539 February 28, 1990
? Mark Muruenas, GMANews.TV dated January 5, 2011

ww

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 19, Article VII of the
Philippine Constitution, do hereby DECLARE and PROCLAIM:

Section 1. The grant of amnesty to former LTSG Antonio Trillanes
IV under Proclamation No. 75 is declared void ab initio because he did
not comply with the minimum requirements to qualify under the
Amnesty Proclamation.

Section 2. Effects.

1. As a consequence, the Department of Justice and Court
Martial of the Armed Forces of the Philippines are ordered to pursue
all criminal and administrative cases filed against former LTSG
Antonio Trillanes in relation to the Oakwood Mutiny and the Manila
Peninsula Incident.

2. The Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine
National Police are ordered to employ all lawful means to apprehend
former LTSG Antonio Trillanes so that he can be recommitted to the
detention facility where he had been incarcerated for him to stand trial
for the crimes he is charged with.

Section 3. Effectivity. This Proclamation shall take effect
immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have signed this Proclamation and caused the seal
of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed to it.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of August in the year of our Lord, Two
Thousand and Eighteen.

By the President:

homo a bh $e
SALWADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

 

 

 

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTLEIED COPY

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 007415 [ sot pension

 
 

|
|