MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 928
DECLARING MAY 2020 AS NATIONAL CENSUS MONTH

WHEREAS, Batas Pambansa Blg. 72 (s. 1980) provides for the taking of an
integrated census every ten (10) years, beginning in 1980, and the designation of the
first day of May of every regular census year as the reference date for said census;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 10625 or the “Philippine Statistical Act of
2013,” provides that the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) shall prepare and
conduct periodic censuses on population, housing and other sectors of the economy;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 352 (s. 1996) requires the conduct of a
census of population and housing every 10 years with the primary objective of
coming up with population figures at the national government level down to the
barangays;

WHEREAS, the year 2020 Census of Population and Housing (CPH) will be
conducted in May 2020, with 01 May 2020 as census reference date;

WHEREAS, the 2020 World Population and Housing Census Programme,
adopted by the United Nations Economic and Social Council, recognizes population
and housing censuses as primary sources of data needed for formulating,
implementing and monitoring policies and programmes aimed at_ inclusive
socioeconomic development and environmental sustainability, and for supplying
disaggregated data needed for the measurement of progress of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;

WHEREAS, the 2020 CPH will be a nationwide government undertaking that

involves the collection, compilation, evaluation, analysis, publication and

as dissemination of data on population count, demographic and socioeconomic

™ characteristics of the population, housing statistics and other relevant data in each
barangay, municipality, city, province and region in the country;

      
  
  
 

_ WHEREAS, the census aims to provide government executives, policymakers
é an d eablanners with Bee and housing data on which to base their social and

‘nment units Hg, requires an up-to-date and comprehensive data of
pulation at the local levels;

NOW, THEREFORE, |I|, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby declare the month of May 2020 as “National Census Month,” with
01 May 2020 as census reference date.

All government agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions and state colleges and
universities, are hereby directed, and the LGUs, as well as the private sector, are
enjoined to provide the necessary support and assistance to the PSA to ensure the
effective implementation of this Proclamation.

All citizens and residents of the Philippines are enjoined to cooperate with the
PSA and its census enumerators in the conduct of the census, by providing truthful
and complete information in response to census questions, pursuant to law.

All administrators, authorities and residents in condominiums, exclusive
villages, and other areas with special concerns, are enjoined to provide support in
the census enumeration by granting access, among others, to deputized census
enumerators.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 13thday of March __ jn the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

By the President:

ae ew
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

 

   

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 014355

   
 
     
   
  

Office of the President
MALACARIANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

 

ATTY. CORCEPTE , PERROLINO-ERAD
DIRE WV