MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 907

DECLARING THE SECOND WEEK OF FEBRUARY OF EVERY YEAR
AS “NATIONAL HAZING PREVENTION WEEK”

WHEREAS, Section 11, Article II of the Constitution declares it a policy of
the State to value the dignity of every human person and to guarantee full respect
for human rights;

WHEREAS, Section 13, Article || of the Constitution provides that the State
recognizes the vital role of the youth in nation-building, and shall promote and
protect the youth’s physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual and social well-being;

WHEREAS, Section 3 of Republic Act (RA) No. 8049, as amended by RA
No. 11053 or the "Anti-Hazing Act of 2018," prohibits all forms of hazing in
fraternities, sororities and organizations, including citizens’ military training and
citizens' army training;

WHEREAS, Section 8 of RA No. 8049, as amended, mandates schools
to implement information dissemination campaigns to provide adequate
knowledge to students and their parents or guardians regarding the
consequences of conducting and participating in hazing;

WHEREAS, throughout the years, there has been an alarming number of
hazing-related deaths in the Philippines despite the passage of the Anti-Hazing
Act; and

WHEREAS, to address the continuous occurrence, as well as the dire
consequences of this act of violence, there is a need for the active participation of
various government agencies, as well as the private sector and non-
governmental organizations, to increase awareness of the importance and value
of hazing prevention;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby declare the second week of February of every year as “National
Hazing Prevention Week.”

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

The Commission on Higher Education (CHED) shall lead, coordinate and
supervise the nationwide yearly observance of the National Hazing Prevention
Week, with the main objective of strengthening the campaign to end hazing and
other fraternity-related violence.

All other agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government,
including government-owned or -controlled corporations and state universities
and colleges, are hereby directed, and all local government units, as well as the
private sector, relevant civil society organizations and professional groups, are
hereby encouraged to actively participate and provide the necessary support and
assistance to the CHED for the successful conduct of programs, projects and
activities relative to the observance and celebration of the National Hazing
Prevention Week.

The necessary funding for the implementation of this Proclamation shall be
charged against the respective available appropriations of the concerned agencies.
For the succeeding years, the necessary funding shall be programmed in the
respective budget proposals of the said agencies, subject to existing laws, rules and
regulations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the
seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this21st day of February jn the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

“WP bn
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

       

i
= Lb OATTY. COMCEPOIGE
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES h * cc
PRRD 2016 - 014154 Y¥ 2-2y- wm Ems