H. No. 3746

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8021]

AN ACT DECLARING THE MORIONES FESTIVAL OF THE PROVINCE OF MARINDUQUE A MAJOR TOURIST ATTRACTION

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The Moriones Festival of the Province of Marinduque is hereby declared a major tourist attraction. As such, it shall be accorded due recognition and shall become a priority program of the Department of Tourism.

SEC. 2. The Department of Tourism, in coordination with the Philippine Tourism Authority and other concerned agencies of the government shall, within one (1) year from the approval of this Act, prepare a tourism development and promotion plan for the Moriones Festival. The plan shall provide for the construction and installation of such appropriate facilities and infrastructure as shall encourage tourism in the area and promote the festival as a religious and cultural heritage.

SEC. 3. The Department of Tourism shall take immediate steps to implement said development and promotion plan and shall incorporate the same in the Department’s overall tourism development program for the ensuing calendar year.

SEC. 4. The Department of Tourism shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the proper implementation of this Act.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on July 27, 1994 and February 15, 1995, respectively.

(Sgd.) EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) CAMILO L. SABIO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved:

FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Lapsed into the law on May 25, 1995 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.

Source : Presidential Management Staff