H. No. 548

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7894]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE NUMANCIA NATIONAL VOCATIONAL SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DEL CARMEN, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE, INTO A COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE SIARGAO NATIONAL COLLEGE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The Numancia National Vocational School in the Municipality of Del Carmen, Province of Surigao del Norte, is hereby converted into a college to be known as the Siargao National College of Science and Technology.

SEC. 2. The Siargao National College of Science and Technology, in addition to its secondary trade and two-year technical education, shall offer undergraduate courses in industrial education and technology, mining, arts and sciences, three-year technician course in trade, agriculture, forestry and fishery, and short-term occupational courses as may be necessary to meet the national and regional needs for trained manpower.

SEC. 3. It shall grant a proficiency certificate in non-degree courses and diploma to the undergraduate degree courses offered.

SEC. 4. The entry qualification of high school graduates desiring to enroll shall be based on the open door policy but limited to the actual capacity of the College for maximum efficiency in terms of quality graduates, efficient use of facilities, and reduction of waste materials resources.

SEC. 5. There shall be a career service program to assist students in pursuit of their career choice.

SEC. 6. The Siargao National College of Science and Technology shall be headed by a College superintendent, who shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED). The powers and duties of the College superintendent shall be those of the superintendent of the existing government colleges.

SEC. 7. In order not to disrupt the present administrative operations of the Numancia National Vocational School, all its. personnel shall be absorbed by the College.

SEC. 8. The school personnel of the Siargao National College of Science and Technology shall be covered by the appropriate Civil Service laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 9. The Treasurer of the Philippines shall be the ex officio treasurer of the College and all accounts and expenses thereof shall be audited by the Commission on Audit. All disbursement shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Commission on Audit.

SEC. 10. All buildings, equipment and facilities, and funds of the Numancia National Vocational School, and all parcels of land thereof, shall be transferred to the College.

SEC. 11. The amount necessary for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current year’s appropriations of the Numancia National Vocational School. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Fees and charges including government subsidies and other income generated by the College shall constitute special trust funds and shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank, and all interests that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same funds for the use of the College.

The income generated by the College may, at the discretion of the College, be disbursed for the professional growth and development, health, welfare and similar benefits of the faculty members and personnel, for extension and student welfare expenses so that the flexibility on the use of income shall be focused on faculty, personnel improvement and student welfare activities, and for expenses necessary for the attainment of its purposes under this Act.

SEC. 12. All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed.

SEC. 13. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) EDGARDO J. ANGARA President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on September 26, 1996 and October 6, 1997, respectively.

Approved: FEB 20, 1995

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Management Staff