S. No. 1032 H. No. 7134

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

First Special Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Friday the seventh day of June, nineteen hundred and ninety-six.

[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8187 ]

AN ACT GRANTING PATERNITY LEAVE OF SEVEN (7) DAYS WITH FULL PAY TO ALL MARRIED MALE EMPLOYEES IN THE PRIVATE AND PUBLIC SECTORS FOR THE FIRST FOUR (4) DELIVERIES OF THE LEGITIMATE SPOUSE WITH WHOM HE IS COHABITING AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. S hort Title . – This Act shall be known as the “Paternity Leave Act of 1996”.

SEC. 2. Notwithstanding any law, rules and regulations to the contrary, every married male employee in the private and public sectors shall be entitled to a paternity leave of seven (7) days with full pay for the first four (4) deliveries of the legitimate spouse with whom he is cohabiting. The male employee applying for paternity leave shall notify his employer of the pregnancy of his legitimate spouse and the expected date of such delivery.

For purposes of this Act, delivery shall include childbirth or any miscarriage.

SEC. 3. Definition of Term. – For purposes of this Act, Paternity Leave refers to the benefits granted to a married male employee allowing him not to report for work for seven (7) days but continues to earn the compensation therefor, on the condition that his spouse has delivered a child or suffered a miscarriage for purposes of enabling him to effectively lend support to his wife in her period of recovery and/or in the nursing of the newly-born child.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of Labor and Employment, the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and the Secretary of Health shall, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act, issue such rules and regulations necessary for the proper implementation of the provisions hereof.

SEC. 5. Any person, corporation, trust, firm, partnership, association or entity found violating this Act or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder shall be punished by a fine not exceeding Twenty-five thousand pesos (P25,000) or imprisonment of not less than thirty (30)days nor more than six (6) months.

If the violation is committed by a corporation, trust or firm, partnership, association or any other entity, the penalty of imprisonment shall be imposed on the entity’s responsible officers, including, but not limited to, the president, vice-president, chief executive officer, general manager, managing director or partner directly responsible therefor.

SEC. 6. Nondiminution Clause . – Nothing in this Act shall be construed to reduce any existing benefits of any form granted under existing laws, decrees, executive orders, or any contract agreement or policy between employer and employee.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. – All laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, issuances, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. – This Act shall take effect (15) days from its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) newspapers of national circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Sgd.) NEPTALI A. GONZALES President of the Senate

This act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1032 and House Bill No. 7134 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives of June 8, 1996.

(Sgd.) CAMILO L. SABIO Secretary General House of Representatives

(Sgd.) HEZEL P. GACUTAN Secretary of the Senate

Approved: JUN 11 1996

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Malacañang Records Office