H. No. 3795

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8104]

AN ACT RENEWING THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO THE RAJAH BROADCASTING NETWORK, INCORPORATED, TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE RADIO BROADCASTING STATIONS AND STATIONS FOR TELEVISION IN THE PHILIPPINES, UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED FORTY-FIVE HUNDRED AND FIVE, TO ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE YEARS FROM THE DATE OF THE EFFECTIVITY OF THIS ACT

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Renewal of Franchise . – The franchise of the Rajah Broadcasting Network, Incorporated, its successors or assigns, hereinafter referred to as the grantee, to construct, maintain and operate radio broadcasting stations and stations for television in the Philippines, granted under Republic Act Numbered Forty-five hundred and five, is hereby renewed to another twenty-five (25) years from the date of the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities . – The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and operated in a manner as will at most result only in the minimum interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of the existing stations or other stations which may be established in accordance with law of other telecommunications services grantees, without in any way diminishing its own right to use its selected wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission or reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantee’s services and/or the availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications Commission . – The grantee shall secure from the National Telecommunications Commission the appropriate permits and licenses for its stations and shall not use any frequency in the radio/television spectrum without having been authorized by the Commission. The Commission, however, shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of any such authority.

SEC. 4. Responsibility to the Public . – The grantee shall provide reasonable public service time to enable the Government, through the said broadcasting stations, to reach the population on important public issues; provide at all times sound and balanced programming; promote public participation such as in community programming; assist in the functions of public information and education; conform to the ethics of honest enterprise; and not use its stations for the broadcasting of obscene and indecent language, speech, act or scene, or for the dissemination of deliberately false information or willful misrepresentation to the detriment of the public interest, or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

SEC. 5. Tax Provisions . – The grantee, as successors or assigns, shall be liable to pay the same taxes on their real estate, buildings, and personal property, exclusive of this franchise, as other persons or corporations arc now or hereafter may be required by law to pay. In addition thereto, the grantee, its successors or assigns, shall pay franchise tax equivalent to three percent (3%) of all gross receipts of the business transacted under this franchise by the grantee, its successors or assigns: Provided , That the grantee, its successors or assigns, shall continue to be liable for income taxes payable under Title II of the National Internal Revenue Code pursuant to Section 2 of Executive Order No. 72 unless the latter enactment is amended or repealed, in which case the amendment or repeal shall be applicable thereto.

The grantee shall file the return with and pay the tax due thereon to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue or his duly authorized representative in accordance with the National Internal Revenue Code and the return shall be subject to audit by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

SEC. 6. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of Grantee . – The grantee shall not require any previous censorship o*f any speech, play, act, scene, or other matter to be broadcast and/or telecast from its stations: Provided , That the grantee, during any broadcast and/or telecast shall cut off from the air the speech, play, act, scene, or other matter being broadcast if the tendency thereof is to propose and/or incite treason, rebellion, or sedition; or the language used therein or the theme thereof is indecent or immoral; and willful failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause for the cancellation of this franchise.

SEC. 7. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, Etc . – The grantee shall not lease, transfer, grant the usufruct of, sell nor assign this franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company, corporation or entity, nor merge with any other corporation or entity without the prior approval of the Congress of the Philippines. Neither shall the controlling interest in the grantee be transferred, whether as a whole or in parts and whether simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any such person, firm, company, corporation or entity without the prior approval of the Congress of the Philippines. Any person or entity to which this franchise is validly sold, transferred, or assigned shall be subject to all the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 8. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause . – This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so requires and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided for.

SEC. 9. General Broadcast Policy . – The grantee shall comply with and be subject to the provisions of a general broadcast policy law which Congress may hereafter enact.

SEC. 10. Reportorial Requirement . – The grantee shall submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines on its compliance with the terms and conditions of the franchise and on its operations within sixty (60) days from the end of every year.

SEC. 11. Effectivity Clause . – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days from the date of its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.

Approved,

(Sgd.) EDGARDO J. ANGARA President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 14, 1995 and February 20, 1995, respectively.

Approved:

FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Lapsed into law on JUL 09 1995, without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.

Source : Presidential Management Staff