H. No. 7795

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7896]

AN ACT CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN LORENZO IN THE PROVINCE OF GUIMARAS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Barangays Suclaran, Cabungahan, M. Chavez, San Enrique, and Gaban in the Municipality of Buenavista; and barangays Cabano, Constancia, Igcauayan, Aguilar, Sebario, Tamborong, and Sapal in the Municipality of Jordan, Province of Guimaras, are hereby separated from their respective municipalities and constituted into a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of San Lorenzo. The temporary seat of government of the new municipality shall be in Barangay M. Chavez.

SEC. 2. The Municipality of San Lorenzo is described as follows:

SEC. 3. The Municipality of San Lorenzo shall acquire corporate existence upon ratification by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite to be conducted in the municipalities affected within ninety (90) days after approval of this Act. The Commission on Elections shall conduct and supervise the plebiscite. The expenses to be incurred for the said plebiscite shall be charged to provincial funds.

SEC. 4. Upon approval of the creation of the new municipality by majority of the votes cast in the plebiscite, the mayor, the vice-mayor, and the members of the sangguniang bayan shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, upon recommendation of the governor of the Province of Guimaras, and shall discharge their official functions until their successors shay have been elected and qualified.

SEC. 5 This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) EDGARDO J. ANGARA President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 24, 1995 and January 16, 1995, respectively.

(Sgd.) EDGARDO E. TUMANGAN Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) CAMILO L. SABIO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: FEB 20 1995

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff