S. No. 1155 H. No. 8179

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety three.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7658]

AN ACT PROHIBITING THE EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN BELOW 15 YEARS OF AGE IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE UNDERTAKES, AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE SECTION 12, ARTICLE VIII OF R.A. 7610

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 12, Article VIII of R.A. No. 7610 otherwise known as the “Special Protection of Children Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act” is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 12. Employment of Children. – Children below fifteen (15) years of age shall not be employed except:

1) When a child works directly under the sole responsibility of his parents or legal guardian and where only members of the employer’s family are employed: Provided, however, That his employment neither endangers his life, safety, health and morals, nor impairs his normal development; Provided, further , That the parent or legal guardian shall provide the said minor child with the prescribed primary and/or secondary education; or

2) Where a child’s employment or participation in public entertainment or information through cinema, theater, radio or television is essential: Provided , The employment contract is concluded by the child’s parents or legal guardian, with the express agreement of the child concerned, if possible, and the approval of the Department of Labor and Employment: and Provided , That the following requirements in all instances are strictly complied with:

(a) The employer shall ensure the protection, health, safety, morals and normal development of the child;

(b) The employer shall institute measures to prevent the child’s exploitation or discrimination taking into account the system and level of remuneration, and the duration and arrangement of working time; and

(c) The employer shall formulate and implement, subject to the approval and supervision of competent authorities, a continuing program for training and skills acquisition of the child.

In the above exceptional cases where any such child may be employed, the employer shall first secure, before engaging such child, a work permit from the Department of Labor and Employment which shall ensure observance of the above requirements.

The Department of Labor and Employment shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of this Section.”

SEC. 2. All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof contrary to, or inconsistent with this Act are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

SEC. 3. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) national newspapers or general circulation whichever comes earlier.

Approved,

This bill, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1155 and House Bill No. 8179, was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on October 7, 1993 and October 6, 1993, respectively.

Approved: November 9, 1993

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Management Staff