H. No. 8488

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Third Regular Session

Begun and held In Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8122]

AN ACT GRANTING THE SWARA SUG MEDIA CORPORATION OF THE PHILIPPINES A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1 . Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and application laws, rules of the regulations, there is hereby granted to the Swara Sug Media Corporation of the Philippines, its successors or assigns and hereunder referred to as the grantee, a franchise to construct, install, operate and maintain for commercial purposes and in the public interest radio and television broadcasting stations in the Philippines, with the corresponding technological auxiliaries or facilities, special broadcast and other broadcast distribution services and relay stations, and to install radio communication facilities for the grantee’s private use in its broadcast service.

SEC. 2 . Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. — The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and operated in a manner as will at result only in the minimum interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of the existing stations or other stations which may be established by law.

SEC. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications Commissions. — The grantee shall secure from the National Telecommunications Commission the appropriate permits and licenses for its stations and shall not use any frequency in the radio/television spectrum without having been authorized by the Commission. The Commission, however, shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of any such authority.

SEC. 4 . Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall provide reasonable public service time to enable the government, through the said broadcasting stations, to reach the population on important public issues; provide at all times sound and balanced programming; promote public participation such as in community programming; assist in the functions of public information and education; conform to the ethics of honest enterprises; and use its stations for the broadcasting of obscene and indecent language, speech, act or scene; or for the dissemination of deliberately false information or willful misrepresentation to the detriment of the public interest; or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

SEC. 5 . Right of Government . — The President of the Philippines, in times of rebellion, public peril, calamity, emergency, disaster or disturbance of peace and other, may temporarily take over and operate the stations of the grantee, temporarily suspend the operation of any station in the interest of public safety, security and public welfare, or authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of said stations during the period when they shall be so operated.

SEC. 6 . Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be for a term of twenty-five (25) years from the date of effectivity of this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. In the event the grantee fails to operate continuously for two (2) years, this franchise shall be deemed ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 7. Acceptance and Compliance. — Acceptance of this franchise shall be given in writing within sixty (60) days after approval of this act. The grantee shall construct, complete and operate a television or radio station within two (2) years from the date of the acceptance in writing of this franchise. Refusal or failure to accept the franchise or to operate within the prescribed period shall render the franchise void.

SEC. 8. Tax Provisions. — The grantee, its successors or assigns, shall be liable to pay the same taxes on their real estate, buildings and personal property, exclusive of this franchise, as other persons or corporations are now or hereafter may be required by the law to pay. In addition thereto, the grantee, its successors or assigns, shall pay a franchise tax equivalent to three percent (3%) of all gross receipts of the radio/television business transacted under this franchise by the grantee, its successors or assigns, and the said percentage shall be in lieu of all taxes on this franchise or earnings thereof: Provided , That the grantee, its successors or assign, shall continue to be liable for income taxes payable under Title II of the National Internal Revenue Code pursuant to Section 2 of Executive Order No. 72 unless the latter enactment is amended or repealed, in which case the amendment or repeal shall be applicable thereto.

The grantee shall file the return with and pay the tax due thereon to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue or his duly authorized representative in accordance with the National Internal Revenue Code, and the return shall be subject to audit by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

SEC. 9 . Democratization of Ownership. — In compliance with the constitutional mandate to democratize ownership of public utilities, the herein grantee shall make public offering through the stock exchanges of the least thirty percent (30%) of its common stocks within a period of three (3) years from the date of effectivity of this Act: Provided , That no single person or entity shall be allowed to own more than five percent (5%) of the stock offerings.

SEC. 10 . Warranty in Favor National and Local Governments. — The grantee shall hold the national, provincial, and municipal government of the Philippines free from all claims, accounts, demands or actions arising out of accidents or injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the construction or operation of the stations of the grantee.

SEC. 11 . Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, etc. — The grantee shall transfer, grant the usufruct of, sell nor assign this franchise or the rights and privileges acquired there under to any person, firm, company, corporation or entity, nor merge with any other corporation or entity without the prior approval of the Congress of the Philippines. Any person or entity to which this franchise is validly sold, transferred or assigned shall be subject to all same conditions, terms restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 12 . Self-regulation by any Undertaking of Grantee. — The grantee shall not require any prior censorship in any speech, play, act  or scene, or other matter to be broadcast or telecast from its stations: Provided , That the grantee, during any broadcast or telecast, may cut off from the air any speech, play, act or scene, or other matter being broadcast or telecast if the tendency thereof is to propose and/or or incite treason, rebellion or sedition, or the language used therein is indecent or immoral and willful failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause for the cancellation of this franchise.

SEC. 13. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all the other provisions not affected thereby shall valid.

SEC. 14 . Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration or repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so requires and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided for.

SEC. 15 . General Broadcast Policy Law. — The grantee shall comply with and be subject to the provisions of a general broadcast policy law which Congress may hereafter enact.

SEC. 16 . Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines on its compliance with the terms and conditions of its franchise and on its operations within sixty (60) days from the end of every year.

SEC. 17 . Effectivity Clause. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days from the date of its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on March 21, 1994 and February 8, 1995, respectively.

Approved:

FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Lapsed into the law on JUL 16 1995 without the signature of the President, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.

Source: Presidential Management Staff