H. No. 10225

Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Tenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, nineteen hundred and ninety-seven.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8470]

AN ACT CREATING THE PROVINCE OF COMPOSTELA , VALLEY FROM THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO DEL NORTE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a new province from the present Province of Davao del Norte, to be known as the Province of Compostela Valley. The Province of Compostela Valley shall comprise the municipalities of Monkayo, Montevista, Laak, New Bataan, Compostela, Maragusan, Nabunturan,Mawab, Maco, Mabini, and Pantukan. The remaining municipalities of Tagum, Asuncion, Kapalong, New Corella.Talaingod, Sto. Tomas, Panabo, Carmen, Babak, Samal and Kaputian shall comprise the Province of Davao del Norte.

SEC. 2. The seat of government of the Province of Davao del Norte shall be the Municipality of Tagum, and that of the Province of Compostela Valley shall be the Municipality of Nabunturan.

SEC. 3. The Province of Davao del Norte shall be divided into two (2) legislative districts as follows.

District I – Tagum, Asuncion, Kapalong, Talaingod and New Corella; and

District II – Panabo, Carmen, Babak, Samal, Kaputian and Sto. Tomas.

SEC. 4. The Province of Compostela Valley shall be divided into two (2) legislative districts as follows:

District I – Monkayo, Montevista, Maragusan, New Bataan and Compostela; and

District II – Laak, Mawab, Nabunturan, Maco, Mabini and Pantukan.

SEC. 5. The creation of the Province of Compostela Valley, as provided in this Act, shall become effective upon approval of the majority of the votes eastern a plebiscite called for the purpose which shall be conducted and supervised by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) within sixty (60) days from the date of the effectivity of this Act, in the political units affected.

The expenses for the plebiscite shall be charged to the Province of Davao del Norte.

SEC. 6. The elective provincial officials of the present Province of Davao del Norte who were elected in the May 11, 1995 elections, shall continue to serve in the province that they will choose: Provided , That they shall continue to receive the salaries they are receiving at the time of the approval of this Act, until the new readjustments of salaries in accordance with law: Provided , further , That where a position in both provinces becomes vacant as a consequence of the creation of the Province of Compostela Valley, all officials as may be necessary to fill in all vacancies in elective positions for the two provinces shall, for the time being, be appointed by the President of the Philippines, and shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected and qualified in the first local elections immediately following the approval of this Act.

SEC. 7. The present appointive officials and employees of the Province of Davao del Norte shall continue to perform their duties in the same province: Provided , That they shall continue to receive the salaries they are receiving at the time of approval of this Act, until the new readjustments of salaries in accordance with law.

All positions for appointive officials and employees for the Province of Compostela Valley shall be open for application and must be filled in within sixty (60) days from the date of ratification of this Act. Provided, That this shall be done without prejudice to the present appointive officials and employees of the present Province of Davao del Norte, who may wish to serve in the Province of Compostela Valley.

SEC. 8. The three (3) incumbent representatives of the present Province of Davao del Norte shall continue to represent the three (3) existing legislative districts of the province until the expiration of their term of office. The proposed legislative districting contained in this Act shall take effect in the next election for congressional representatives immediately following the approval of this Act.

SEC. 9. Upon the effectivity of this Act, the obligations, funds, assets and other properties of the present Province of Davao del Norte shall be divided proportionately between the Province of Davao del Norte and the Province of Compostela Valley by the President of the Philippines upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

SEC. 10. During the first year of implementation of tins Act the internal revenue allotment allocated to Davaodel Norte pursuant to Section 285 of the Local Government Code shall be proportionately divided between the two (2) provinces of Davao del Norte and Compostela-Valley in accordance with the terms and conditions as may be set in the resolution to be submitted to the Department of Budget and Management by the incumbent SangguniangPanlalawigan of Davao del Norte Province, in consultation with the incumbent representatives of Davao del Norte Province! Thereafter, the provinces of Davao del Norte and Compostela Valley shall be entitled to an internal revenue allotment as authorized under the said Local Government Code.

SEC. 11.This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 10, 1998 and January 9, 1998, respectively.

(Sgd.) LORENZO E. LEYNES, JR. Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: JAN 30 1998

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Management Staff