MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1201

EXTENDING THE TERM OF MT. PINATUBO ASSISTANCE, RESETTLEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION UNTIL 31 DECEMBER 2000

WHEREAS , Sec. 6 of Republic Act No. 7637 which created the Mt. Pinatubo Assistance, Resettlement and Development Commission (MPARDC) provides that the Commission shall have a term of six (6) years;

WHEREAS , the same law provides that the President may, within six (6) months prior to the expiration of said term, extend the existence of the Commission for a period of not more than three (3) years;

WHEREAS , the six-year term of the Commission shall end on 19 October 1998; and,

WHEREAS , there is need to extend the term of MPARDC to complete its critical tasks on the rehabilitation, security and welfare of the Mt. Pinatubo victims as well as ensure the proper transfer of its programs and activities to concerned agencies.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby extend the term of MPARDC from 20 October 1998 to 31 December 2000 to undertake the following tasks:

1. Finalization of documentary requirements for the awarding of resettlement housing benefits to duly validated Mt. Pinatubo victims in accordance with existing policies;

2. Completion of rehabilitation and/or repair of roads, utilities and other support facilities in the resettlement sites;

3. Turn-over of resettlement sites administration and components to the appropriate national and local government agencies and other entities;

4.  Provision of resettlement assistance to remaining lahar and flood victims in evacuation centers;

5. Operationalization of on-going and existing resettlement-based livelihood facilities and projects;

6. Strengthening of the capabilities of resettled victims to participate in the development of their respective communities;

Preparation of accounting and reportorial requirements to Congress; and

8. Other tasks and activities that may be given by the President.

All concerned agencies shall transfer to MPARDC all balances of funds, records, properties, other assets and liabilities of the defunct Task Force Mt. Pinatubo which are still in their respective possessions or under their control as mandated under Sec. 17 of R.A. 7637. A report on the action taken herein shall be submitted to the Office of the President within thirty (30) days from the date of this Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia