PROCLAMATION NO. 470

DECLARING THE FIRST WEEK OF OCTOBER OF EVERY YEAR AS LINGGO NG KATANDAANG FILIPINO (ELDERLY FILIPINO WEEK)

WHEREAS , The United Nations adopted the General Assembly Resolution 37/51 of 3 December 1982 to pursue an International Action Plan on Ageing;

WHEREAS , The Executive Department, through the Department of Social Welfare and Development, is responsible for the development of a social welfare programme designed to promote the well-being of the elderly;

WHEREAS , Republic Act 7432 maximizes the contribution of Senior Citizens to nation building and grants benefits and special privileges to senior citizens who are at least 60 years of age with an income not exceeding P60,000 annually;

WHEREAS , The elderly population is becoming the fastest growing sector of the population and is expected to double before the year 2000;

WHEREAS , The increasing population of elderly persons is entitled to adequate food, shelter, clothing, and health care and should be provided with opportunities for livelihood, family and community support and self-help;

WHEREAS , Elderly persons should, likewise, have access to appropriate educational and training programmes either as participants or as resource providers, considering their wealth of experience and capabilities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Proclamation No. 1503, s. 1975, and declare the period from October 1 to 7, 1994, and every first week of October of every year as Linggo ng Katandaang Filipino (Elderly Filipino Week).

The Department of Social Welfare and Development, the Department of Health, Department of Education, Culture and Sports, Department of the Interior and Local Government, and Coalition of Services for the Elderly (COSE) shall coordinate with and provide the necessary assistance to the Federation of Senior Citizens Associations of the Philippines (FSCAP), a non-government organization with nationwide machinery for carrying out the activities for the week. The Secretary of Social Welfare and Development shall chair the national committee it is to constitute, with FSCAP as permanent Secretariat.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President:

Executive Secretary