MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1214

DECLARING 1998 AS JOSEFA LLANES ESCODA CENTENNIAL YEAR AND SEPTEMBER 20, 1998 AS A SPECIAL DAY IN THE PROVINCE OF ILOCOS NORTE

WHEREAS, Josefa Llanes Escoda is considered as one of the country’s most illustrious Filipino women who championed the cause of the civic and social services and was the Founder of the Girl Scouts of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, having been an active member of the American Red Cross-Philippine Chapter, Josefa Llanes Escoda has been dubbed as the Philippine’s Florence Nightingale for her untiring and genuine commitment for the poor and the needy;

WHEREAS, in her capacity as Executive Secretary of the Philippine Anti-Leprosy Society and other socio-civic organizations, Josefa Llanes Escoda had strongly campaigned for the improvement of the laborer’s lot and the establishment of the Boy’s town;

WHEREAS, Josefa Llanes Escoda’s exemplary courage and heroism in giving food and medicine to Filipino and American prisoners then interned at San Fernando, Pampanga; University of Santo Tomas, Manila; Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija and Los Baños, Laguna, during the Pacific War, earned for her the distinction and honor as one of the greatest heroines of the last Pacific War;

WHEREAS, in August 1944 Josefa Llanes Escoda, who had been under the surveillance by the Japanese, was arrested and taken to Fort Santiago in Intramuros where she joined her late husband Antonio Escoda and the late Gen. Vicente Lim who were earlier taken captive by the Japanese;

WHEREAS, after suffering inhumane tortures in 1945, Josefa Llanes Escoda along with fellow war prisoners were executed by the Japanese authorities;

WHEREAS, in recognition of Josefa Llanes Escoda’s heroic deed during World War II and her exemplary accomplishments and priceless contributions as Founder of the Girls Scouts of the Philippines and organizer of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs of the Philippines, Presidential Proclamations were issued by Malacañang (PP# 166 by Pres. Carlos P. Garcia and PP#31 by Pres. Corazon C. Aquino), declaring September 20 as Josefa Llanes Escoda Day;

WHEREAS, September 20, 1998 will mark the centennial of the birth anniversary of Josefa Llanes Escoda, it is only fitting that such a significant event is celebrated with appropriate activities not only in her hometown in Dingras, Ilocos Norte but throughout the country as well;

WHEREAS, to memorialize her heroic exploits and Girl Scouting ideals which she passed on as legacy to the young girls of the Philippines, with appropriate tributes and ceremonies, it is most fitting to declare a Centenary Year and a Special Day in Ilocos Norte Province for Josefa Llanes Escoda;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 1998 as Josefa Llanes Escoda Centenary Year and September 20, 1998 as a special day in the province of Ilocos Norte;

A Special Committee is hereby created to take charge of the nationwide preparations to commemorate the centennial of the birth anniversary of Josefa Llanes Escoda on September 20, 1998, to be composed of the following:

The Committee is hereby designated to take charge of the celebration and to undertake the following activities:

1. Prepare the general program of the centenary and submit a copy of same to the President of the Philippines for his information;

2. Publication of Josefa Llanes Escoda Biography;

3. Conduct of Josefa Llanes Escoda Centennial Exhibit in various parts of the country;

4. Promote commemorative celebrations throughout the Philippines;

5. Collect, edit and publish the important speeches and state papers of Josefa Llanes Escoda that have not been published yet;

6. Conduct a nationwide contest in painting and sculpture and in music that shall appropriately honor Escoda; and,

7. Coordinate with the Bureau of Posts relative to the issuance of commemorative stamps and cause the issuance of commemorative medals for Escoda Centenary.

Funding for the various commemorative activities shall be sourced from the regular budget of concerned agencies.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 29th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia