MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 56

DECLARING SEPTEMBER 25-30, 1992 AND EVERY THEREAFTER AS THE LINGGO NG KABATAAN IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS , it is the state policy, under Section 13, Article II of the 1987 Constitution that “[T]he State recognizes the vital role of the youth in nation-building and shall promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well-being. It shall inculcate in the youth patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and civic affairs”;

WHEREAS , Section 439(a), Chapter 10, Book III of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 provides that “[E]very barangay shall, in coordination with the Pederasyon ng mga Sangguniang Kabataan at all levels, conduct an annual activity to be known as the Linggo ng Kabataan on such date as shall be determined by the Office of the President”;

WHEREAS , Articles 208 and 209 of Rule XXVIII of Administrative Order No. 270 Prescribing the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the Local Government Code of 1991 provides for the Observance of the Linggo ng Kabataan and its Activities;

WHEREAS , it is desirable that the achievements of the Filipino Youth in their chosen fields of endeavor which significantly contributes to the development of the nation be given recognition and attention by the people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare September 25-30, 1992, and every year thereafter as the Linggo ng Kabataan. As mandated by Articles 208 and 209 of Rule 28 of Administrative Order No. 270 Prescribing the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code of 1991 every province, city, municipality, and barangay in coordination with the Pederasyon ng mga Sangguniang Kabataan shall conduct the following activities during the Linggo ng Kabataan:

(a) Election of the counterparts of all elective and appointive local officials, as well as heads of NGAs stationed or assigned in the territorial jurisdiction of the LGU, among in school and community youth residing in the LGU concerned from ages thirteen (13) to seventeen (17). During said week, they shall hold office as boy and girl officials and shall perform such duties and conduct such activities as may be provided in the ordinance enacted pursuant to the Local Government Code;

(b) Commemoration of young Filipino heroes who made significant contributions to the development of the country or locality;

(c) Recognition and awarding of outstanding youths and youth organizations for their achievements and contributions to national development; and

(d) Awareness campaign on environmental issues, sports festivals and competitions, cultural festivals, arts and skills exhibition, volunteer work, tour of historical places, and such other youth-oriented activities as may be deemed relevant.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia