MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 461

DECLARING THE FIRST WEEK OF SEPTEMBER OF EVERY YEAR AS THE NATIONAL CRIME PREVENTION WEEK

WHEREAS, crime prevention and suppression is a priority concern of the present administration and should likewise be of every citizen;

WHEREAS, there exists a need to adopt a total approach in combatting criminality with the active participation of the five pillars of the criminal justice system requiring the evolvement and intensified implementation of projects and activities by different sectors of society;

WHEREAS, there is a vital need to focus public attention on the importance of crime prevention;

WHEREAS, the observance of National Crime Prevention Week will generate community awareness and appreciation of the importance and value of crime prevention and foster interest and participation of the general public;

WHEREAS, there is a need for overall coordination of the different government agencies to ensure the success of the various programs to be undertaken during the National Crime Prevention Week;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me by law, do hereby declare the first week of September of every year as the National Crime Prevention Week under the auspices of the National Police Commission.

The Department of the Interior and Local Government shall be the lead agency in drawing up plans, programs, and activities with the active involvement of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the National Police Commission, the Peace and Order Councils, the Office of the Press Secretary, and the Public Information Agency, in the observance of National Crime Prevention Week.

All departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of the national government, local government units, government owned or controlled corporations, the private sector and the public at large are hereby enjoined to actively support the activities and programs for the National Crime Prevention Week.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31 st of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia