MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1050

DECLARING THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER, 1997 AND OF EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS “CIVIL SERVICE MONTH”

WHEREAS , the body of government officials and employees collectively known as the civil service has been an institution in the Philippines for almost a century since its establishment in September, 1900 by virtue of Public Law No. 5 (An Act for the Establishment and Maintenance of an Efficient and Honest Civil Service in the Philippine Islands);

WHEREAS , the Philippine civil service has steadfastly ensured continuing governmental operations through all the political changes and government administrations over the years;

WHEREAS , civil servants, whose total number exceed one million, constitute a significant sector of Philippine society dispensing governmental service down to the remotest barrio of the archipelago;

WHEREAS , in accordance with the sacred trust reposed in the civil service by the Constitution, civil servants must at all times perform their duties and responsibilities with efficiency, responsiveness, integrity and courtesy;

WHEREAS , it is but fitting that civil servants reaffirm their commitment to this public trust by commemorating the establishment of the Philippine civil service.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines; by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of September, 1997 and of every year thereafter as “Civil Service Month”.

The Civil Service Commission shall spearhead the yearly commemoration by determining the appropriate activities for the observance thereof. The Commission shall issue the necessary orders and circulars for the purpose.

All agencies, offices and instrumentalities of government shall implement the programs promulgated by the Civil Service Commission and shall actively participate, as well as ensure the active involvement of their officials and employees, in the activities that the Commission may deem necessary for the meaningful and successful celebration of the Civil Service Month.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of July in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia