MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 966

DECLARING 1997 AS TEOFILO SISON CENTENNIAL YEAR

WHEREAS, 1997 marks the centenary of the birth of the late Senator and Secretary Teofilo Sison, a distinguished Filipino statesman who left behind an unforgettable and exemplary legacy of an honest, competent, nationalistic service to the Filipino people;

WHEREAS, his brilliance as a lawyer was recognized by the Supreme Court in 1914 when it authorized him to take the bar examination without a formal legal education based on his work after receiving his Bachelor of Arts Degree from UST;

WHEREAS, because of his proven and highest degree of excellence in governmental affairs and wisdom as jurist and legislator he was appointed and served as Chief legal adviser in Malacañang of the late President Elpidio Quirino.

WHEREAS, through his patriotic ardor, broad and varied public career, talent and leadership, he successfully laid the foundation of the national defense system of the Philippines as the first Secretary of Defense;

WHEREAS, Senator-Secretary Sison was privileged to serve in the three (3) branches of the government for several decades: the legislative, as twice elected senator of the Philippines ably representing the second Senatorial District of Pangasinan, La Union and Zambales; the executive, as Provincial Governor of Pangasinan, first Secretary of Interior, first Secretary of National Defense, Secretary of Justice, Secretary of Justice and Labor, Secretary of the Budget, Chairman of the Civilian Emergency Administration and Chairman of the Executive Committee for the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philippines in 1935 pursuant to the Tydings-McDuffie Law; and the judiciary, as Associate Justice of the first Court of Appeals organized in 1936.

WHEREAS, in all three (3) branches of government he left behind an exemplary record of leadership, loyalty to duty and competence in performance, an inspiring achievement worthy of emulation by all, and a precious legacy to the youth;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL, V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested upon me by law, do hereby declare the year 1997 as Teofilo Sison Centennial Year.

The National Commission for Culture and the Arts, and the National Historical Institute in coordination with:

1 The Kaluyagan Nen-Palaris

2) The Daughters of Princess Urduja

3) Senator-Secretary Teofilo L. Sison Foundation

4) The Department of Education, Culture and Sports

are hereby designated collectively in-charge of the celebration to undertake the following activities:

1) Prepare the general program of the Centennial and submit a copy of the same to the President for his information;

2) Promote and direct commemorative celebrations throughout the province of Pangasinan;

3) Collect, edit and publish the important works, articles, speeches, and state papers of Senator-Secretary Teofilo Sison;

4) Install fitting and inspiring monuments or markers in honor of the late Senator-Secretary Teofilo Sison in the appropriate and proper places;

5) Coordinate with concerned government agencies relative to the issuance of commemorative stamps and medals for the Teofilo Sison Centennial;

6) Prepare a photo exhibit which will chronicle the life and achievements of Teofilo Sison for the purpose of inspiring the youth to emulate his life of humble, honest and exemplary public service. This exhibit will be implemented in coordination with the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.

The Commission and the Institute are authorized to receive gifts or donations, including funding, materials and services for use in the above mentioned activities, subject to the provisions of law, in particular Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 373 dated 09 January 1974 and Section 21 of R.A. No. 7356 dated 03 April 1992.

The Commission and the Institute are likewise empowered to call on any department, bureau, office or agency of the government, including government owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as they may need in the discharge of their functions.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12 th day of February in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia