MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1250

EXCLUSION OF MINERAL RESOURCE-RICH AREAS OF CAGRARAY ISLAND, ALBAY FROM THE BICOL REGION TOURISM MASTER PLAN

WHEREAS , the Bicol Region Tourism Master Plan (BRTMP) serves as the blueprint for the development and promotion of tourism in the Bicol Region, the implementation of which will generate livelihood and employment opportunities therein;

WHEREAS , the BRTMP embraces mineral resource-rich areas found in the Island of Cagraray, Albay Province;

WHEREAS , the inclusion of these mineral resource-rich areas in the BRTMP precludes the utilization and development of the island’s mineral resources and caused the cessation of exploratory mining and related activities, thereby depriving investors of the return on their investments and the local residents of employment opportunities;

WHEREAS , the sustainable development and utilization of natural resources, which includes mineral resources, is being promoted and encouraged by the government in accordance with the Philippine Mining Act (RA No. 7942, s. 1995);

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare and order:

SECTION 1. Exclusion of Mineral Resource-Rich Areas in Cagraray Island from the Coverage of the BRTMP . Upon the recommendation of the Regional Technical Working Group (RTWG) composed of representatives from the regional offices of the Department of Tourism, National Economic and Development Authority, Presidential Commission on Bicol Tourism Special Development Project, and representatives from the Provincial Government of Albay, Municipal Government of Bacacay, Albay Provincial and Bacacay Municipal Tourism Councils, and in consultation with the concerned local communities, the mineral-rich areas in Cagraray Island as delineated in the attached map which forms part and parcel of this document, are hereby excluded from the coverage of the Bicol Region Tourism Master Plan.

SECTION 2. Resumption of Mining and Related Activities . Mining and related activities that were stopped in the mineral resource-rich areas included in the coverage of the BRTMP may be allowed to resume upon the certification by the Region V Mines and Geo-sciences Bureau, Provincial Government of Albay and Municipal Government of Bacacay that the said areas are within the mineral source-rich areas delineated in accordance with the provisions of Section 1 above, and upon the completion of pertinent requirements pursuant to existing laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 3. Exclusion of Certain Areas from Mining and Related Activities. The Regional Technical Working Group shall determine the areas within the delineated mineral resource-rich areas that need to be protected from mining and related-activities for, among others, their tourism, ecological, archeological values/significance. The RTWG shall coordinate with the Region V Mines and Geosciences Bureau for the revocation and/or the non-issuance of mining and other pertinent permits for said areas.

SECTION 4. Effectivity . This proclamation shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9 th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

BY THE PRESIDENT: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia