MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 520

DECLARING 12 JANUARY 1995 AS A DAY TO COMMEMORATE THE CELEBRATION OF WORLD YOUTH DAY IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS , the United Nations’ (UN) declaration of 1985 as the International Year of the Youth has brought forth a Papal Tradition of Celebrating the World Youth Day;

WHEREAS , the World Youth Day aims to bring together young people from all over the world to understand various cultures, work together for justice and peace, and communicate in youthful unity a message of faith, hope and love to the world;

WHEREAS , the Philippines fully supports the United Nations’ declaration and the objectives of the World Youth Day;

WHEREAS , there is a need to provide the opportunity for all Filipinos, especially the youth, to fully participate in the World Youth Day activities.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me in by law, do hereby declare 12 January 1995 as a day to commemorate the celebration of World Youth Day in the Philippines. In this regard, the following guidelines are hereby issued:

1. Everyone is enjoined to actively participate in the most meaningful manner in the celebration of the World Youth Day.

2. All public sector employees in the National Capital Region who wish to participate in World Youth Day activities are authorized to do so.

3. Private sector employers and employee unions/organizations are encouraged to provide arrangements on a voluntary basis for their participation in World Youth Day activities.

4. Classes in all schools for all levels, both public and private, which are under the supervision of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, in the National Capital Region are suspended from 9 – 17 January 1995 to allow the use of school facilities for World Youth Day activities and to facilitate the participation and mobilization of students in said activities. Schools in the NCR which are not supervised by DECS may issue their respective suspension of classes, as may be necessary, within the period.

5. Heads of schools outside the NCR are enjoined to make arrangements for their faculties, students, and personnel to participate in World Youth Day activities.

6. All national and local government departments/agencies and instrumentalities involved with the activities of the World Youth Day and concerned with maintaining peace and order, smooth traffic flow, health services, fire protection, utility services, and other similar emergency services are directed to provide 24-hour continuous regular service on 12 January 1995 and for the entire duration of the Papal visit.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia