MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 537

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM FEBRUARY 1, 1995 TO FEBRUARY 28, 1996 AS THE YEAR OF INTERNAL MEDICINE IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Philippines will host the XXIII International Congress of Internal Medicine to be held from February 1 to 6, 1996;

WHEREAS, the said international congress will provide an international forum for internists to exchange scientific information with their counterparts; to discuss recent advances in internal medicine and its subspecialties; to tackle problems common to many countries or to specific population sectors and to seek their solution, as well as to give opportunity for the local internists to renew and expand professional friendships and for the foreign internists to enjoy exposure to the Philippine environment for their mutual enrichment, both professionally and culturally; and finally, to provide contract for the young internists and those from developing countries with eminent senior internists thru this Congress as an educational forum in which they can participate and learn of developments in a broad range of pertinent areas;

WHEREAS, the holding of such an important event will do honor to the  Filipino nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from February 1, 1995 to February 28, 1996 as the Year of Internal Medicine in the Philippines, under the auspices of the XXIII International Congress of Internal Medicine.

All government department, agencies and offices including government owned or controlled corporations are hereby directed to extend their assistance and support to the XXIII International Congress of Internal Medicine.

Non-government organizations and the private sectors are hereby urged to lend their full cooperation to this undertaking.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21 st day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia

Note: This issuance is followed by Proclamation No. 540, s. 1995.