MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 728

DECLARING 1996 AS PRESIDENT CARLOS P. GARCIA CENTENNIAL YEAR

WHEREAS, the year 1996 marks the centenary of the birth of the late President Carlos P. Garcia, eminent legislator, administrator, lawyer, poet, orator, philosopher, guerilla leader, educator and statesman;

WHEREAS, Carlos P. Garcia had devoted a great part of his life in selfless, dedicated and sincere service to our country and people as a teacher, representative, Governor, Senator, Vice-President and later, President of the Republic, and finally, as President of the 1971 Constitutional Convention;

WHEREAS, during his term as President of the Republic, Carlos P. Garcia strongly advocated the “Filipino First” Policy which served as a guide for his official acts and actuations, particularly in the economic field;

WHEREAS, during his stint as delegate and President of the 1971 Constitutional Convention, Carlos P. Garcia served as a paragon of inspiration in the colossal task of adopting a Constitution that would embody and undertake the highest ideals and aspirations of our people;

WHEREAS, it is timely and significant to commemorate the accomplishments of the late President Carlos P. Garcia on the occasion of the centennial of his birth;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the year 1996 as Carlos P. Garcia Centennial Year in consonance with the Decade of the Centennial of Filipino Nationalism.

The National Commission for Culture and the Arts, hereinafter referred to as the Commission and the National Historical Institute, hereinafter referred to as the Institute, in coordination with the President Carlos P. Garcia Foundation, Inc., are hereby designated to jointly take charge of the celebration and to undertake the following activities:

1. Prepare the general program of the Centennial and submit a copy of the same to the President for information;

2. Promote and direct commemorative celebrations throughout the Philippines, specially in municipalities, schools and places named after the late President Carlos P. Garcia;

3. Collect, edit and publish the important works, articles, speeches and state papers of President Garcia that have not been published;

4. Install fitting and inspiring monuments or markers, in honor of the late President Garcia in the appropriate and proper places;

5. Restore the birth place and other places which are significant to the life and times of the late President Garcia;

6. Coordinate with concerned government agencies relative to the issuance of commemorative stamps and medals for the Carlos P. Garcia Centennial; and,

7. Prepare a documentary film on the life of Carlos P. Garcia.

The Commission and Institute may constitute an Executive Committee and such other committees as may be deemed necessary, and with membership from both the government and the private sector, to undertake historical and cultural activities related to the centenary celebration.

The Commission and the Institute are authorized to receive gifts or donations, including funding, materials and services, for use in the above mentioned activities, subject to Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 373 dated 09 January 1974 and Section 21 of R.A. No. 7356 dated 03 April 1992.

The Commission and the Institute are likewise empowered to call on any department, bureau, office or agency of the government, including government owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of their functions relative to the centenary celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of February, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia