MALACA Ñ ANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO 1066

DECLARING A NATIONAL NEONATAL TETANUS ELIMINATION CAMPAIGN STARTING 1997

WHEREAS, tetanus among newborns or Neonatal Tetanus (NT) is still a major threat to children’s lives;

WHEREAS, this disease should no longer occur because it is preventable through vaccination of women, before childbirth and that the available vaccine is safe, effective and inexpensive;

WHEREAS, the disease has been observed to cluster in high risk areas and communities and noted to have been reduced to 1 case per 1000 live birth per year in the Philippines but not in each province, city or municipality;

WHEREAS, in 1989, the World Health Assembly called for a worldwide elimination of neonatal tetanus (NT);

WHEREAS, Local Government Units (LGUs) are empowered to meet and resolve local health problems;

WHEREAS, the Department of Health has the necessary technical and other elimination strategies.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare a Neonatal Tetanus Elimination campaign targeted at provinces and cities with reported NT cases. To achieve this, I hereby enjoin the following:

The local government units specifically the province and city levels to take the lead in implementing the NT elimination strategies as follows:

1.1 identify the NT “high risk” areas according to:

the high number of NT cases the low Tetanus Toxoid (TT) vaccination coverage of women (at least 2 doses of TT before delivery of the baby) the high presence of traditional birth attendants of “hilots” especially the untrained hilots which may mean high numbers of “unclean” births the absence of available data on any of the above

1.2 identify reasons why these problems continue to exist

1.3 conduct thorough information and education campaigns (IEC) to clarify and plan community-wide intervention such as immunization of others and women.

1.4 monitor and sustain anti-tetanus protection among women of child-bearing age.

1.5 monitor the impact of these NT elimination statistics.

2. The Department of Health (DOH) to define the details of the NT Elimination campaign and coordinate and establish necessary linkages.

3 The other government agencies, non-governmental organization, civic and religious groups, professional groups and other private sectors to actively support and participate.

This campaign and collaboration shall continue until newborns no longer die from neonatal tetanus in the Philippines.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26 th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (SGd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia