MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 615

DECLARING THE PHILIPPINE EAGLE AS THE NATIONAL BIRD OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS , it is the policy of the State to conserve and develop our patrimony and to protect and advance the right of the people to a balanced and healthful environment in accordance with the rhythm and harmony of nature;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Eagle is the best biological indicator of the quality of our forest ecosystems and is the flagship species in the conservation of Philippine wildlife;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Eagle, scientifically known as the Pithecophaga jafferyi , is a natural treasure found only in the Philippines and as such has become a source of national pride;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Eagle, whose uniqueness, strength, power, and love for freedom, exemplifies the Filipino people;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Eagle offers immense ecological, aesthetic, educational, historical, recreational and scientific value to the Philippines and the Filipino people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby proclaim and declare the Philippine Eagle as the National Bird of the Philippines.

Pursuant hereto, all government offices, agencies, and instrumentalities are hereby enjoined to ensure the proper conservation, protection, preservation, and management of the Philippine Eagle.

The Department of Environment and Natural Resources is hereby directed to secure the viability of the existing Philippine Eagle population by:

1. Establishing sanctuaries in areas where the Philippine Eagle is known to exist;

2. Promoting the participation of local communities in the management of the Philippine Eagle’s habitat through stewardship agreements or providing them access to the DENR’s community based programs;

3. Accelerating and expanding field research and monitoring activities on the Philippine Eagle; and

4. Promoting public awareness and education on the Philippine Eagle.

IN WITNESS HEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of July, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia