PROCLAMATION NO. 867

AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 496 BY DECLARING DECEMBER 3 TO 9 OF EVERY YEAR AS “NATIONAL ENERGY WEEK”

WHEREAS , Republic Act 7638 approved the creation of the Department of Energy on December 9, 1992;

WHEREAS , Section 2 (a) of the Act declares that it is the policy of the State to ensure a continuous, adequate and economic supply of energy with the end-view of ultimately achieving self-reliance in the country’s energy requirements through the integrated and intensive exploration, production, management and development of the country’s indigenous energy resources, and through the judicious conservation, renewal and efficient utilization of energy to keep pace with the country’s growth and economic development and taking into consideration the active participation of the private sector in the various areas of energy resource development;

WHEREAS , it is imperative to create public awareness and focus attention on the energy program of the government and likewise encourage the public to actively participate and contribute to the enhancement of the same;

WHEREAS , former President Corazon C. Aquino issued Proclamation No. 496, series of 1989, declaring January 21 to 27 as National Energy Week and thereafter, the third week of January of every year;

WHEREAS , past celebrations of National Energy Week did not get the involvement needed from other concerned sectors because of their own calendar of celebrations which did not coincide with the declared National Energy Week under Proclamation No. 496;

WHEREAS , there is a need to coordinate activities of the energy sector including oil and gas companies, power utilities, professional and technical organizations, academe and government offices, among others, for greater participation and more fruitful cooperation during the Energy Week;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby amend Proclamation No. 496, series of 1989, by declaring December 3 to 9 of every year as National Energy Week to coincide with the anniversary of the Department of Energy. Appropriate celebration of the said week shall therefore be under the auspices of the Department of Energy.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS