MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 397

DECLARING THE MONTH OF JULY 1994 AS THE NATIONAL REGISTRATION MONTH FOR POTENTIAL SOCIALIZED HOUSING BENEFICIARIES

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7279, otherwise known as the Housing and Urban Development Act dated 24 March 1992, among others, provides the extension of socialized housing to the underprivileged and the homeless;

WHEREAS, the full implementation and distribution of benefits under Republic Act No. 7279 has been delayed in view of the lack of manpower and logistic support or inability of local government units to undertake the actual registration and thereby complete their respective masterlist of social housing beneficiaries; and,

WHEREAS, considering the urgency of completing the Masterlist, it is necessary to specify time frames within which vital activities should be completed and to seek the participation of the concerned sectors.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of July 1994 as the National Registration Month for Potential Socialized Housing Beneficiaries of R.A. 7279.

SECTION 1. Voluntary Registration. For the month of July 1994, all individuals who believe that they possess all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications of program beneficiaries under R.A. 7279, as stated under Section 17 of the said law, shall register with their respective local government units and shall provide the following information:

a. Site/location of the property occupied; b. Name of the owner of the property, if known to the occupant; c. Number of years of the occupant in the property; d. Present occupation of the occupant and monthly family income; e. Names and ages of dependents; and, f. Other relevant information.

SEC. 2. Responsibilities of Local Government Units . Pertinent to the registration, all local government units are hereby directed to undertake the following:

a. Provide the venue for the registration;

b. Collate, verify and process the data gathered/or data given by potential beneficiaries/applicants within sixty (60) days;

c. Provide the necessary logistics for the actual registration, collation, verification and processing of the data;

d. Submit to the Housing ad Urban Development and Coordinating Council a complete and verified Masterlist of Socialized Housing Beneficiaries within ninety (90) days;

e. Disseminate information relative to the registration.

SEC. 3. Responsibilities of Other Government Agencies. The following government agencies are also directed to provide assistance to the local government units in the national registration:

a. The Department of Interior and Local Government shall ensure that all local government units comply with the directive and shall provide police assistance during the registration;

b. The Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council shall submit a report for the President on the conduct and result of the national registration;

c. The Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor shall assist the local government units in the actual registration; and,

d. The Philippine Information Agency shall assist the local government units in disseminating information in preparation for the national registration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia