MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 429

DECLARING AUGUST 1 OF EVERY YEAR AS “FAMILY PLANNING DAY”

WHEREAS, Section 15, Article II, of the Philippine Constitution provides that “the State shall protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness among them”;

WHEREAS, Section 3, Article XV of the Philippine Constitution provides that “the State shall defend: 1) The right of spouses to found a family in accordance with their religious convictions and the demands of responsible parenthood; 2) The right of children to assistance, including proper care and nutrition, and special protection from all forms of neglect, abuse, cruelty, exploitation, and other conditions prejudicial to their development; 3) The right of the family to a family wage and income; and 4) The rights of families or family associations to participate in planning and implementation of policies and programs that affect them”;

WHEREAS, the Filipino nation is faced with health problems that threaten the lives of the most vulnerable among our population – the large number of women and children that would be denied of their right to health care, nutrition, knowledge and education, and better access to economic and social opportunities;

WHEREAS, underscoring the problems is the pace of our population growth and that of our capability to provide for our women and children which depends to a large measure on how we meet our population challenge;

WHEREAS, there is a need to launch an invigorated and intensified campaign that shall provide focus on family planning emphasizing safe motherhood and child survival;

WHEREAS, family planning allows the free choice of all Filipinos to choose the number and spacing of their children, consistent with their religious and moral beliefs;

WHEREAS, family planning is a critical component of proper Philippine Population Management, to achieve sustainable human development, and Philippines 2000;

WHEREAS, the family planning workers and volunteers have been on the front line in providing family planning services under sometimes difficult conditions, and therefore should be recognized for their unswerving dedication;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare August 1 of every year as “Family Planning Day.” The Department of Health with the cooperation of the different participating agencies (government and non-government organizations) shall plan for, organize, and coordinate the activities for the celebration of the day.

All government departments, agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to support and participate in the celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia