MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1023

DECLARING THE PERIOD JULY 3 TO 10, 1997 AS “STUDENT DEBATE WEEK”

WHEREAS , the Philippines, through the De La Salle University Debate Society, will host the 18th Australasian Debating Championship from July 3 to 10, 1997 in Manila;

WHEREAS , the Australasian Debating Championship is the second biggest gathering of student debaters, which is expected to gather about five hundred debaters from the Asia Pacific Region, some 350 of whom will come from 30 foreign countries in the Region;

WHEREAS , the Australasian Debating Championship is an opportunity for Filipino debaters, young and old, to gain exposure to world class debating tussles;

WHEREAS , the Philippines has earned the reputation and goodwill of superb hosting and handling of international conferences, meets and gatherings as a result of last year’s Asia Pacific Economic Council (APEC) Summit Meeting;

WHEREAS , the nations of the world that may be called upon to send delegates to any international gathering hosted by the Philippines expect nothing less than a well-prepared and well-managed gathering in the tradition of the 3rd APEC Summit Meeting;

WHEREAS , the highly successful hosting of the 3rd APEC Summit Meeting was the result of admirable consolidation of expertise and resources by the public and the private sectors under the direction and control of the government;

WHEREAS , it is only fitting and proper that the government and the private sectors lend a helping hand to the Organizing Committee under the control and direction of the De La Salle University Debate Society in making the 18th Australasian Debating Championship a highly successful gathering of the Region’s student debaters;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from July 3 to 10, 1997, as “Student Debate Week” and for this purpose I hereby direct all government agencies and government owned and controlled corporations to extend the necessary support to the 18th Australasian Debating Championship. I likewise urge the private sectors to lend a hand in making this international gathering of student debaters a success.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia