MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 311

PROCLAIMING THE ADOPTION OF THE 1993-1998 PHILIPPINE PLAN OF ACTION FOR NUTRITION

WHEREAS, Section 9, Article II of the 1987 Constitution provides for the following State policy: “The State shall promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies that provide adequate social services, promote full employment, a rising standard of living, and an improved quality of life for all”;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 491 (25 June 1974), as amended, declared “that nutrition is now a priority of the government to be implemented by all branches of government in an integrated manner”;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 491 (25 June 1974), as amended, created the National Nutrition Council for the purpose of formulating and implementing an integrated national program on nutrition;

WHEREAS, the National Nutrition Council has formulated the 1993-1998 Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition which was approved by the Cabinet on 20 July 1993;

WHEREAS, the 1993-1998 Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition is consistent with various global movements to eradicate hunger and malnutrition in the world, as enunciated in various international fora, including the following: the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) held in December 1992 in Rome, Italy during which a World Declaration and Global Plan of Action for Nutrition was ratified; the Conference on Ending Hidden Hunger held in 1990 in Montreal, Canada during which participating countries vowed to prevent, control, and eliminate deficiencies in vitamins and minerals; and the World Summit for Children held in 1989 in New York during which nutritional goals to ensure child survival and development were adopted; and

WHEREAS, the 1993-1998 Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition seeks to solve the country’s nutritional problems which continue to be a major impediment to national development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the adoption of the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition for 1993-1998 as the country’s blueprint for achieving nutritional adequacy for all and as an important element for international competitiveness, people empowerment and human development.

The National Nutrition Council, its Governing Board, Technical Secretariat and network of operations shall oversee and coordinate the implementation of the Plan in collaboration with local government units, non-governmental organizations, the private and the business sectors, international organizations, and the community, in general. The Council shall report to the Cabinet annually on the progress of the Plan during the Nutrition Month.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14 th day of DECEMBER in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia