MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 555

DECLARING METRO MANILA AS “CONVENTION CITY MANILA” AND CREATING A CONVENTION CITY MANILA — NATIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE [CCM-NOC]

WHEREAS , the meetings, conventions, incentives and exhibitions industries remain among the promising and resilient sectors of the tourism industry worldwide;

WHEREAS , these industries contribute significantly to projecting a positive image for the Philippines abroad, promoting international goodwill, facilitating the free exchange of ideas and transfer of technologies, generating foreign receipts and increasing employment and investment opportunities;

WHEREAS , Metropolitan Manila, popularly known as “Manila”, is the frequent venue for meetings, conventions and exhibitions, given its support infrastructure and demonstrated access to a broad range of professional expertise for conventions management;

WHEREAS , there is a need to maximize the utilization of these physical and human infrastructure to enhance Metropolitan Manila’s competitiveness as the site for meetings, conventions, exhibitions and the like in the Asia-Pacific;

WHEREAS , the Philippines is host to major international and regional conferences in 1995 and 1996;

WHEREAS , the Philippine meetings and conventions industry will celebrate its twentieth year in 1996;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Convention City Manila. Metropolitan Manila, composed of the eight cities of Caloocan, Makati, Mandaluyong, Manila, Muntinglupa, Pasay, Pasig and Quezon, and nine municipalities of Las Piñas, Malabon, Marikina, Navotas, Parañaque, Pateros, San Juan, Taguig and Valenzuela shall be launched as “Convention City Manila”.

SEC. 2. Convention City Manila Campaign. The Convention City Manila Campaign shall aim to promote and enhance Metropolitan Manila as the preferred venue for meetings, conventions, exhibitions and the like, in the Asia-Pacific. The Campaign shall initially be for two years, starting April 1995 and ending December 1996.

SEC. 3. Convention City Manila—National Organizing Committee [CCM-NOC]. To lead in the Campaign, the Convention City Manila — National Organizing Committee [CCM-NOC] is hereby constituted as follows:

Members: Undersecretary, Department of Foreign Affairs Undersecretary, Department of Trade and Industry Undersecretary, Office of the Press Secretary Undersecretary for Peace and Order, Department of Interior and Local Government Undersecretary, Department of Budget and Management Undersecretary, Department of Public Works and Highways Undersecretary, Department of Transportation and Communications Chairman, Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council

SEC. 4. Coordinating Committee. The CCM-NOC shall be assisted by a Coordinating Committee in the implementation of the Campaign composed of the following:

The Mayors of Metropolitan Manila The General Manager, Philippine International Convention Center The General Manager, Philippine Tourism Authority The General Manager, Manila International Airport Authority The President, Cultural Center of the Philippines The Executive Director, National Commission on Culture and the Arts The Executive Director, National Parks Development Committee The Administrator, Intramuros Administration The President, Philippine Airlines The President, Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry The President, Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster ng Pilipinas

Representatives of the largest associations of the following:

Hotels and Restaurants Travel agencies Tour operators sector Advertising agencies Convention/Exhibition organizers sector Aviation industry Shipping industry Other support industries/sectors that the CCM-NOC may so determine

The CCM-NOC Chairman may invite other representatives from the government and private sectors as he deems necessary to be members of this Committee for purposes of coordinating implementation of the Campaign.

SEC. 5. CCM-NOC Functions. The CCM-NOC shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate a two-year Workplan and Budget for the proper implementation of the Campaign.

b. Supervise, coordinate and monitor the Campaign implementation, including an aggressive sales and promotions program here and abroad.

c. Ensure the coordinated preparation of support plans for key meetings, conventions, exhibitions and the like, such as Security Plans, Rehabilitation Plans (i.e. for PICC and NAIA) and Communications Plans.

d. Perform other tasks as the President may assign from time to time.

SEC. 6. Bidding for International and Regional Meetings. All government agencies including government owned or controlled corporations, and interagency bodies and task forces active in participating in counterpart international or regional events, are encouraged to bid for Metropolitan Manila as the venue for international and regional meetings, conventions, exhibits and the like, in close coordination with the CCM-NOC.

SEC. 7. Government Support. The CCM-NOC Chairman may call upon any government agency for assistance to ensure the success of the Campaign.

SEC. 8. Secretariat. The CCM-NOC shall have the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation (PCVC) as its Secretariat, with its office as the PCVC’s Conventions and Incentive Travel Unit.

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Guidelines. The CCM-NOC shall adopt such implementing rules and guidelines as may be necessary to carry out its functions.

SEC. 10. Funding. The CCM-NOC Convention City Manila Campaign shall be funded with an allocation of P21.175 Million for 1995 and P20.6 Million for 1996, to be drawn entirely from the Trust Liability Account of the Department of Tourism for the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation, provided that the funding for Special Programs such as the Rehabilitation Programs of the Philippine International Convention Center and the Ninoy Aquino International Airport, shall be taken from appropriate sources as jointly recommended by the CCM-NOC and the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 11. Effectivity. This Proclamation shall take effect immediately

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of March, 1995.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia