MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 62

DECLARING A MORAL RECOVERY AND ENJOINING ACTIVE PARTICIPATION OF ALL SECTORS IN THE FILIPINO SOCIETY

WHEREAS, there is a need for moral renewal in order to eradicate the social ills that have plagued us for the past several decades, such as graft and corruption, patronage politics, apathy, passivity, mendicancy, factionalism and lack of patriotism;

WHEREAS, Article XIV, Section 3 (2) of the Constitution provides that “all educational institutions shall . . . inculcate patriotism and nationalism, foster love of humanity, respect for human rights, appreciation of the role of national heroes in the historical development of the country, teach the rights and duties of citizenship, strengthen ethical and spiritual values, develop moral character and personal discipline, encourage critical and creative thinking, broaden scientific and technological knowledge and promote vocational efficiency”;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Senate, on September 18, 1987 adopted the Shahani-sponsored Resolution No. 10 directing a Senate Task Force to inquire into the strengths and weaknesses of the Filipino Character with a view to solve the social ills and strengthen the nation’s moral fiber, thereby laying the groundwork for the national campaign for Moral Recovery;

WHEREAS, the Senate Task Force, after comprehensive study, has established the need to develop in the Filipino — (1) a sense of patriotism and national pride, or “pagmamalaki sa bansa” — a genuine love, appreciation and commitment to the Philippines and things Filipino; (2) a sense of the common good or “kakayahang magmalasakit” — the ability to look beyond selfish interests, a sense of community living, a sense of justice and a sense of outrage at its violation; (3) a sense of integrity and accountability, or “katapatan at pananagutan” — an aversion towards graft and corruption in society and an avoidance of the practice in one’s daily life; (4) the value and habits of discipline, hard work or “pagsisikap”, self-dignity and self-reliance; and (5) the value and habits of self-reflection and analysis or “pagpapahalaga at pagsusuri sa sarili”, the internalization of spiritual values, the emphasis on essence rather than on form;

WHEREAS, moral recovery is an integral aspect in ensuring success in the government’s economic development and people empowerment programs and projects;

WHEREAS, the Moral Recovery Program is conceived to be an important dimension of programs which this administration has already launched such as the KABISIG, the various poverty alleviation and countryside development programs, livelihood and basic services delivery, among others;

WHEREAS, there is a need to prepare the youth to respond to the challenges of modernization and the 21st century;

WHEREAS, there are existing mechanisms which can serve to promote and ensure a sustained Moral Recovery Program for national development and solidarity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the sovereign will of the Filipino people and the powers vested in me by the laws of the land, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Enjoining Active Participation in the Moral Recovery Program . Filipinos of all ages and all sectors of our society are hereby enjoined to actively participate in the national campaign for Moral Recovery.

The Moral Recovery Programs will primarily aim to inculcate the following virtues for national development: pride in being Filipino; caring and sharing; integrity and accountability; self-reliance; good manners and right conduct which shall also cover the value and habits of courtesy, discipline and respect for authority and institutions; people empowerment; and, self-reflection and analysis.

SECTION 2. Implementing Arm of the Moral Recovery Program . The KABISIG People’s Movement National Operations Center is hereby tasked to serve as the implementing arm of the Executive Branch’s Moral Recovery Program. Among others, it shall ensure the integration of moral values in the implementation of various KABISIG and other government programs and projects and shall coordinate with the Congress of the Philippines to ensure synchronized executive-legislative activities.

All Constitutional Commissions, bodies and the judiciary are enjoined to actively promote and participate in these efforts in view of their crucial role in the promotion of social justice and respect for human rights.

SECTION 3. The Creation of the Council of Advisers on Moral Recovery . A council of Advisers on Moral Recovery shall be constituted to advise the President on all matters pertaining to moral recovery. This shall be composed of individuals who are living exemplars of Filipino values and who should be emulated by the people. The Council of Advisers shall be named by the President within thirty (30) days from the signing of this Proclamation.

SECTION 4. Effectivity . This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia