MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 462

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF TACURONG AND M’LANG IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby-created in the Province of Cotabato two municipalities to be known as the municipalities of Tacurong and M’lang whose territories and boundaries are described as follows:

The Municipality of Tacurong: “Bounded on the east, by an imaginary straight line running northwesterly from a point in the boundary between Buluan and Koronadal, particularly at the sitio of Talic towards San Manuel, thence in the same direction to its intersection with another imaginary straight line, which shall serve as northern boundary, perpendicular to the above eastern boundary and passing through the municipal boundary monument along the national highway near the sitio of Gansing, between the municipalities of Dulawan and Buluan, towards the established boundary between the municipalities of Buluan and Dulawan; on the west, by the established and existing boundary between the municipalities of Dulawan and Buluan; on the south, by the established boundary between the municipalities of Buluan and Koronadal.” (Used in this description: Map of the municipality of Buluan submitted by the District Engineer of Cotabato showing the constituted barrios to compose the proposed municipality of Tacurong, Province of Cotabato, Scale 1:250,000.)

The Municipality of M’lang: “Bounded on the east, by an imaginary straight line starting from the municipal boundary monument MBM No. 3 at the northern edge of Sikatulan Forest, thence straight to MBM No. 2 at the southern edge of the same forest, and from thence running straight eastward, coinciding with the Kidapawan-Buluan boundary at MBM No. 1 situated on the same boundary; on the south, by an imaginary straight line from MBM No. 1 on the Kidapawan-Buluan boundary, thence straight to the point where the Damakling River branches on its easternmost and biggest branch, and from thence following the westward course of the Damakling River until the sitio of Dungos; on the west, by an imaginary straight line from Dungos running northward until the intersection of the Buluan-Kabacan-Kidapawan boundaries; on the north, by the Malamote Creek, starting from the intersection of the Buluan-Kabacan-Kidapawan boundaries and following the eastward course of the Malamote Creek until the intersection of this creek with the Kabacan-Kidapawan boundary, thence from this intersection running straight south to the starting point, MBM No. 3 at the northern edge of Sikatulan Forest.” (Used in this description: Map of Kidapawan showing the proposed municipality of M’lang, Province of Cotabato, Scale 1:250,000, submitted by the District Engineer.)

The municipality of Tacurong contains the following barrios: Tacurong which shall be the seat of the municipal government, San Manuel, Mangilala, Damaguit, Tubac, Dungoan, Maibo, Talic, San Felipe, New Iloilo, Bucay-Pait, Tangtangan, Tajahmuda and Katungal.

The municipality of M’lang contains the following barrios: M’lang which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Malamote, Tibao, Lika, Bialong, Inas, Bagong-tapay, Tawan-tawan, Dugong, Malasila, Tolonan, Minapan, and Damawato.

The organization herein made shall take effect upon appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 462 : Creating the Municipalities of Tacurong and M’lang in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (8), 3863-3864.