MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 132

AMENDING SECTION 1, RULE IV, OF THE CIVIL SERVICE RULES, REGARDING RATING OF EXAMINATION PAPERS

As an act of recognition of the invaluable services of veterans to the country and conformably with the spirit of Republic Act No. 65, as amended by Republic Act No. 154, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct that section 1 of the Civil Service Rule IV be, as it is hereby, amended to read as follows:

“1. Examination papers shall be rated according to their excellence on a scale of 100 and the subjects of each examination shall be given such relative weights as the Commissioner shall prescribe. Honorably discharged soldiers and sailors shall have 5 points added to their earned ratings in examinations for entrance to the classified service. Applicants for entrance examination who are honorably discharged and who establish by official records the present existence of a service-connected disability, and widows of honorably discharged soldiers and sailors, and wives of honorably discharged soldiers and sailors who, because of service-connected disability are themselves not qualified but whose wives are qualified for appointment, shall have 10 points added to their earned ratings; and this shall also apply to retired officers and enlisted men who establish through official sources the present existence of a service-connected disability in the same manner as is required of others who are granted disability preference. After examination papers have been rated competitors shall be duly notified of their standing in the examination.”

The Commissioner of Civil Service shall prepare and print such forms as may be necessary to give due effect to the provisions of this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 132 : Amending Section 1, Rule IV, of the Civil Service Rules, regarding rating of examination papers. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (4), 1120-1121.