MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 380

AMENDING SECTION ELEVEN-A OF ACT NUMBERED TWENTY-SEVEN HUNDRED AND SIX, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED SEVENTY-FOUR

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Four hundred twenty-two, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section eleven-A of Act Numbered Twenty-seven hundred and six, as amended by Republic Act Numbered Seventy-four, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 11-A. The total annual expenses of the Bureau of Private Schools shall be met by the regular amount appropriated in the annual Appropriation Act: Provided, however, That for additional expenses in the supervision and regulation of private schools, colleges and universities and in the purchase of textbooks to be sold to students of said schools, colleges and universities the President of the Philippines may authorize the Secretary of Education to levy an equitable assessment from each private educational institution equivalent to one per cent of the total amount accruing from tuition and other fees: Provided further, That no new positions shall be created by the Director of Private Schools unless approved by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Secretary of Education, nor shall any textbook be purchased or sold by the Director of Private Schools unless the purchase price or price of resale shall have been previously approved by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Secretary of Education: And Provided, finally, That the Secretary of Education may, in the interest of the service, delegate to the Bureau of Internal Revenue the actual collection of the assessment herein provided.

“The Collector of Internal Revenue, upon delegation by the Secretary of Education, shall, by regulation, prescribe the form, manner and time for levying and payment of the assessment, and non-payment of the assessment herein provided by any private school, college or university shall be sufficient cause for the cancellation by the Secretary of Education of the permit or recognition granted to it.”

SEC. 2. This Executive Order shall take effect upon its promulgation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 380 : Amending Section Eleven-A of Act Numbered Twenty-seven hundred and six, as amended by Republic Act Numbered Seventy-four. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 46 (12), 5891-5892.