MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 244

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF MOBO, BALENO, CAWAYAN, MANDAON, BALUD AND USON, IN THE PROVINCE OF MASBATE.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby created, in the Province of Masbate, six municipalities to be known as the municipalities of Uson, Mobo, Baleno, Balud, Cawayan and Mandaon, with the seats of government at the barrios of Uson, Mobo, Baleno, Balud, Cawayan and Mandaon, respectively.

The municipalities of Uson, Mobo and Balud, as herein organized, shall consist of the respective territories which the former municipalities of Uson, Mobo and Balud had at the time of their annexation to the municipalities of Dimasalang, Masbate and Milagros. The municipality of Baleno, as herein organized, shall consist of the territory which the former municipality of Baleno had at the time of its annexation to the municipality of Aroroy, plus the barrio of Magdalena of the municipality of Masbate. The municipality of Cawayan as herein constituted shall consist of the barrios and sitios of Nauco-Dacu, Maoco-Diot, Cobre, Piña, Guinlobngan, Gilotoñgan, Namatyan, Guiloñangan, Vegia, Bitlig, Recodo, Guiom, Campato, Lubigan, Cabayogan, Dalepi, Celodoño, Malbug, Bara, Naboyanan, Taberna, Mactan, Lagui-lagui, Nabayawan, Villahermosa, Polot, Bebejan, Calumpang, Palobandera, Cabug, Salvador, Matagbac, Cokok, Mahayahay, Panorama, Benteriales, Isok-dorang, Maihaw, Madbad, Tagaytay, Itombato, Segundo, Pin-as, Nabogtoan, Divisoria, Bongabon and Tobog, all in the municipality of Milagros. The municipality of Mandaon shall consist of the barrios and sitios of Mandaon, Nailaban, Maolingon, Tumalaytay, Bugtong, Alas, Tagpu, Nanipsan, Ayat, Gapus, Canomoy, Buri, Lo-oc, Cagmasoso and Palo Dacu, all in the municipality of Milagros.

The municipality of Dimasalang shall have its present territory, minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Uson. The municipality of Masbate shall have its present territory, minus the portions thereof included in the municipalities of Mobo and Baleno. The municipality of Aroroy shall have its present territory, minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Baleno. The municipality of Milagros shall have its present territory, minus the portions thereof included in the municipalities of Balud, Cawayan, and Mandaon.

The municipalities herein created shall each begin to exist upon the appoinment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 244 : Creating the Municipalities of Mobo, Baleno, Cawayan, Mandaon, Balud and Uson, in the Province of Masbate. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (7), 2741-2742.