MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 155

FIXING FRIDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1948, AS CENSUS DAY

WHEREAS, the census of the Philippines contemplated in Republic Apt No. 36, entitled “Census Act of Nineteen Hundred and Forty-Six,” was not taken on Wednesday, January 1, 1947, the day designated as Census Day in Executive Order No. 21, dated October 15, 1946; and

WHEREAS, the said Republic Act No. 36 has been amended by Republic Act No. 202, which provides that “a census of the Philippines shall be taken not later than November 1, 1948 and the President shall, by executive order, proclaim any day selected for census-taking as Census Day”;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, pursuant, to the provisions of Republic Act No. 36, as amended, do hereby designate Friday, October 1, 1948, as Census Day, on which date the enumeration of the population and the collection of all pertinent social and economic data about the Philippines shall begin and proceed on consecutive days from daylight to darkness, including Sundays and holidays until completed.

In accordance with the provisions of said Republic Act No. 36, as amended by Republic Acts Nos. 202 and 259, that “the necessary supervisors, enumerators and other subordinate personnel for the census work shall be appointed by the Director of the Census and Statistics and may be drafted from the personnel of the Government, including provincial, city, and municipal officials and employees, school teachers, city and municipal police forces, and members of the Philippine Army,” all Heads of Departments under the Executive Branch of the Government are hereby enjoined to authorize and direct all bureaus and offices respectively under them and provincial, city and municipal officials, as well as provincial constabulary commanders concerned, to make available for purposes of census-taking, the services of such of their personnel as may be requisitioned for the purpose: Provided, however, That the Director of the Bureau of the Census and Statistics, in the interest of economy and efficiency, shall make use as much as possible of the services of the teachers under the Bureau of Public Schools for the work of enumeration and inquiry whenever practicable; And provided, further, That the Division Superintendents of Schools, Provincial or City Treasurers, Provincial or City Fiscals, District or City Engineers, District or City Health Officers, and Provincial or City Auditors shall be ex-officio members of the provincial or city census boards which, under the law, shall assume full responsibility for census-taking within their respective territorial jurisdictions.

All such government personnel as may be drafted for the census work shall, unless otherwise directed by superior census authority, render service in the barrio, poblacion, municipality, city or province where they are actually working.

Executive Order No. 21, dated October 15, 1946, is hereby amended accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 155 : Fixing Friday, October 1, 1948, as Census Day. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (7), 2154-2155.