MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 185

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF CAUAYAN, NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF SIPALAY.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Sipalay, Maricalum and Cayhagan, together with certain portions of Bacuyagan, all of the municipality of Cauayan, Province of Negros Occidental, are hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Sipalay, with the seat of government at the barrio of Sipalay.

As herein organized the municipality of Sipalay shall have the following boundaries as described in Index Map of Cauayan Cadastre B. L. No. 193, Province of Negros Occidental, surveyed June, 1924, to July, 1927, by cadastral survey party No. 20-A, Bureau of Lands:

From a point along the shore in the barrio of Cartagena which is, traversed by North Latitude; 9° 50′ running eastward in a straight line along said Latitude 9° 5.0′ until it intersects East Longitude 122° 35′; thence in a straight north-to-south line following East Longitude 122° 35′ to its intersection with North Latitude 9° 40′; thence in a straight east-to-west line to where this line first touches the shore of Nabulao Bay; in the barrio of Bacuyagan; thence following the boundary of the municipal waters which Sipalay should have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code to the point of beginning.

The municipality of Cauayan shall consist of its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Sipalay.

The municipality herein organized shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 185 : Organizing certain barrios of the municipality of Cauayan, Negros Occidental, into an independent municipality under the name of Sipalay. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44 (11), 4166-4167.