MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 165

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF BALINGASAG, ORIENTAL MISAMIS, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Jasaan, Danao, Kamatayan or San Antonio, Bubuntugan, Solana, and Aplaya, all of the municipality of Balingasag, Oriental Misamis, are hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Jasaan, with the seat of government at the barrio of Jasaan.

The boundaries of the new municipality are as follows:

Beginning from a point located right at Punta Gorda marked by an old Spanish monument made of adobe blocks, 1 m. x 1 m. x 2 m., running due east until it intersects a point at the center of Cabulig River, 90 meters wide, 11.8 kms. away; thence following along the center of Cabulig River, 90 meters wide, running towards the sea in a southwestward direction up to a point in the center of Cabulig River which is an old boundary corner of the municipalities of Balingasag and Claveria; with an approximate distance of 6.75 kms.; thence due south, 4,300 kms., which is an old boundary corner between the municipalities of Balingasag and Claveria; thence S. 41° 15′ E. 4.000 kms., which is an old boundary corner of Balingasag and Claveria; thence S. 9° 45′ E., 1.450 kms., which is an old boundary corner of the municipalities of Claveria, Balingasag and Tagoloan; thence due West until it intersects a point on the shoreline which is located at the mouth and center of Caponoyan Creek, 10 meters wide, 6.58 kms. away and is an old boundary corner of the municipalities of Balingasag and Tagoloan; thence following the boundary of the marine waters which the municipality of Jasaan shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2331 of the Revised Administrative Code, to the point at Punta Gorda, which is the point of the beginning. (Bearings and distances are approximate.)

The municipality of Balingasag shall consist of its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Jasaan.

The organization herein made shall take effect on September 1, 1948.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 165 : Organizing certain barrios of the municipality of Balingasag, Oriental Misamis, into an independent municipality. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (8), 2596-2597.