MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 304

CALLING UPON ALL INHABITANTS OF THE PHILIPPINES AND MOBILIZING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES FOR THE INTENSIFICATION OF THE NATIONAL FOOD PRODUCTION CAMPAIGN.

WHEREAS, it has become imperative to take immediate steps to increase the local production of foodstuffs to fill the shortage created by limited importation thereof, to check their rise in price, and to reduce dollar expenditures for the import of such foodstuffs as may very well be grown in our country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. A nation-wide campaign for the production of foodstuffs suited to local conditions shall be further intensified under the direction of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, who is hereby designated as the General Manager of the national food production campaign.

SEC. 2. To carry this Order into effect, the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources is hereby empowered to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to insure the success of the campaign.

SEC. 3. The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources is hereby authorized to call upon such entities and instrumentalities of the Government as may be needed to give the necessary cooperation for the successful prosecution of the campaign.

SEC. 4. There are hereby created in each province, city and municipality, local committees to supervise the campaign, composed as follows:

Provincial Committee:

City Committee:

Municipal Committee:

SEC. 5. The Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Education, the Secretary of Finance, and the Secretary of Public Works and Communications shall instruct all officials under their respective departments mentioned in the preceding section to comply with all directives which the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources may issue from time to time in connection with this campaign, and to see to it that the same are observed by all private citizens concerned.

SEC. 6. All inhabitants and civic and religious organizations of the Philippines are hereby enjoined to participate actively in the production of foodstuffs and to carry out effectively the aims of the campaign. Employees of the various entities and agencies of the National, provincial, city and municipal governments, shall take the lead in the campaign and set the example in their respective communities in the cultivation of vacant lots and backyards and in undertaking poultry and piggery projects.

SEC. 7. For the effective accomplishment of the food production campaign, the provisions of Executive Order No. 223, dated June 14, 1949, should be given wide publicity so that wherever vacant agricultural lands of the public domain are available, facilities should be provided to expedite their occupation for the purposes herein set forth.

SEC. 8. Such funds as may from time to time be provided for by the National, provincial, city and municipal governments for undertaking the food production campaign authorized in this Order shall be disbursed and duly accounted for by the officials concerned with the approval of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 304 : Calling upon all inhabitants of the Philippines and mobilizing all government agencies and instrumentalities for the intensification of the National Food Production Campaign. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46 (2), 395-396.