MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 477

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 345, DATED SEPTEMBER 19, 1950, BY PROVIDING ADDITIONAL PURPOSES FOR WHICH DISBURSEMENTS MAY BE MADE OUT OF THE PEACE FUND

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby amend paragraph 4 of Executive Order No. 345, dated September 19, 1950, creating the Peace Fund Commission, by adding purpose (6) for which the peace fund shall be disbursed, so as to read as follows:

“Now, therefore, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Peace Fund Campaign Commission which shall be charged with the responsibility of raising funds from voluntary contributions to carry out the purposes of this Order. Said funds shall be (1) for the purchase of loose firearms and such other arms and equipment, as can be used to resist the violent elements in accordance with the provisions of Republic Acts Nos. 486 and 482; (2) for the compensation of additional members of the Armed Forces to be employed in the peace campaign; (3) for indemnity to the heirs of those who nay die or receive injuries in line of duty; (4) for other relief and assistance to civilians who may be engaged in the peace campaign; (5) for aid in the protection of the civilian population in case of emergency; and (6) for payment of cash rewards to civilians for the surrender, capture or killing or for information leading to the capture or killing of leaders of the dissidents and subversive organizations or for such other assistance rendered directly in connection with the current peace and order campaign and for intelligence and counter-intelligence expenses of the Department of National Defense. The amounts collected shall be allotted by authority of the President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of Chairman of the Commission, the Treasurer of the Commission and the Commissioner of the Budget. All the contributions and disbursements of the Commission shall be audited by the Auditor General or his representative in accordance with law.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 477 : Amending Executive Order No. 345, dated September 19, 1950, by providing additional purposes for which disbursements may be made out of the Peace Fund. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 47 (10), 5033.