MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 230

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS OF THE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF PANTAO-RAGAT, PROVINCE OF LANAO, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPAL DISTRICT UNDER THE NAME OF MATUNGAO

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Nunang, Matungao, Matampai, Pasayanon, Pangi, Somiorang, Batangan, Bangco, and Batal, all of the municipal district of Pantao-Ragat, Province of Lanao, are hereby organized into an independent municipal district under the name of Matungao with the seat of government at the barrio of Matungao. The municipal district herein organized is bounded:

On the north, by the municipality of Kauswagan, separated by the present boundary between the municipality of Kauswagan and the municipal district of Pantao-Ragat; on the east, by the municipality of Balo-i, separated by the present boundary between Pantao-Ragat and Balo-i; on the south, by the remaining portion of the municipal district of Pantao-Ragat, separated by a straight line coming from the old boundary between the municipal district of Pantao-Ragat and the municipality of Kolambugan and passes the boundary between the barrio of Pantao-Ragat, seat of the municipal district government of Pantao-Ragat, and Bangco, a barrio of the proposed municipal district of Matungao, nearest to the above barrio of Pantao-Ragat; and on the west by the municipality of Kolambugan, separated by the present boundary between the municipality of Kolambugan and the municipal district of Pantao-Ragat.

The municipal district of Matungao shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of June, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 230 : Organizing certain barrios of the municipal district of Pantao-Ragat, Province of Lanao, into an independent municipal district under the name of Matungao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 45 (6), 2393-2394.