MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 536

CREATING THE NATIONAL TRAFFIC COMMISSION AS AN ADVISORY BODY IN THE EFFECTIVE ENFORCEMENT OF ALL LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS REGULATING TRAFFIC ORDER, SAFETY OF TRAFFIC AND PEDESTRIANS; TO AVOID MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS; AND REGULATE TRAFFIC MOVEMENTS TO ACHIEVE EFFICIENCY AND ECONOMY.

WHEREAS, the injuries to and loss of human lives and damages to property caused by motor vehicle accidents have occurred so frequently that they have reached alarming proportions; and

WHEREAS, it is convenient and advisable to have an agency of the Republic of the Philippines to act as an advisory body in the effective enforcement of all laws, rules and regulations regulating traffic in the Philippines;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the National Traffic Commission to be composed of the following:

Commerce, or his representative

Transportation Operators Association)

Council, or his representative

Public Works and Communications

The National Traffic Commission shall have the following-functions and duties:

( a .) To compile traffic- data all over the Philippines covering all kinds of vehicles, motor or animal-drawn, using national roads, interprovincial roads, provincial and city roads and municipal roads; accidents which have occurred since the liberation causing injuries to and loss of human lives and damages to property; the volume thereof on each kind of road, paying special attention to populated centers; the number of human lives lost and the value of damages caused to property; and the time of the day and night when the volume of traffic is most heavy.

(b) To conduct a thorough study of ways and means of enforcing effectively all laws and traffic rules and regulations governing traffic and of coordinating and correlating the functions and duties of different offices to attain that end.

( c ) To implement its study of effective laws and means of enforcing all laws and traffic rules and regulations by organizing and conducting, with the cooperation of government and private agencies, a nation-wide campaign to inform the public of the basic provisions of the existing laws governing traffic and of the necessity of their due observance thereof, and for that purpose shall disseminate news and information through the distribution of posters and pamphlets, issuance of press releases, installation of traffic safety signs, radio broadcasts, audio-visual exhibition, and such other effective means and media as will create and promote a strong and vigilant public consciousness to the necessity of complying with and of observing all laws, rules and regulations effecting traffic with a view to minimizing, if not altogether preventing, unnecessary injuries to and loss of lives and damages to property due to traffic accidents.

(d) To recommend the enactment of adequate legislation designed to promote orderly traffic, safety travel, and the solution of traffic accidents as well as to regulate traffic movement to achieve efficiency and economy.

The National Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to call upon- all departments, Bureaus or offices, agenda, the government-owned or controlled corporations, provincial, city and municipal governments to furnish. it with such technical and clerical assistance, data, and information as it may require in connection with the performance of its work and shall have access to, and the right to examine, any books, documents, papers or records of said governmental entities.

It shall submit semi-annual and annual reports of its accomplishments to the President of the Philippines, Its first report shall be submitted not later than January 31, 1953, and its subsequent reports shall be submitted every six months thereafter.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1952). Executive Order No. 536 : Creating the National Traffic Commission as an advisory body in the effective enforcement of all laws, rules and regulations regulating traffic order, safety of traffic and pedestrians; to avoid motor vehicle accidents; and regulate traffic movements to achieve efficiency and economy. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48 (10), 4216.