MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 458

CREATING AN INTER-DEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE ON COTTAGE INDUSTRIES

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. An Inter-Departmental Committee on Cottage Industries is hereby created, to be composed of nine members, each appointed by the respective Heads of the following departments, offices, corporations, or agencies of the government:

1. Department of Justice 2. Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources 3. Department of Education 4. Department of Labor 5. Department of Commerce and Industry 6. Office of Economic Coordination 7. Social Welfare Administration 8. Rehabilitation Finance Corporation 9. Price Stabilization Corporation

The Committee shall elect from among its members a Chairman and a Secretary. Decisions of the Committee shall be valid if approved by a majority of all the members.

SEC. 2. The functions of the Committee shall be to prepare, after proper survey and research work, a national program for the promotion and development of cottage industries in the Philippines; to coordinate and integrate the work of the different departments, offices, corporations, and agencies of the government concerning the development and promotion of cottage industries in the Philippines; and to give assistance to public and private enterprises in the development and promotion of cottage industries.

SEC. 3. The Committee shall promulgate rules and regulations to carry out its objectives. It is empowered to call upon any or all of the entities aforementioned for any assistance, data, and information that it may need. Decisions of the Committee may be appealed to the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 4. The Committee shall meet regularly at least once a month. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or the Administrator of Economic Coordination.

SEC. 5. The Committee shall submit an annual report of its activities and accomplishments to the President of the Philippines at the end of every fiscal year, and such other reports as he may require from time to time.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of July, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 458 : Creating an inter-departmental committee on cottage industries. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (7), 3305-3306.