MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 150

CREATING THE SOCIAL SECURITY STUDY COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the promotion of social justice in order to insure the well-being and economic security of all the people is a constitutional and moral responsibility of our Government; and

WHEREAS, in view of the dislocations brought about by the last war, the great mass of our working classes are confronted with tremendous difficulties and to ameliorate their social and economic condition, it appears necessary and expedient that an agency be organized which will study progressive social security systems abroad and formulate legislation implementing their findings and observations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Social Security Study Commission which shall be composed of such members as the President may appoint. Each member of the Commission who is not in the Government service shall receive compensation in such amount as shall be fixed by the President. The Commission shall undertake a thorough and careful investigation of the social and economic problems of our working classes, conduct researches on advanced social security systems, study the rates and characteristics of risks or hazards confronting the working classes, and establish actuarial tables based on a social insurance program at least cost to both employer and employee.

For the effective performance of its functions, the Commission is empowered to issue subpoena and subpoena duces tecum to compel the production of documents, to administer oaths and take testimony or evidence rela­tive to any matter within the scope of its functions. It shall also be empowered and authorized to request such technical assistance as may be available from foreign and international bodies, and to call upon any Department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including the corporations owned and controlled by the same, for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its work.

The Commission shall submit its report and recommendations not later than six months from the date of its organization.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 150 : Creating the Social Security Study Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (7), 2150-2151.