MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 596

ORGANIZING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF HAGONOY, MALALAG, DOÑA ALICIA AND BABAK; IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Davao and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby organized in the Province of Davao the following municipalities:

1. The municipality of Hagonoy, which shall comprise the northern part of the municipality of Padada as organized under Executive Order No. 236, series of 1949, and separated from the said municipality by a straight west-to-east line along latitude 6° 40′ 30″ north, and passing thru KM. 318.5 on the Digos-Malalag-Makar national road.

The municipality of Hagonoy contains the barrio of Hagonoy, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, and the other barrios of the municipality of Padada located north of the line just described.

2. The municipality of Malalag, which shall comprise the southern and southeastern part of the municipality of Padada and separated from the municipality of Padada by a straight west-to-east line passing through the Bolton Barrio Boundary Monument No. 20, Santa Cruz Cadastre 275 Davao.

The municipality of Malalag contains the barrios of Malalag, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Bulacan, Bolton, Santa Maria, New Baclayon, and Sulop.

3. The municipality of Dona. Alicia, which shall consist of the eastern part of the municipality of Tagum and the northern part of the .municipality of Pantukan, separated from the municipality of Tagum by a straight line starting from the point where the present southeastern boundary of Tagum touches the coast of the Davao Gulf and running directly to the northeasternmost corner of the territory of Tagum; and separated from the municipality of Pantukan by the boundary line between the barrio of Pindasari and the Mampising Plantation from the sea coast to the mountains toward the east.

The municipality of Dona Alicia contains the barrios, of Cuambog, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, and Pindasan.

4. The municipality of Babak, which shall comprise the northern part of the Island of Samal lying north of a straight line starting from the west coast of the Island of Samal at a point approximately longitude 125° 39′ 30″ east and latitude 7° 6′ 10″ north, and running northeasterly to a point, along the east coast approximately longitude 125° 47′ 45″ east and latitude 7 ° 7’ north.

The municipality of Babak contains the barrios of Babak, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, and Libuak. (Date used in defining boundaries are those of the Census Atlas of the Philippines, Vol. V, 1939 Census, and Davao District Engineer’s notes.)

The municipality of Padada shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof comprised in the municipalities of Malalag and Hagonoy.

The municipality of Tagum shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof comprised in the municipality of Doña Alicia.

The municipality of Pantukan shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof comprised in the municipality of Doña Alicia.

The municipality of Samal shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof comprised in the municipality of Babak.

The municipalities of Hagonoy, Malalag, Doña Alicia and Babak herein created shall each begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance of the Provincial Treasurer of Davao that they are financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 596 : Organizing the municipalities of Hagonoy, Malalag, Doña Alicia and Babak; in the Province of Davao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (5), 1748-1749.