MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 468

ORGANIZING CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF MARGOSATUBIG, PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF ALICIA

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby organized in the Province of Zamboanga, a municipality to be known as the municipality of Alicia which shall consist of the southwestern part of the municipality of Margosatubig and more particularly bounded and described by the following boundary lines:

Beginning from the mouth of Lapirauan Eiver on Dumanquilas Bay running northwesterly following its course to a distance of 2,500 meters; thence N. 47° 30′ W. in a straight line to a distance of 12,000 meters; thence N. 32° 00′ to a distance of 3,000 meters more or less until it meets the old boundary line of Margosatubig and Kabasalan municipalities; thence in a southwesterly direction following the same old Margosatubig-Kabasalan boundary line to Talaid Point; thence eastward and southward following the shore line and around west and south coast of Olutanga Island including adjacent small islands, to the point of beginning, the mouth of Lapirauan River.” (Used in this description: Map of the Proposed municipality of Naga-Naga, now Alicia, showing the different barrios and sitios of the mother municipality, scale 1:250.000, submitted by the district engineer and approved by the provincial Governor of Zamboanga.)

The municipality of Alicia as herein organized shall have the following barrios: Naga-Naga, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Benuangan, Pandan-Pandan, Lutiman, Cawayan, Minundas, Talusan, Caliran, Gandaan, and Suba-Nipa.

The organization herein made shall take effect upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, the vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 468 : Organizing certain portion of the municipality of Margosatubig, province of Zamboanga, into an independent municipality under the name of Alicia. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (8), 3883-3884.