MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 248

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JOSE IN THE PROVINCE OF SAMAR

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created, in the Province of Samar, a municipality, to be known as the municipality of San Jose, with the seat of government at the barrio of Carangian, which shall consist of that portion of the municipality of Bobon, described and bounded as follows:

On the north, by an imaginary line to be drawn in such a way as to place within the jurisdiction of this municipality Gilbert Island, Cabaogon Islands, Pangilala Island, and other adjacent islands; on the east, by a straight imaginary line starting from the northern coast, and running southerly through Km. post 162 on the Bobon-Lavezares road, and continuing until it intersects the present San Antonio-Bobon boundary at a point exactly west of the center of the barrio of Santander in the municipality of Bobon; on the south, by the present San Antonio-Bobon boundary; and on the west, by the present Lavezares-Bobon boundary. (Description based on data shown in 1939 Census Atlas of the Philippines and rough sketch map submitted by petitioners.)

The municipality of San Jose contains the following barrios: Carangian, which is the seat of government, Rosario, Jamoog, Buenavista, Giratag, Aguadahan, Salhag, Tubigdanao, and Bag-ong Sabang.

The municipality of Bobon shall have its present territory, minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of San Jose.

The municipality of San Jose shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 248 : Creating the Municipality of San Jose in the Province of Samar. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (7), 2745-2746.