MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 643

CREATING THE CORPS OF PROFESSORS OF THE PHILIPPINE MILITARY ACADEMY AND PROVIDING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF THE MEMBERS THEREOF

By virtue of the powers vested in me by section 22(c) of the National Defense Act, as amended, and section 4(c) of Republic Act No. 291, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the National Defense Act, as amended, and section sors of the Philippine Military Academy and prescribe the following rules’ and regulations for the appointment and promotion of officers therein.

There shall be a professor who shall be the Dean of the Corps of Professors and who shall be senior in academic and military rank to all other professors; one professor for each of the academic departments of instruction who shall be the head of, and senior in academic and military rank to, all members of the Corps of Professors in his academic department; and an associate professor or assistant professor for each course of instruction prescribed in the approved curriculum. Such professors, associate professors and assistant professors shall be carried in a separate roster of the regular force apart from the several roster of the Armed Forces.

Members of the Corps of Professors shall be in addition to the number of commissioned officers of the Regular Force prescribed in section 3 of Republic Act No. 291, otherwise known as the Armed Forces Personnel Act of 1948.

The appointment and promotion of the members of the Corps of Professors shall be as follows:

(a) Professors shall be originally appointed in the grade of Major. They become eligible for promotion to the grade of Lieutenant Colonel after six years of service as Major in the Corps of Professors, and to Colonel after seven years of service as Lieutenant Colonel in the Corps of Professors: Provided, That the professor appointed as Dean of the Corps of Professors shall be promoted in military grade earlier, or advanced in’ seniority, whichever shall be necessary to give him seniority in military work over all other professors. The grade of Colonel shall be the highest grade to which professors shall be promoted.

(b) Other members of the Corps of Professors, shall be originally appointed in the grade of Captain with the academic title of assistant professors. They become eligible for promotion to the grade of Major after five years of service as Captain in the Corps of Professors; and to the grade of Lieutenant Colonel after six years of service as Major in the Corps of Professors. The grade of Lieutenant Colonel shall be the highest grade to which assistant professors and associate professors shall be promoted. An associate professor may be advanced in academic title from that of associate professor to professor whenever a vacancy occurs in the latter category, in which case he becomes entitled to the rights to promotion of professors. Irrespective of their length of service in grade, associate professors advanced in academic title to professors shall be promoted in military grade or advanced in seniority, whichever shall be necessary to give them seniority in military rank over all members of the Corps of Professors in their respective academic departments.

( c ) Officers of the Regular Force or of the Reserve Force not prohibited by law to transfer to other branches of the Armed Forces, may be appointed to the Corps of Professors upon their own application, in which case they shall carry their grade to their new appointment: Provided, That officers thus appointed as assistant professors shall be so appointed to the grade of Captain if they are of a lower grade; those appointed as professors shall be appointed to the grade of Major if they are of a lower grade: Provided, further, That nothing in this Executive Order shall prevent the; Chief of Staff from: detailing for specified periods such officers of the arms and services of the Armed Forces who are desired to occupy any position in the faculty of the Philippine Military Academy as special professors, or otherwise. Officers of the arms and services assigned by the Chief of Staff to the faculty of the Philippine Military Academy shall not by virtue of such assignment become separated from their assigned arms and services and shall not be subject to the rules and regulations governing the promotion of the members of the Corps of Professors.

(d) Professors and assistant professors appointed by virtue of this Executive Order shall, for purposes of promotion, be credited with whatever service they have rendered in the capacity of professor, acting professor, assistant professor, acting assistant professor, or head or acting head of any Department of Instruction of the Philippine Military Academy, prior to their appointment. Except as hereinbefore provided, members of the Corps of Professors shall be given the same pay, allowances, rights to retirement, privileges, and the like to which other officers of the Regular Force are entitled,

Executive Order No. 361 dated August 6, 1941 is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 643 : Creating the corps of professors of the Philippine Military Academy and providing rules and regulations for the appointment and promotion of the members thereof. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (11), 4732-4734.