MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 286

CREATING A FAIR TRADE BOARD

WHEREAS, eases of imitation, alteration and substitution of lawful trade-marks and trade names, misbranding, mislabeling, fraudulent designation of origin, false description, adulteration, fraudulent refilling of empty containers and other deceiptive arid fraudulent methods of unfair competition and unethical trade practices are becoming rampant in the domestic trade of the country;

WHEREAS, these unfair methods of competition and unethical trade practices constitute a menace to the economy and social welfare of the country in that they injure legitimate business enterprises, impair the public revenues and prejudice the buying public;

WHEREAS, in the interest of legitimate business and fair trade, it is necessary to coordinate the efforts of various agencies of the Government to the end that the menace may be eradicated and suppressed; and

WHEREAS, to prevent greater injury to the buying public and the legitimate manufacturers and businessmen, the Government should take appropriate and decisive steps in this direction;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Commerce and Industry, do hereby create an interdepartmental fair trade practices enforcement body, to be known as the Fair Trade Board, composed of the follow:

The Board shall synchronize, coordinate and make more effective the activities of the various government agencies relating to the administration and enforcement of the unfair competition and unfair trade practices laws and regulations, and shall immediately take steps to prosecute all violators thereof to the end that all forms of unfair competition and all unethical trade practices may be suppressed and stamped out in this country.

The Board shall render an annual report of its activities, thru the Secretary of Commerce and Industry, to the President of the Philippines, together with such recommendations as it may deem necessary in the furtherance of the purposes of this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 286 : Creating a Fair Trade Board. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (10), 4234-4235.