MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 376

ABOLISHING THE RURAL PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION AND TRANSFERRING ITS POWERS, DUTIES, FUNCTIONS, PROPERTIES, ASSETS AND LIABILITIES TO THE BUREAU OF LANDS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act No. 422, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Rural Progress Administration created by Executive Order No. 191, dated March 2, 1939, pursuant to the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 378, and converted into a corporation by Executive Order No. 206, dated May 31, 1939, pursuant to the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 378, as amended by Commonwealth Acts Nos. 420 and 539 is hereby abolished, and its powers, duties and functions are hereby transferred to, vested in, and assumed by, the Bureau of Lands.

SEC. 2. There is hereby created in the Bureau of Lands a Division of Landed Estates to handle the various phases of the activities presently undertaken by the Rural Progress Administration. The Division of Landed Estates shall have the following positions and allotments for sundry expenses and special purposes in lieu of those provided for the Rural Progress Administration in its current principal budget:

DIVISION OF LANDED ESTATES

SALARIES AND WAGES

Sales and Collection Section

Field Service Section

SUNDRY EXPENSES

SPECIAL PURPOSES

1. For reimbursement to the Budget Commission for the expenses of the accounting service=₱22,620.00

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

SUMMARY

SEC. 3. So much of the present personnel of the Rural Progress Administration as may be necessary and qualified shall be appointed in the Division of Landed Estates in accordance with the Civil Service Law, rules and regulations: PROVIDED, That any of the present personnel of the Administration not so appointed in the Division of Landed Estates, unless he refuses to serve if retained, shall be paid from the funds of the Administration herein transferred and available for the purpose, gratuity in a lump sum equivalent to one month salary for every year of continuous satisfactory service rendered but not exceeding 12 months, on the basis of the last salary received: PROVIDED, FURTHER, That any, official or employee who has rendered less than one year of service shall be entitled to a gratuity of one-half of one month’s salary: AND PROVIDED, FINALLY, That in case of subsequent reinstatement in the government service or in any government-owned or controlled corporation, he shall refund to the National Government the value of the gratuity which he would not yet have received had it been paid to him in monthly installments.

SEC. 4. All the powers, duties and functions, records, properties, equipment, assets, rights, choses in action, obligations and liabilities of the Rural Progress Administration abolished under this Order are hereby transferred to, and assumed by, the Bureau of Lands.

SEC, 5. The proceeds from the sale of the estates heretofore administered by the Rural Progress Administration and any income derived from the administration of said estates shall constitute a special fund to be known as Landed Estates Fund which shall be used, subject to the provisions of section 7-1 (4) of Commonwealth Act No. 246, as amended, for operating expenses, for the settlement of the liabilities and obligations of the Rural Progress Administration and for the acquisition of private lands or any interest therein, through purchase or expropriation, . for subdivision into home lots or small farms for resale at reasonable prices and under such conditions as may be fixed by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources to their bona fide tenants or occupants or to private individuals who will work the lands themselves and who are qualified to acquire and own lands in the Philippines.

SEC. 6. Commonwealth Act No. 378, as amended by Commonwealth Acts Nos. 420 and 539, and all acts or parts of acts and executive orders, administrative orders or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 376 : Abolishing the Rural Progress Administration and transferring its powers, duties, functions, properties, assets and liabilities to the Bureau of Lands, and for other purposes. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46 (11), 5330-5333.