MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 236

ORGANIZING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF DIGOS, PADADA, AND PANABO, IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby organized, in the Province of Davao, the following municipalities:

Municipality of Digos, which shall comprise a part of the municipality of Santa Cruz, bounded on the west and northwest, by the present boundary line between the Provinces of Cotabato and Davao; on the northeast, by the course of Quibanban Creek from its mouth on Davao Gulf, upstream to its source, and by a straight line to be drawn from this source to the top of Mount Apo (active volcano, 2,155); on the east, by the limits of the municipal waters that should pertain to this municipality; and on the south, by a straight imaginary line starting from the coast of Davao Gulf, and running westerly so as to pass through Km. Post 64 on the provincial road somewhere south of the barrio of Digos, and a point midway between the center of the barrio of Kisanto and the provincial road leading from Davao to Cotabato, until it intersects the Cotabato-Davao boundary in the west.

The municipality of Digos contains the following barrios: Digos, where the seat of government shall be located, Tres de Mayo, Guma, Bansalan, Malanao, and Doropoy.

Municipality of Padada, which shall comprise the southern part of the municipality of Santa Cruz, bounded on the north, by the southern boundary of the municipality of Digos referred to in the next preceding paragraph; on the west, by the present Cotabato-Davao boundary; on the south, by the present boundary between the municipalities of Sta. Rosa and Malita; and on the east, by the limits of the municipal waters that should pertain to this municipality.

The municipality of Padada contains the following barrios: Limonso, where the seat of government shall be located, Danlalbalan, Layan, Ignit, Quisanto, Padada, Bolton, Molabago, Madonga, Palili, Matin-aw, Tolagan, Hagonoy, Talas, Balabag, Sulop, Balalan, and Ibo.

Municipality of Panabo, which shall comprise the western part of the municipality of Tagum, bounded on the north, by the west portion of the present boundary line between Taguna on one side and the municipalities of Kapalong and Saug on the other; on the west and south, by the present boundary line between the municipality of Tagum and the City of Davao; on the southeast, by the limits of the municipal waters which this municipality should have; and on the east by the Tagum River.

The municipality of Panabo contains the following barrios: Panabo, where the seat of government shall be located; Ising, which shall include the sitios of Mangalcal, Sibulano, and Southern Davao; Maduao, which shall include the sitios of Upper Licanan, Tagpuri, Tagurot, and Tagactac; Malatibas,  which shall include the sitios of Manay and Little Panay; Lasang, which shalll include the sitio of small Panabo; Cagangohan, which shall include the sitio of Pontakan; Anibungan, which shall include the sitios of San Miguel and Kinamayan; and Bincungan, which shall include the sitios of Lapaz and Tuganay.

The municipalities herein organized shall each begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

The municipality of Santa Cruz shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof included in the municipalities of Digos and Padada.

The municipality of Tagum shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Panabo.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1949). [Executive Order Nos. : 128 – 297]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.