MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 158

CREATING A LABOR-MANAGEMENT ADVISORY BOARD

WHEREAS, the relations between labor and management are at times marred by industrial disputes usually arising from a misunderstanding of their mutual rights and obligations;

WHEREAS, it would be in the interest of industrial peace, which is the only climate under which a speedy rehabilitation and development of our country is possible, that industrial disputes be at least minimized, if not altogether avoided, through an amicable adjustment of labor disputes; and for this purpose, there is need of an agency which will help bring labor and management to the best understanding possible; and

WHEREAS, the problems of labor should be approached from the broadest perspective compatible with the just exercise of the right of management to direct its enterprises;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Labor-Management Advisory Board which shall be composed of a Chairman and such members as the President may appoint. One-half of the members shall be chosen from labor and the other half from management elements of the country. The members of the Board who are not Government officials shall receive such per diems as may be fixed by the President.

It shall be the duty of the Board to assist the President of the Philippines in the formulation of the labor policies of the Government; to advise the Secretary of Labor with respect to the administration of labor laws; to study ways and means of preventing or minimizing industrial and other labor disputes, and to assist the Secretary of Labor and the other agencies of the Government in endeavoring to reconcile the parties to an industrial strife and inducing them to settle the same amicably.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 158 : Creating a Labor-Management Advisory Board. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (7), 2158.