MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 484

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS TO CARRY INTO EFFECT THE PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED SIX HUNDRED AND TEN

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 6 of Republic Act No. 610, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations to carry into effect the provisions of said Act.

SECTION 1. General Headquarters Armed Forces of the Philippines is hereby designated to process all claims for death gratuity and disability pension under Republic Act No. 610. Payment of approved claims shall be made through the Philippine Veterans Board, which is designated as the agency in charge of payment of benefits under said Act.

SEC. 2. Payment of the death gratuity provided in section 3 of Republic Act No. 610 shall be directed by the Secretary of National Defense upon a determination by him of the line of duty and service connection of the decedent’s death within the scope of said Act and after the Judge Advocate General of the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall have made a determination in each case of the person or persons entitled to receive payment of the gratuity and the amount of their respective shares therein. In making such determination, the Judge Advocate General shall be guided by the provisions of Republic Act No. 136, as amended, which are not in conflict with the provisions of Republic Act No. 610.

No payment of death gratuity shall be made by the Philippine Veterans Board except as hereinabove provided.

SEC. 3. A board composed of three (3) medical officers and two (2) line officers to be named by the Chief of Staff is hereby created in the Armed Forces of the Philippines and placed under the administrative supervision of the Adjutant General. This board shall be a full-time body and shall be known as a Certificate of Disability Discharge (CDD) and Rating Board.

SEC. 4. All applications for disability discharge and disability pension shall be referred to the CDD and Rating Board. Applications for disability discharge shall be passed upon by the three medical officers of the Board who shall sit as CDD Board. Applications for disability pension shall be passed upon by all five (5) members of the Board, sitting as a Rating Board, who shall determine the extent of the disability of the person applying for disability pension, in accordance with the “Schedule for Rating Disabilities of the US Veterans Administration, 1945 Edition”. A majority vote of the members of either board shall be sufficient to sustain a finding in each case.

SEC. 5. Findings and determinations by the Rating Board on the extent of the disability of the person applying for disability pension, when approved by the Secretary of National Defense, shall be conclusive and shall serve as sufficient authority for the Philippine Veterans Board for the payment of the disability pension corresponding to the rate of disability so determined.

SEC. 6. The Philippine Veterans Board shall keep complete records of all disbursements made by virtue of the operation of Republic Act No 610.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 484 : Prescribing rules and regulations to carry into effect the provisions of Republic Act Numbered Six hundred and ten. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 47 (11), 5555-5556.