MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 234

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS AND SITIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF BALINGASAG, MISAMIS ORIENTAL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the portion of the territory of the municipality of Balingasag, Province of Misamis Oriental, described herein, is hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Lagonglong, with the seat of government at barrio Lagonglong:

Bounded on the north, by the present boundary line between the municipalities of Salay and Balingasag; on the west, by the limits of the municipal waters which the municipality of Lagonglong shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code; on the south, by a straight west-to-east line to be drawn from the coast of Mindanao Sea and passing through the old Spanish monument, made of adobe block .80 x .80 x 2.00 meters, located on the east side of Salay-Balingasag provincial road somewhere south of Km. post 55; and on the east, by the present boundary line between Claveria and Balingasag.

The municipality of Lagonglong as herein organized shall have the following barrios:

(1) Lagonglong, the poblacion, which shall include the sitio of Lumbo; (2) Dampil, which shall include the sitios of Cabulawan, Mambuaya, Mayang and Tamongcal; (3) Umagos, which shall include the sitios of Gaston and Mandampog; (4) Cabibihan, which shall include the sitios of Mantabol and Kauswagan; and (5) Limason, which shall include the sitios of Agong and Banglay.

The municipality of Balingasag shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Lagonglong.

The municipality of Lagonglong shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the municipal mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Indenpendence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 234 : Organizing certain barrios and sitios of the Municipality of Balingasag, Misamis Oriental, into an independent municipality. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (7), 2727-2728.