MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 572

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF NORALA IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as the municipality of Norala, which shall consist of the following places or sitios in the municipality of Dulawan, known as

and which shall hereafter be referred to and recognized as barrios under the same names.

The seat of government of the municipality of Norala shall be at the barrio of Norala.

The municipality of Norala as herein organized is separated from the municipality of Dulawan by the course of the Allah River from the sitio of Matiompong in the north southward to where the Sepaka Creek empties in the said river, and from this point by a straight line drawn northeasterly to the southwester most corner of the territory of the municipality of Tacurong. The northeast boundary of Norala shall coincide partly with the west boundary of the municipality of Tacurong and partly with the southwest boundary of the municipality of Lambayong.

The municipality of Dulawan shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Norala.

The municipality of Norala shall be organized and begin to exist upon certification by the Provincial Treasurer that the new municipality possesses the financial capacity to pay its officials and employees the minimum salaries and wages in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 602 and upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 572 : Creating the municipality of Norala in the province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (3), 817.