MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 578

CHANGING THE LIMITATIONS IN THE INCOME OF ADMITTED PATIENTS IN GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS AND CHARITY CLINICS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PRESENT MARKED FLUCTUATIONS OF THE STANDARD OF LIVING

By virtue of the powers vested in me by section 7 of Republic Act No. 747, entitled “An Act to regulate the fees to be charged against patients in Government hospitals and charity clinics, classifying patients according to their financial condition,” and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Health, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby change the limitations in the income of admitted patients in government hospitals and charity clinics as follows in view of the marked fluctuations of the standard of living:

SECTION 1 ( a ) To be classified as indigent patient so as to be absolutely free from any and all charges incurred by the hospital during his confinement and have priority in accommodation, one shall have a total income of not more than one hundred twenty pesos a month, if not married; if he is married or head of family, each additional member shall be given thirty pesos as allowance to the total income of the family but not to exceed two hundred ten pesos a month ; if he is a member of a family, the total income of the family should not be more than two hundred ten pesos a month. Said category of patients shall be absolutely free from any and all charges incurred by the hospital during their confinement and such patients shall further have priority in accommodation.

( b ) To be classified as partial pay patient so as to be entitled to free professional services in a government hospital, one shall have a total income of more than one hundred twenty pesos but not more than two hundred ten pesos a month, if not married; if he is married or head of a family, each additional member shall be given thirty pesos as allowance to the total income of the family but not to exceed three hundred pesos a month; if he is a member of a family, the total income of the family shall not be more than three hundred pesos a month. Said category of patients shall pay only the cost of medicines used and the hospitalization fees.

( c ) To be classified as full pay patient, one shall have an income of more than three hundred pesos a month, irrespective of whether or not he or she is single or married and/or head of a family. If he is a member of a family, the total income of the family must be more than three hundred pesos a month. Said category of patients shall pay not only the medicines used and hospitalization charges but also the professional fees.

SEC. 2. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 578 : Changing the limitations in the income of admitted patients in Government hospitals and charity clinics in accordance with the present marked fluctuations of the standard of living. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 49 (3), 821.