MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 367

ABOLISHING THE NATIONAL URBAN PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE CAPITAL CITY PLANNING COMMISSION AND CREATING IN LIEU THEREOF THE NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 98, series of 1946, the National Urban Planning Commission was created mainly for the purpose of preparing general plans zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations for urban areas, like our towns and cities;

WHEREAS, under Republic Act No. 333, the Capital City Planning Commission was created for the special purpose of preparing a master plan for the Capital City of the Philippines, including necessary zoning and subdivision regulations;

WHEREAS, under Administrative Order No. 38, the Real Property Board was created for the purpose of attending to the various problems involving private real estate arising from the formulation and execution of the planning of the City of Manila by the National Urban Planning Commission;

WHEREAS, the activities and functions of the two Commissions are closely related to each other; and

WHEREAS, the consolidation of the powers, duties and functions of the aforementioned Commissions will not only result in one integrated planning for both urban and regional areas, including the Capital City of the Philippines, but will also effect economy and efficiency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Republic Act No. 422, do hereby abolish the National Urban Planning Commission created under Executive Order No. 98, series of 1946, the Capital City Planning Commission created under Republic Act No. 333, and the Real Property Board created under Administrative Order No. 38, dated July 12,1947, and in lieu thereof there is hereby created an office to be known as the National Planning Commission.

SECTION 1. Powers, duties and functions. —The National Planning Commission shall have all the powers, duties and functions now vested by law upon the National Urban Planning Commission, the Capital City Planning Commission and the Real Property Board except such as are inconsistent herewith.

SEC. 2. Regional Planning. —The National Planning Commission is hereby authorized:

( a ) To prepare general plans for regional areas for the purpose of integrating and coordinating the various plans for the different urban areas within each region;

( b ) To prepare general plans for the Philippines or any of its sections showing the overall locations of such projects or proposals as are of national character and scope, such as the locations of inter-provincial and inter-regional trunk roads, waterways and other inland transportation facilities; the locations of ports, harbors, wharves and other port facilities; the locations of airports and other air terminals; the locations of national parks, forest reserves, seashore bathing facilities, and other important recreational as well as health resorts of the country; and

( c ) To submit recommendations for the conservation and development of the natural resources of the country in so far as planning is concerned.

SEC. 3. Subdivision Code. —Regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Capital City and other urban areas which the National Planning Commission may issue in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order No. 98, series of 1946, and Republic Act No. 333 shall be compiled and cited as the Subdivision Code.

SEC. 4. Building Code. —The National Planning Commission shall draft uniform regulations for the conservation, repair and alteration of buildings, which will be known and cited as the Building Code. Such regulations shall set the minimum performance standards for building materials and methods of construction for the purpose of preventing building collapse and accidents, minimizing fire hazards, insuring sanitary and healthful living conditions, and in general, promoting public safety and welfare. The Building Code, or any proposed amendment thereof, shall be submitted to the local legislative bodies concerned for adoption in the form of ordinances, and shall take effect in the same manner as zoning or subdivision regulations. The Building Code shall be administered and enforced by the local officials concerned.

SEC. 5. Composition of the Commission. — The National Planning Commission shall be composed of a Chairman and six members, all to be appointed by the President of the Philippines with the consent of the Commission on Appointments. The Chairman and members of the Commission who are not government officials shall each receive a per diem of not exceeding twenty pesos for each day of meeting actually attended, not to exceed two times a week. The Chairman and the members of the Commission shall hold office at the pleasure of the President. In case of the absence, inability or other temporary incapacity of the Chairman, the Commission shall designate one of its members to act as temporary Chairman.

The National Planning Commission shall be under the direct supervision and control of the President of the Philippines. The President may designate any of his technical advisers, or other official in the Executive Department, to act as adviser or technical assistant in the National Planning Commission.

SEC. 6. Administrative staff. —The National Planning Commission shall have a permanent head to be known as Director of Planning, who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines with the consent of the Commission on Appointments and shall receive a compensation of nine thousand pesos per annum.

The Director of Planning shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Commission and the Bureau of Civil Service, and shall prescribe the duties of such planners, engineers, architects, landscape architects, economists, sociologists, attorneys, and other technical and clerical employees as may be required and within the appropriation available therefor.

SEC. 7. Salaries. —All positions existing in the Capital City Planning Commission and the National Urban Planning Commission are hereby abolished and the following positions are created and established in lieu thereof:

OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN AND DIRECTOR OF PLANNING

2,400.00

NATIONAL REGIONAL DIVISION

URBAN DIVISION

ZONING AND REGULATORY DIVISION

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION

ACCOUNTING UNIT (Budget Office)

AUDITING UNIT (General Auditing Office)

Total

SUNDRY EXPENSES

₱7,000.00

Total

FURNITURE AND EQUIPMENT

Total

SUMMARY

Total expenses

SEC. 8. Transfer of records, etc. —All records, properties, equipment, funds, cause in action, rights and obligations, and other assets and liabilities of the National Urban Planning Commission, the Capital City Planning Commission and the Real Property Board are hereby transferred to the National Planning Commission.

SEC. 9. Provision for gratuity. —Upon authority and approval of the President, any savings in the existing appropriations of the National Urban Planning Commission and the Capital City Planning Commission may be used for the payment of gratuity equivalent to one month salary for every year of continuous satisfactory service rendered, but not exceeding twelve months, on the basis of the last salary receive to officials and employees who are separated from the service by reason of the abolition of their positions in this Executive Order: Provided, however, That those who rendered less than one year of service shall be allowed and given gratuity equivalent to one-half of one month’s salary: And provided, further, That in case of subsequent reinstatement of an employee who received gratuity hereunder in another office of the Government or in a government-owned or controlled corporation, he shall refund the value of the gratuity which he would not yet have received had it been paid in monthly installments.

SEC. 10. Repealing clause. —Such provisions, of Executive Order No. 98, series of 1946, and of Republic Act No. 333, and all other acts, executive orders, administrative orders, or parts thereof, as are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed.

SEC. 11. Effectivity — This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 367 : Abolishing the National Urban Planning Commission and the Capital City Planning Commission and creating in lieu thereof the National Planning Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 46 (11), 5301-5307.