MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 203

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS AND SITIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF INITAO, PROVINCE OF MISAMIS ORIENTAL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF MANTICAO.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Manticao, Talabaan, Mambaya, Punta Silum, and Lugait, and the sitios of Taloca, Sambuyaan, Pagawan, Upper Malatong, Patag, Daan Manticao, Kalangahan, Mambuaya, Dimalosi, Olab, Taal, Talacogon, Macaw, Tigbao, Cabocabo, Zalimbal, Sisamon, Tamao, Laolao, Lagondogon, Ayaaya, Linabo, Padionga, Santo Nino, Paitan and Kaloknayan, all of the municipality of Initao, Province of Misamis Oriental, are hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Manticao, with the seat of government at the barrio of Manticao.

The municipality of Manticao as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From the mouth of Linangkayan Creek somewhere south west of the sitio bearing the same name, in a straight west to east imaginary line to a distance of approximately 7.1 Kms.; thence running due south, along the west boundary of the municipal district of Lourdes, until it intersects the present Misamis Oriental-Lanao provincial boundary; thence northwestward following the said Misamis Oriental-Lanao provincial boundary, passing through the Bureau of Lands monument at Km. 76.437 on the provincial road, near Zalimbal Point, to where it touches the waters of the Iligan Bay at high tide; thence, following the boundary of the municipal waters which the municipality of Manticao shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2331 of the Revised Administrative Code., to the point of beginning.”

The municipality of Manticao as herein organized shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of February, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 203 : Organizing certain barrios and sitios of the municipality of Initao, province of Misamis Oriental, into an independent municipality under the name of Manticao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (2), 549-550.