MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 222

ORGANIZING A PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF TUBOD, PROVINCE OF LANAO, INTO A MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF BAROY, AND ANNEXING TO THESE MUNICIPALITIES CERTAIN PORTIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF KOLAMBUGAN.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby organized, in the Province of Lanao, a municipality to be known as the Municipality of Baroy, which shall consist of the southern part of the municipality of Tubod plus a certain portion of the territory of Kolambugan referred to in Resolution No. 35, series of 1948, of the municipal council thereof, more particularly bounded and described as follows:

On the northeast, by the Ininguian Creek from its mouth in Panguil Bay somewhere west of the poblacion of the barrio of Sagadan, upstream to its source somewhere at the sitio of Kapatagan, and a straight line running from this source southeasterly, traversing sitios Licapao and Blakan to the summit of Mount Talaysague on the southeastern boundary of Kolambugan, as defined in Paragraph 13 of Executive Order No. 13, dated April 21, 1917, of the Governor of the Department of Mindanao and Sulu:

On the northwest, by the limits of the municipal waters of Baroy from the mouth of the Ininguian Creek to the mouth of the Rawaan River;

On the southwest, by the northern and eastern boundaries of the municipality of Lala as defined in Executive Order No. 208, dated March 22,1949; and

On the south and southeast, by the portion of the Kolambugan-Kapatagan boundary line fixed in paragraphs 12 and 13 of Executive Order No. 13, dated April 21, 1917, of the Governor of the Department of Mindanao and Sulu, outside of the territory of the municipality of Lala.

The seat of government of the municipality of Baroy shall be at the barrio of Baroy.

The municipality of Tubod shall consist of its present territory, minus the portion thereof inducted in the municipality of Baroy, plus that portion of the territory of Kolambugan, bounded in the northeast by a straight line drawn from the summit of Mount Catmon in southeasterly direction to its intersection with the Kolambugan-Munal boundary, and on the south by the southeast portion of the northeastern boundary of Baroy described above.

The municipality of Kolambugan shall consist, of its present territory minus the portions thereof annexed to the municipalities of Tubod and Baroy.

The municipality of Baroy herein organized shall begin to exist, upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QURINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 222 : Organizing a portion of the Municipality of Tubod, Province of Lanao, into a municipality under the name of Baroy, and annexing to these municipalities certain portions of the municipality of Kolambugan. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (6), 2384-2385.