MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 134

TRANSFERRING THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF BARCELONA, PROVINCE OF SORSOGON, FROM ITS PRESENT LOCATION TO THE SITIO OF MAPAPAC, BARRIO OF PAGHALUBAN

Upon the recommendation of the municipal council of Barcelona, Province of Sorsogon, and the provincial board of Sorsogon, concurred in by the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the seat of government of the municipality of Barcelona, Province of Sorsogon, is hereby transferred from the poblacion to the sitio of Mapapac, barrio of Paghaluban of the same municipality.

This Order shall take effect only after the Secretary of the Interior shall have received:

(1) From the District Engineer two copies of a tentative development plan of the new poblacion of Barcelona prepared by his office, showing all the existing and the proposed streets and the following public improvement sites:

( a ) Presidencia or municipal hall site which should contain an area of 5,000 square meters and should be situated in a well drained section and should, if possible, face the plaza or park;

( b ) Plaza site, which should contain an area of at least one hectare;

( c ) Market site, which should contain an area of one hectare and be located, if possible, out of view from the municipal hall, the school building and the plaza, and should be near, not along, the provincial road, navigable river or railroad station, if any;

( d ) Cemetery site, which should contain an area of one hectare for each 10,000 population and meet the requirements of the health authorities; and

( e ) School site, which should contain such area as may be approved by the school authorities and should be situated in a well drained section.

(2) From the mayor of Barcelona, through the provincial governor of Sorsogon, true copies of the deeds of conveyance covering the lands constituting the five public improvement sites above specified, with certificates of the provincial fiscal as to the validity and sufficiency of such deeds of conveyance.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 134 : Transferring the seat of government of the municipality of Barcelona, Province of Sorsogon, from its present location to the sitio of Mapapac, barrio of Paghaluban. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (4), 1122-1123.