MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 651

CREATING THE ROXAS MEMORIAL COMMISSION TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE NATION-WIDE CAMPAIGN FOR FUNDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE ROXAS MEMORIAL ON THE SITE RESERVED FOR THE PURPOSE BY PROCLAMATION NO. 359 DATED DECEMBER 16, 1952, AND FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A LOW-COST HOUSING PROJECT FOR DISABLED WAR VETERANS ON THE SITE RESERVED THEREFOR BY PROCLAMATION NO. 422 DATED NOVEMBER 12, 1953.

Whereas, the late President Manuel Roxas had the singular distinction of being the First President of the Republic of the Philippines, in which position he rendered invaluable services to the country up to the time of his death in the performance of an official engagement at Clark Field on April 15, 1948;

Whereas, the Filipino people, in expressing their gratitude for the patriotic services of the late President Manuel Roxas, initiated the raising of funds by public subscription for the construction of an income-producing Memorial for the purposes, among others, of immortalizing his memory, extending financial aid to needy or indigent war widows and orphans, disabled war veterans and public charitable and social welfare institutions, encouraging the development of theatrical talents, and promoting theatrical arts and productions and symphony orchestra music; and

Whereas, certain parcels of the public domain situated in the City of Manila have been reserved for use as site of the Roxas Memorial under Proclamation No. 359 dated December 16, 1952, and another parcel of land situated in Diliman, Quezon City, has been reserved for use as site of a low-cost housing project for disabled war veterans under Proclamation No. 422 dated November 12, 1953;

Now, therefore, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Roxas Memorial Commission composed of the following:

The Commission shall be in charge of a nation-wide campaign for raising funds for the construction of the Roxas Memorial the project to be known as Roxas Memorial Project No. 1, on the site reserved therefor by Proclamation No. 863 dated December 16, 1952, and for the construction of a low-cost housing project in Diliman, Quezon City, for disabled war veterans, the project to be known as Roxas Memorial Project. No. 2, on the site reserved therefor by Proclamation No. 422 dated November 12, 1953. The Commission is hereby authorized to create and organize as many subcommittees as it may deem necessary in the provinces, chartered cities and municipalities, and to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out the work entrusted to it.

The Commission shall meet at such times and places as may be designated by the Chairman and shall submit its report to the President from time to time.

All funds coming into the Commission shall be deposited with the Philippine National Bank or with any other banking institution authorized to do business in the Philippines, and the necessary withdrawals therefrom shall be made only by checks duly signed by the treasurer of the Commission and countersigned by the chairman and by the auditor to be designated by the Auditor General.

Executive Order No. 635 dated October 27, 1953, is hereby revoked,

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 651 : Creating the Roxas Memorial Commission to take charge of the nation-wide campaign for funds for the construction of the Roxas Memorial on the site reserved for the purpose by Proclamation No. 359 dated December 16, 1952, and for the construction of a low-cost housing project for disabled war veterans on the site reserved therefor by proclamation no. 422 dated November 12, 1953. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (12), 5253-5255.