MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 633

ORGANIZING CERTAIN PORTIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES OF INITAO AND ALUBIJID, MISAMIS ORIENTAL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF LIBERTAD

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Governor of Misamis Oriental, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby organized in the Province of Misamis Oriental a municipality to be known as the municipality of Libertad, to consist of the barrios of Libertad, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, and Himay-lan and the sitios of Taboo, Upper Himaylan, Ritablo, Kamaca, Lobloban, Bitaogon, Pinamagsalan, Ulab, Kilangit and Quezon of the municipality of Initao, and the barrios of Matangad and Paugayawan, and barrios of Dolong and Tala-o of the municipality of Alubijid.

The municipality of Libertad as heroin organized as separated from the municipality of Alubijid by a northwest-to-southeast straight line, from a point on the seashore, identified as point No. 1 in the map of the proposed municipality of Libertad, passing through BBL concrete monument in the sitio of Burnay at Km. 91.5 on the provincial road, to point No. 2 on the Alubijid-Lourdes boundary; and from the municipality of Initao by another straight line, similarly drawn, from point No. 5 on the seashore, to point No. 4 on the upper course of said river to point No. 8 on the Initao-Lourdes boundary.

(Description based on data shown in map of proposed municipality of Libertad, scale 1 to 40,000, submitted by District Engineer Teodoro Mocorro of Oriental Misamis, April 14, 1051.)

The municipality of Libertad shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that the said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipalities of Initao and Alubijid, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios and sitios comprised in the municipality of Libertad, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 633 : Organizing certain portions of the Municipalities of Initao and Alubijid, Misamis Oriental, into an independent municipality under the name of Libertad. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (10), 4240-4241.