MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 204

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS AND SITIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES OF CLARIN, INABANGA AND BALILIHAN, PROVINCE OF BOHOL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF BORJA.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Sagbayan. Canmaya Centro, Canmaya Diot, Canmano, San Antonio. and San Isidro, and the sitios of Santa Cruz, San Vicente Norte, San Vicente Sur, San Ramon, and Kalangahan, of the municipality of Clarin, the sitios of Mantalongon and Katipunan of the municipality of Inabanga, and the sitios of Cabasacan and Ubuhan of the municipality of Balilihan, all of the Province of Bohol, are hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Borja, with the seat of government at the barrio of Sagbayan.

The municipality herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

From point 1, which is at the top of Cambangi Hill, somewhere west of the sitio of Santa Cruz, as shown in the sketch map, showing the proposed municipality and the municipalities of Clarin, Inabanga, and Balilihan, submitted by the District Engineer, running in a straight line, N. 32° 09′ E., 1,2 Km. to point No. 2, which is the center of 3-1 OM. concrete culvert; thence N. 32° 45′ E., 3.2 Km. to point 3, which is the highest point of Cansaga Cliff; thence N. 66° 00′ E., 1.6 Km., to point 4 (Tubod sa Bongbong); thence N. 53° 20′ E., to point 16 (Lampac Hill); thence southeastward to point 45(a) somewhere southwest of the poblacion of the barrio of Cambito-or of the municipality of Inabanga and somewhere northeast of the sitio of Mantalongon; thence northeastward to point 20 which is the junction of Cansuaub, Cagamo-anan and Boho brooks; thence curving southeastward, southward and southwest-ward along the Inabanga-Carmen boundary to the top of Kanliogan Hill; thence in a straight line, to Km. post 78 on the Bacane provincial road. somewhere south of the barrio of Canmano; thence following the provincial road to Km. post 79; thence southerly in a straight line to point 13 on the top of Kantomacang Daku Hill; thence westward to point 49; thence northwestward in a straight line to point 34, which is the northeast corner of the Municipal Cemetery of Causwagan; thence N. 35° 32′ W., to point 15, which is the junction of Tagayam and Anislagan creeks; thence N. 17° 15′ E., 2.75 Km., to the point of beginning.

The municipality of Borja as herein organized shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of February, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 204 : Organizing certain barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Clarin, Inabanga and Balilihan, province of Bohol, into an independent municipality under the name of Borja. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (2), 550-551.