MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 470

PROVIDING INSTRUCTIONS TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS DURING THE TIME THAT THE PRESIDENT IS OUTSIDE THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the President should leave the Philippines to take up official matters vitally affecting the relations of the Philippines and the United States;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following instructions are hereby issued for the conduct of public affairs during his absence:

1. The Vice-President of the Philippines is authorized to exercise supervision over the executive departments for and in the name of the President. The Executive Secretary shall, as heretofore, sign all papers that are ordinarily signed by him by or under the authority of the President.

2. Each Secretary of Department shall attend to and decide matters which pertain to his Department and which under the law, he may decide. On those matters which require approval of the President, in case urgent action is needed, such approval shall be obtained by cable. On other departmental business which, although within the jurisdiction of a Secretary of Department, are of such importance as to affect the general policies of the Government and, therefore, should be the subject of consultation with the President, the Secretary concerned may communicate for such purpose with the President by cable or other convenient means of communication.

3. The Cabinet shall hold its regular meetings and shall meet at such other times as may be necessary. The Vice-President shall preside over the meetings. Matters which have heretofore been acted upon by the Cabinet shall continue to be considered and decided by the Cabinet: Provided, however, That in the absence of unanimity of opinion on any important question submitted, no decision shall be taken until it shall have been submitted to the President.

4. All official communications to the President, whether by letter or by cable, shall be transmitted through or by the Executive Secretary.

5. The Vice-President shall preside over all official ceremonies, receive and return the official calls of foreign dignitaries in behalf and in representation of the President, and on such occasions the Vice-President shall be entitled to the honors and courtesies due the President of the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 470 : Providing instructions to be followed in the conduct of public affairs during the time that the President is outside the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (8), 3885-3886.