EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 571

CREATING A DECORATION TO BE KNOWN AS THE ORDER OF SIKATUNA

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, ELPIDIO QUIRINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a decoration, to be known as the Order of Sikatuna, to be awarded by the President of the Philippines to personnel of the Department of Foreign Affairs, both in the Home Office and in the Foreign Service, as well as to persons who may have rendered exceptional and meritorious services to the Republic, and to diplomats, officials and nationals of foreign states who have rendered conspicuous services in fomenting, developing and strengthening friendly relations between their country and the Republic of the Philippines.

The award may also be made by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs in the name of and by authority of the President.

SEC. 2. The Order of Sikatuna, which commemorates the first treaty (Pacto de Sangre) between the Philippines and a foreign country, shall be divided into four ranks:

1.     Raja – To be awarded to heads of states, former heads of states and Cabinet secretaries and diplomats of at least ambassadorial or equivalent rank, Filipino or foreign, far extraordinary services in the field of foreign relations.

2.     Lakan – To be awarded to ambassadors, ministers, officials of equivalent rank as ambassadors and ministers, and other distinguished persons, Filipino or foreign, for outstanding services in the field of foreign relations.

3.     Maginoo – To be awarded to senior officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs, whether in the Home Office or in the Foreign Service, below ministerial rank, for excellent services in the field of foreign relations. This may likewise be awarded to government officials of the Philippines and of foreign countries of comparatively the same rank and private citizens deserving of such honor.

Before any Filipino government official or employee may be entitled to the award, he must have a minimum of six years service in the government.

1.     Maharlika – To be awarded to junior officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs, whether in the Home Office or in the Foreign Service, to government officials of the Philippines and of foreign countries, and to private citizens deserving of such honor. Before any Filipino government official or employee may be entitled to the award, he must have a minimum of four years service in the government.

SEC. 3. The decoration of the Order of Sikatuna may be awarded posthumously to any person entitled thereto, in which case the same shall be received by his legal heirs; if there be no legal heir, by his nearest of kin; and if there be no heir or nearest of kin, by any person designated by the President of the Philippines, or the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, acting by authority of the President, to receive the award on behalf of the deceased.

SEC. 4. The form, make and design of the decoration for the Order of Sikatuna, the manner of wearing it and other details shall be prescribed in such rules and regulations as may be proposed by the Philippines Heraldry Committee and approved by the President of the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27 th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(SGD.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO

President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) MARCIANO ROQUE

Acting Executive Secretary