MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 415

REORGANIZING THE GOVERNMENT QUARTERS COMMITTEE

In order to facilitate and coordinate the use and occupancy of the National Government buildings, the construction of new quarters and the rental of privately-owned property for such purposes, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue, of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Government Quarters Committee to be composed of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, as chairman, and the Commissioner of the Budget and the Auditor General as members.

The powers and duties of this Committee shall be as follows:

1. To investigate and look into the matter of assignment of quarters in public buildings to the different branches of the government, departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the National Government, and to recommend such changes in the assignment of quarters as may be deemed advisable in the interests of public service and efficiency;

2. To study and consider the advisability of renting privately-owned property for use as offices or storehouses by the National Government; and

3. To submit to the President such recommendations with respect to the construction, acquisition, use or occupancy of additional quarters that might be needed by the National Government in the City of Manila or in the provinces,

Executive Order Numbered One hundred and twenty-one, series of nineteen hundred: and thirty-seven, and all other orders and regulations in conflict herewith are hereby modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 415 : Reorganizing the Government Quarters Committee. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (2), 583-584.