MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 469

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SINDANGAN, PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF LILOY

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrio of Liloy and sitios of Salug, Lipacan, Palandoc, Caracol, Mucas, Timan, Banigan and Patawag, all of the municipality of Sindangan, Province of Zamboanga, are hereby segregated from the said municipality and organized into an independent municipality under the name of Liloy with the seat of government at the barrio of Liloy.

The municipality of Liloy shall have the following boundaries:

From the mouth of Palandoc River on Sindangan Bay, running southerly following its course up to its source, thence southward in a straight imaginary line until this line intersects the old boundary line between Sindangan and Kabasalan; thence in a westerly direction following the old boundary line between Sindangan and Kabasalan until it intersects the course of the Patawag River; thence northerly following the course of this river to its mouth; thence following the boundary of the municipal waters which the municipality of Liloy should have to the mouth of Palandoc River, the point of beginning.” (Used in this description: Map of the Proposed municipality of Liloy showing the different barrios and sitios of the mother municipality, Scale 1:250,000, approved by the District Engineer.)

The municipality of Liloy shall have the following barrios: Liloy, Salug, Lipacan, Palandoc, Caracol, Mucas, Timan, Banigan and Patawag.

The municipality of Liloy shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 469 : Organizing a certain portion of the municipality of Sindangan, province of Zamboanga, into an independent municipality under the name of Liloy. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (8), 3884-3885.