MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 284

ORGANIZING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TABANGO OUT OF CERTAIN PORTIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES OF SAN ISIDRO AND LEYTE, PROVINCE OF LEYTE.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Santa Rosa, Tugas, Tabango (proper) and Campokpok, together with the sitios of Tomalistis, Bagahopi, Boho, Lawis, Tabango Diot, Liogliog, Otabon, Masisi, Sabang, Tabayla, Burabod, Sonlogaon, Tipolo, Tubig Baho, So-oy, Inangatan, Obo-ob, Tahad, Pining, Layog, Manban, Copolay, Bagalay, Catmon, La Fortuna I, Omaganban and Abobo, all of the municipality of San Isidro, and the barrio of Butasun (I) together with the sitios of La Fortuna II, Colonia, Danao, Marilawaan, Jimareo, Tigo, Ban-aw, Hibacqngan, Palanog, Butasun II and Maranlog, all of the municipality of Leyte, in the Province of Leyte, are hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Tabango with the seat of government at the barrio of Tabango.

The municipality of Tabango shall be separated (a) from the municipality of San Isidro, by a straight line starting from the mouth of the creek immediately northeast of sitio Arevalo, on Arevalo Bay, and running easterly through sitio Abobo to the common point of the boundaries of San Isidro, Calubian and Leyte; and ( b ) from the municipality of Leyte, by the channel of the Naga River from its mouth to a point in said river exactly east of the center of sitio Wagui; and from this point by a straight line to the common point of the boundaries of San Isidro, Villaba and Leyte. (Data used in this description are based on the Coast and Geodetic Survey topographic map of 1937; the Census Atlas map and the sketch maps submitted by petitioners.)

The municipalities of San Isidro and Leyte shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof included in the municipality of Tabango.

The municipality of Tabango, as herein organized, shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof, but in no case earlier than November 15, 1949.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 284 : Organizing the municipality of Tabango out of certain portions of the municipalities of San Isidro and Leyte, province of Leyte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (10), 4232-4233.