MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 241

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 169, DATED AUGUST 30, 1948, ENTITLED “CREATING AN OPIUM CUSTODIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF ACT NO. 2381, AS AMENDED BY ACT NO. 3006, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE OPIUM LAW.”

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby amend the first paragraph of Executive Order No. 169, dated August 30, 1948, to read as follows:

“All prohibited drugs and all instruments, apparatus and articles specially designed for the use thereof, now in the possession of the Bureau of Customs, the Bureau of Internal Revenue, or any other government bureau or office, national, provincial or municipal, whether held pending adjudication by the courts or for other purposes, shall be immediately invoiced and turned over to a committee, to be known henceforth as the Opium Custodian Committee, which shall be under the immediate control or supervision of the Chief of Constabulary; and hereafter officers of the law, except those of the City of Manila, shall likewise invoice and turn over to said Committee, through the provincial commander concerned, all such drugs, instruments, apparatus and articles as may be seized or found, as soon as possible or at the latest within 24 hours after coming in possession thereof: Provided, That the Police Department of the City of Manila may handle the processing of evidence of this nature and keep said articles during the pendency of the criminal cases in which they are to be used as evidence, subject to the condition that said prohibited drugs, as well as instruments, apparatus and articles designed for the use thereof, shall be turned over to the Opium Custodian Committee immediately after the criminal cases, in which such evidence was used, have been finally disposed of by the courts.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 241 : Amending Executive Order No. 169, dated August 30, 1948, entitled “Creating an Opium Custodian Committee for the Enforcement of Act No. 2381, As Amended by Act No. 3006, otherwise known as the Opium Law”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (7), 2735.