MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 486

PROVIDING FOR THE COLLECTION AND COMPILATION OF HISTORICAL DATA REGARDING BARRIOS, TOWNS, CITIES, AND PROVINCES

WHEREAS, the manuscripts, books and other publications forming the collections of the National Library were almost entirely destroyed during the battle for the liberation of the City of Manila from the Japanese;

WHEREAS, among the documents destroyed were those manuscripts containing important data relating to the history and culture of our barrios, towns, cities, and provinces—manuscripts which were collected and preserved by virtue of Executive Orders Nos. 2 and 136, dated January 26, 1911, and January 3, 1938, respectively; and

WHEREAS, it is for our advancement that such data be regathered and brought up to date from time to time, to serve as a source of inspiration and guidance for our future generations, as well as source of materials for historians, investigators and researchers;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

That data on the history and culture of each barrio, town, city, and province be collected and compiled;

That the history of each province be written;

That the Division Superintendent of Schools direct the collection of these data and the preparation of the manuscripts, using the outline appearing in the Appendix hereto, which is hereby made an integral part of this Order;

That these manuscripts be completed and submitted as soon as possible, but not later than July 4, 1953.

All agencies of the Government as well as private citizens in possession of any pertinent historical data in any form are hereby enjoined to extend their full cooperation to the division superintendents, district supervisors, principals, and teachers entrusted with the execution of this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Reference : Appendix

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 486 : Providing for the collection and compilation of historical data regarding barrios, towns, cities, and provinces. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 47 (12), 6046-6050.