MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 253

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF ANINI-Y AND LIBERTAD IN THE PROVINCE OF ANTIQUE

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby created in the province of Antique two municipalities to be known as the municipalities of Anini-y and Libertad with the seats of government at the barrios of Anini-y and Libertad, respectively.

The municipality of Anini-y as herein organized shall consist of the barrios of San Francisco, Iba, Nasuli-A, and Nasuli-C, Casay, Igpalge, Igtomarom, Magclalena, Mabuyong, San Roque, Nato, Butuan, Tagaytay, Anini-y, Talisayan, Sagua, Lisub A, Lisub B, Bayo Pequeiio, and Bayo Grande, all of the municipality of Dao.

The municipality of Libertad, as herein organized, shall consist of the barrios of San Roque, Pajo, Cubay, Bulanao, Maramig, Paz, Igcagay, Idiayan, Barushus, Libertad, Tabuc, Lacadon, Ebabao, Aracan, Lindero, Union, Buya, Tinigbas, and Punta Pucio, all of the municipality of Pandan.

The municipality of Dao shall have its present territory, minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Anini-y.

The municipality of Pandan shall have its present territory, minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Libertad.

The municipalities of Anini-y and Libertad shall each begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, the vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 253 : Creating the Municipalities of Anini-y and Libertad in the Province of Antique. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (8), 3173-3174.