MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 278

ORGANIZING A PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF BURAUEN, PROVINCE OF LEYTE, INTO A SEPARATE MUNICIPALITY, UNDER THE NAME OF JULITA.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Leyte a municipality to be known as the municipality of Julita, which shall consist of the eastern portion of the municipality of Burauen, more particularly bounded and described as follows:

On the north, by the present Burauen-Dagami boundary; on the east, by the present Burauen-Dulay boundary; on the south, by the present Burauen-La Paz boundary; and on the west, by a line starting from a point on the Burauen-La Paz boundary, which point is approximately 1,750 meters southeast of the center of barrio San Esteban in the municipality of Burauen and approximately 2,800 meters southwest of barrio Posod of the municipality of Julita, running straight in a northeasterly direction crossing the Burauen-Dulag provincial road at a point 650 meters west of the center of barrio San Pablo in the municipality of Julita, and continuing in the same direction until it intersects the present Burauen-Dagami boundary, somewhere northwest of barrio Libas in the municipality of Julita and northeast of barrio of Potong in the municipality of Burauen. (The data used are those shown in map of the municipality of Burauen, showing the proposed boundaries of the proposed boundary of Julita, Province of Leyte, scale 1:50,000, signed by Demetrio Resurrection, chief of survey party No. 12-A.)

The municipality of Julita, as herein created, contains the following barrios: Julita, which is the seat of the municipal government, Anibong, Aslom, Bungdo, Hindang, Calbasag, San Pablo, San Andres, Caridad, Santo Nino, Alegria, Tagkip, Tolosahay and Posod.

The municipality of Burauen shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Julita.

The municipality of Julita, as herein created, shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof, but in no case earlier than November 15, 1949.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 278 : Organizing a portion of the municipality of Burauen, province of Leyte, into a separate municipality, under the name of Julita. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (10), 4227-4228.