MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 445

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS AND SITIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF LIANGA, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF OTEIZA

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Surigao a municipality to be known as the municipality of Oteiza, comprising, the northern part of the municipality of Lianga, more particularly described and bounded as follows:

On the north by the present, Lianga-Tago boundary; on the east by the limits of the marine waters which the municipality of Oteiza. shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code; on the south by the following line which shall separate it from the municipality of Lianga: From the mouth of Gata Creek, somewhere west of sitio Britania in the municipality of Oteiza and northeast of sitio Diatago in the municipality of Lianga, running upstream following the course of this, creek to its source; thence straight due west in an imaginary line up to its intersection with the Agusan-Surigao boundary: and on the west, by the Agusan-Surigao boundary.

(Reference used in this description: Map of municipality of Lianga, showing the proposed boundary line which shall separate Oteiza from its mother municipality, scale 1: 125,000 prepared by F. M. Juntilla, road foreman, approved and submitted by District Engineer Bernardo L. Apostol, October 30, 1950.)

The municipality of Oteiza, as herein organized, contains the following barrios: Oteiza, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Salvacion, which shall comprise Sitio Britania, and Pt. Tangka, Santo Niño, Antipolo, Marihatag, Santa Cruz and San Isidro.

The municipality of Lianga shall have its present territory, minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Oteiza.

The municipality of Oteiza shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice mayor and a majority of the councilors.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 445 : Organizing certain barrios and sitios of the Municipality of Lianga, Province of Surigao, into an independent municipality under the name of Oteiza. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (6), 2758.