Office of the President

of the Whilippines
Malacatiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 96

REQUIRED ON-SITE WORKFORCE IN GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES UNDER THE ALERT LEVEL SYSTEM

WHEREAS, Article Il, Section 15 of the Constitution declared it a policy of the
State to protect and promote the right to health of the people;

WHEREAS, the Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging
Infectious Diseases, through Resolution No. 146-F (s. 2021) dated 28 October 2021,
recommended to the Office of the President the adoption of the Alert Level System for
all areas of the Philippines, through a phased nationwide rollout;

WHEREAS, the President, through Executive Order No. 151 (s. 2021)
approved the nationwide implementation of the Alert Level System and the adoption
of the “Guidelines on the Implementation of Alert Level System for COVID-19
Response in Pilot Areas” (Alert Level System Guidelines);

WHEREAS, the updated Alert Level System Guidelines provides that
government agencies and instrumentalities shall maintain a skeleton workforce or be
fully operational and shall adhere to the required percentage of on-site workforce
depending on the alert level;

WHEREAS, the updated Alert Level System Guidelines further provides that
agencies and instrumentalities of the government located in areas placed under Alert
Level 1 shall adhere to 100% on-site workforce, while off-site work shall be subject to
relevant rules and regulations issued by the Civil Service Commission (CSC) and the
Office of the President;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular No. 93 (s. 2021), as amended, provides for
the required on-site workforce in government agencies and instrumentalities under the
Alert Level System;

WHEREAS, there is a need to balance health considerations and the
continuous delivery of public services, consistent with the updated Alert Level System
for dealing with COVID-19 in the country;

NOW THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Government remains in full operation. Government agencies and
instrumentalities shall remain fully operational regardless of the alert level of the area
where they are located, but subject to the following required on-site workforce as
prescribed in the Alert Level System Guidelines, while applying work from home and
other flexible work arrangements:

a. AlertLevel5 Skeleton workforce on-site and the remainder under
alternative work arrangements as approved by the head of
agency unless a greater on-site capacity is required in
agencies providing health and emergency frontline services,
laboratory and testing services, border control, or other
critical services, in accordance with the relevant rules and
regulations issued by the Civil Service Commission.

b. AlertLevel4 at least 40% on-site workforce
c. AlertLevel3 atleast 60% on-site workforce
d. Alert Level 2 atleast 80% on-site workforce

Under Alert Level 1, all agencies and instrumentalities of the government shall
adhere to 100% on-site workforce.

Section 2. Authority to increase on-site workforce. In areas placed under
Alert Levels 2 to 5, the heads of all agencies and instrumentalities of the executive
branch, including government —owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), may
increase the on-site workforce of their offices beyond the minimum provided above.

Department secretaries may require heads of agencies over which they have
control or supervision, or which are attached to their departments, to implement a
larger on-site workforce should the one set by the agency head be insufficient for the
delivery of services, as determined by the department secretary.

Agencies providing health and emergency frontline services, laboratory and
testing services, border control, or other critical services, shall require an on-site
workforce that is larger than the minimum provided above, as may be necessary to
deliver their mandates.

In all cases, the requirement on on-site workforce shall be subject to social
distancing requirements and other minimum public health standards.

Section 3. Continuous effectivity of Memorandum Circular No. 86. (s.
2021), as amended. The provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 86 (s. 2021), as
amended by MC No. 94 (s. 2022), on compliance with health protocols in the
workplace, and the conditions therein for the reduction of on-site workforce or
temporary closure of premises of government agencies and instrumentalities, shall
continue to be observed under the Alert Level System.

Section 4. Instances when work from home arrangements may be
required. The heads of all agencies and instrumentalities of the executive branch,
including GOCCs, may require government officials and employees who are infected
or those identified as close contacts of suspect, probable and/or confirmed case of
COVID-19 or asymptomatic and underwent the required quarantine while waiting for
the result of the swab test administered upon him/her or completing the required
quarantine as prescribed to adopt work from home arrangements subject to rules and
regulations issued by the CSC.

Section 5. Application to other agencies. The offices of the legislative and
judicial branches of government, independent constitutional commissions and bodies,
and local government units are strongly urged to adopt the provisions of this Circular.

Section 6. Repeal. Memorandum Circular No. 93 (s. 2021) is hereby
superseded and all other rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent
with the provisions of this Circular are hereby repealed, amended or modified
accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect
immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this? gay of ®ebruary , in the Year of our Lord
Two Thousand and Twenty-two.

By Authority of the President

a
Pe
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary “

MALACARANG RECORDS OFFICE
CERTIFIED COPY