Office of the President
of the jihilippines

alacatang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 38

ENJOINING ALL APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO
SUPPORT THE PHILIPPINE HOSTING OF THE 518’ ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK BOARD OF GOVERNORS, TO
BE HELD IN MANILA ON 3-6 MAY 2018

WHEREAS, the Philippines, committed to fostering economic growth and
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region, continues to be an active member-state of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB);

WHEREAS, the Philippines has agreed to host the 51°' Annual ADB Board of
Governors’ Meeting, to be held on 3-6 May 2018 at the ADB Headquarters in
Mandaluyong City;

WHEREAS, there is a need to constitute a Steering Committee composed of
relevant government agencies that shall manage and supervise all tasks and activities
relative to the aforesaid Philippine hosting and to enjoin all other government agencies
to provide support and assistance to ensure a successful Philippine hosting;

WHEREAS, under Section 6, Chapter 2, Title ], Book III of Executive Order No.
292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987,” acts of the President on matters relating to
internal administration, which the President desires to bring to the attention of all or
some of the departments, agencies, bureaus or offices of the Government, for
information or compliance, shall be embodied in Memorandum Circulars;

NOW, THEREFORE, there is hereby created a Steering Committee to take
charge of the coordination, preparation and arrangement for the Philippine hosting of
the 51° Annual Meeting of the ADB Board of Governors (“the Meeting”), composed of
the following members:

Chairperson: Secretary of Finance

Members: Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
Secretary of Tourism
Secretary of Budget and Management
Secretary of Trade and Industry
Secretary of Foreign Affairs
Secretary of Public Works and Highways
Secretary of Transportation
Secretary of the Interior and Local Government

The abovementioned members, including the Chairperson, may designate and
authorize their respective representatives to the Steering Committee.

The Steering Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Coordinate the planning, preparations, and arrangements for the Philippine
hosting;

b. Make all necessary decisions pertaining to said hosting;

c. Form sub-committees for the effective implementation of the activities related
to the event; and

d. Perform such other powers and functions as may be necessary to ensure a
successful Philippine hosting of the event.

The Steering Committee shall also identify and evaluate existing and relevant
facilities and infrastructure to determine their present state or condition and direct
concerned government agencies to adopt and implement measures for immediate
improvement, renovation and rehabilitation of such facilities and infrastructure for the
event as may be necessary.

The Secretary of Finance is hereby granted power and authority to form and
head the Steering Committee that will oversee and make all necessary decisions in
relation to the hosting of the Meeting.

All other government agencies are hereby directed to ensure the proper
allocation of human resources, cooperate with the Steering Committee and provide full
support to activities related to the Meeting.

The Steering Committee shall not convene any meetings not related to the
hosting of the Meeting. Further, the Steering Committee and all other bodies as may be
established pursuant to this Memorandum Circular, including the authority and
functions of the Chairperson and the member-agencies herein, shall be functus officio
within thirty (30) calendar days from the conclusion of the Meeting, except for purposes
of settlement of obligations and other commitments to third persons incurred during the
effectivity of this Memorandum Circular in preparation for the aforesaid hosting, and for
purposes of winding-up its operations.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, thisl7thday of January in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Eighteen.

By authority of the President:

ved em

PSavabor Cc. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary A

SST RAS ey ES

of the Prasident

 

BRD.
El iG HEAD

 

 
    
  

383 Pew
COPY

SODA

SOREN

   

ESPRESSO NATE 2 RT TEENIE TNS