Office of the jiresident
of the Philippines

alacattang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 04 _
COURTESY RESIGNATIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL APPOINTEES

In view of the President's desire to rid the bureaucracy of corruption, and to
give him a free hand in achieving this objective, all presidential appointees are
hereby directed to tender their unqualified courtesy resignations within seven
(7) calendar days from date hereof, except the following:

a) newly appointed Cabinet Secretaries, Undersecretaries and Assistant
Secretaries in their respective Departments, including presidential advisers
or assistants with the equivalent rank as aforementioned;

b) other officials in the Executive Department, including state universities and
colleges, and government-owned or - controlled corporations (GOCCs),
appointed by the incumbent President;

c) career officials as defined by the Civil Service Laws, rules and regulations;

d) Judiciary;

e) officials whose offices are created by virtue of the Philippine Constitution
(e.g., Constitutional Commissions, Ombudsman, etc.); and

f) those whose appointments are currently being processed or who may be
appointed by the President shortly after the effectivity of this Memorandum

Circular.

Presidential appointees in the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the
Philippine National Police shall be dealt with separately.

Courtesy resignations shall be submitted to the Heads of Departments or
Offices exercising supervision or control over the appointee, or to which the
latter’s office is attached, copy furnished the Office of the President thru the
Executive Secretary.

In the case of GOCCs, courtesy resignations shall be submitted to the
departments respectively exercising supervision over them; otherwise, to the
Office of the President thru the Executive Secretary.

Only the President, or the Executive Secretary by authority of the President,
may act on _ courtesy resignations, taking into consideration the

recommendation of the department or agency head concerned and in
accordance with existing laws and jurisprudence.

Until any action on their courtesy resignations is taken by the President,
appointive officials shall continue to report for work and perform their normal
duties and responsibilities.

In the event the President accepts the resignation of the head of an agency or
GOCC, his/her deputy or other next-in-rank, or in the absence thereof the most
senior career official therein, shall act as Officer-In-Charge of the agency or
GOCC concerned until a replacement is duly appointed by the President.

Any presidential appointee covered by this Memorandum Circular who fails or
refuses without a valid reason to tender his or her courtesy resignation within
the period stated above may be held administratively liable and meted the
appropriate penalty.

All government officials and employees, particularly those in offices performing
regulatory, investigatory, adjudicatory, and licensing functions, whether
appointed by the President or not, including officials and employees of local
government units, are hereby enjoined to comply strictly with ethical norms of
honesty, integrity, efficiency, and fidelity to the people they are sworn to serve
and protect.

For your immediate compliance.

Done in the City of Manila, this gona day of August 2016.

By Authority of the President:

ne
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

|

NARIANITO M, DIMAANDAL

DIRECTOR IV

2| Ke .... Uae

|