Office of the President
of the Philippines
Malacaiiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 52

CREATING THE INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE ON FEDERALISM AND
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 10 (s. 2016) created the Consultative Committee
tasked to conduct consultations, and review the provisions of the 1987 Constitution
including, but not limited to, the structure and powers of government, local governance
and economic policies;

WHEREAS, the conduct of a public information drive and advocacy campaign at
the grassroots level is necessary to raise public awareness on Federalism and
constitutional reform, as well as to ensure widest public participation in the ongoing
initiatives to amend or revise the fundamental law of the land;

WHEREAS, constant consultations with all sectors of society is essential in every
stage of the process of constitutional reform so that all such efforts towards reform will
embody the sovereign will and reflect the ideals and aspirations of our people; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution vests in the President
the power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and: offices:

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Creation. There is hereby established an Inter-Agency Task Force on
Federalism (IATF) to be composed of the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government
or his equivalent as Chairperson; the Secretary of Justice, as Vice-Chairperson; and the
heads of the following offices/agencies as members:

(a) Office of the Cabinet Secretary;

(b) Presidential Management Staff;

(c) Presidential Communications Operations Office;
(d) Office of the Presidential Spokesperson;

(e) Presidential Legislative Liaison Office;

(f) Office of the Political Adviser;

(g) Commission on Higher-Education;

(h) Development Academy of the Philippines; and
(i) University of the Philippines Law Center.

The members may designate their respective permanent representatives to the
IATF with the rank of Undersecretary or Assistant Secretary.

Technical and administrative support services of the IATF shall be sourced from the
organic personnel of the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), and if
necessary, from the other member-agencies of the IATF.

Section 2. Functions. The IATF shall have the primary duty of integrating,
harmonizing and coordinating ongoing efforts towards Federalism and constitutional
reform. To this end, the I|ATF shall perform the following functions:

(a) Develop strategies and implement such activities necessary and proper to raise
public awareness on Federalism and constitutional reform;

(b) Prepare an Information Dissemination and Public Communication Plan to ensure
an effective, efficient and uniform undertaking of advocacy activities: :

(c) Undertake consultations with the former members of the Consultative Committee,
government agencies, the private sector, and the public in general concerning
Federalism and constitutional reform;

(d) Liaise with Congress to initiate the process of and address the roadblocks to
constitutional reform; and

(e) Perform such other functions as the President may direct.

Section 3. Agency Coordination. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, or
instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or -controlled
corporations and state universities and colleges, are hereby directed to coordinate with
the IATF before conducting any activity involving Federalism and constitutional reform, to
render the necessary support to the IATF consistent with their respective mandates, and
to participate in the educational programs and orientation seminars on Federalism and
constitutional reform that the IATF shall conduct.

Section 4. Reportorial Requirement. The IATF shall submit quarterly reports on
its activities and accomplishments to the President.

Section 5. Funding Requirement. The budgetary requirements for the operations
of the IATF shall be sourced from appropriate funding sources that the Department of
Budget and Management may identify, subject to relevant laws, rules and regulations.

Funding for succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget proposal of the
DILG.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 34S* day of Octeber in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Eighteen.

By authority of the President:

4. be
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary &