Office of the President
of i ilippines
al

acatany

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 93

REQUIRED ON-SITE WORKFORCE IN GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
AND INSTRUMENTALITIES UNDER THE ALERT LEVEL SYSTEM

WHEREAS, Article II, Section 15 of the Constitution declared it a policy of the
State to protect and promote the right to health of the people;

WHEREAS, the IATF, through Resolution No. 146-F (s. 2021) dated 28
October 2021, recommended to the Office of the President the adoption of the Alert
Level System for all areas of the Philippines, through a phased nationwide rollout;

WHEREAS, the President, through Executive Order No. 151 approved the
nationwide implementation of the Alert Level System and the adoption of the
“Guidelines on the Implementation of Alert Level System for COVID-19 Response in
Pilot Areas’ ( Alert Level System Guidelines);

WHEREAS, the Alert Level System Guidelines provides that government
agencies and instrumentalities shall remain to be fully operational and shall adhere to
the required on-site workforce depending on the alert level, with those assigned to
work off-site subject to alternative work arrangements as approved by the head of
agency in accordance with the relevant rules and regulations issued by the Civil
Service Commission;

WHEREAS, there are reports that some government agencies and
instrumentalities have such a small proportion of their total workforce on-site that the
delivery of public service suffers as a result;

WHEREAS, there is a need to balance health considerations and the
continuous delivery of public services, regardless of the alert level system prevailing
in a particular area;

NOW THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Government remains in full operation. Government agencies
and instrumentalities shall remain fully operational regardless of the alert level of the
area where they are located, but subject to the following required on-site workforce as
prescribed in the Alert Level System Guidelines, while applying work from home and
other flexible work arrangements:

a. Alert Level5 Skeleton workforce on-site and the remainder under
alternative work arrangements as approved by the head of
agency unless a greater on-site capacity is required in
agencies providing health and emergency frontline services,
laboratory and testing services, border control, or other

critical services, in accordance with the relevant rules and
regulations issued by the Civil Service Commission.

b. AlertLevel 4 atleast 40% on-site workforce

c. AlertLevel3 atleast 60% on-site workforce

 

d. AlertLevel 2 atleast 80% on-site workforce

Section 2. Authority to increase on-site workforce. The heads of all
agencies and instrumentalities of the executive branch, including government —owned
or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), may increase the on-site workforce of their
offices beyond the minimum provided above.

Department secretaries may require heads of agencies over which they have
control or supervision, or which are attached to their departments, to implement a
larger on-site workforce should the one set by the agency head be insufficient for the
delivery of services, as determined by the department secretary.

Agencies providing health and emergency frontline services, laboratory and
testing services, border control, or other critical services, shall require an on-site
workforce that is larger than the minimum provided above, as may be necessary to
deliver their mandates.

In all cases, the requirement on on-site workforce shall be subject to social
distancing requirements and other minimum public health standards.

Section 3. Continuous effectivity of Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 86 (s.
2021). The provisions of MC No. 86 (s. 2021) on compliance with health protocols in
the workplace, and the conditions therein for the temporary closure of premises of
government agencies and instrumentalities, shall continue to be observed under the
Alert Level System.

Section 4. Application to other agencies. The offices of the legislative and
judicial branches of government, independent constitutional commissions and bodies,
and local government units are strongly urged to adopt the provisions of this Circular.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect
immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 17 thday of December, in the Year of our Lord
Two Thousand and Twenty-one.

By Authority of the President:

a

™N

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

__Executive Secretary

[ Office of the President
|

   
  
 

MALACARANG RECORDS OFFICE

ER TERR

3 e