Office of the President
of the Philippines

alacatiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 76

ENJOINING ALL SECTORS TO SUPPORT, COOPERATE WITH,
AND PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO THE PHILIPPINE STATISTICS
AUTHORITY TO ENSURE THE SUCCESSFUL CONDUCT OF THE
2020 CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING

WHEREAS, Batas Pambansa Blg. 72 (s. 1980) mandates the conduct of an
integrated census of population and housing every ten (10) years beginning in 1980;

WHEREAS, under Republic Act (RA) No. 10625 or the “Philippine Statistical
Act of 2013,” the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) shall prepare and conduct
periodic censuses on population, housing and other sectors of the economy;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 352 (s. 1996) provides for the conduct
of the census of population and housing every ten (10) years, primarily to take an
inventory of the total population and housing units in the country and collect
information about their characteristics;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No.928 (s. 2020) declared May 2020 as National
Census Month, with 01 May 2020 as the census reference date; and

WHEREAS, to provide government executives, policymakers, and planners
with updated population and housing data on which to base their social and
economic development plans and programs that will benefit the various sectors and
local communities, it is imperative for the government to obtain a complete and
accurate census count;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. The PSA Board shall act as the National Census Coordinating
Board (NCCB) which shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary for
the successful undertaking and completion of the May 2020 census.

Section 2. The PSA shall be the lead implementing agency which shall take
all steps necessary for the smooth conduct of the census and provide full-time
support in planning and implementing activities for the census operations and ensure
that the gathering, consolidation and analysis of census data shall be done in the
most truthful and credible manner.

Section 3. All national government agencies, government-owned or
_ controlled corporations, government financial institutions, state universities and

colleges and their attached agencies and instrumentalities are hereby directed, and
a local government units, as well as the private sector, are enjoined to render
prompt and necessary assistance to the NCCB, the PSA and the census boards at
1 c al level in the conduct of the census, including related promotion, information
Ination and program coordination, subject to applicable laws, rules and

Section 4. The data collectors and processors shall perform their duties and
responsibilities with utmost integrity and commitment in accordance with existing
laws, rules and procedures

Section 5. The PSA and its deputized officers and personnel shall protect and
ensure the confidentiality of the data and information obtained from the respondents,
which will be held in strictest confidence and in accordance with RA No. 10173 or the
“Data Privacy Act of 2012,” and other relevant laws and regulations.

Section 6. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 13thday of March , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

By authority O/the President:

\aivaoon C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

3 ident
Cffice of the Pres :
MALACAMANG RECORDS OFFICE

m COPY