@ffice of the President
of vi hilippines
alacatt

aranang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 95

DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES, OFFICES,
INSTRUMENTALITIES, AS WELL AS LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS,
TO PREPARE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PHILIPPINE
IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM AND ITS’ INTEGRATION INTO
GOVERNMENT PROCESSES, DATABASES, SYSTEMS AND
SERVICES ‘

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11055 or the “Philippine
Identification System Act,” established the Philippine Identification System (PhilSys)
as the single national identification system for citizens and resident aliens of the
country, to promote seamless delivery of services, improve efficiency, transparency
and targeted delivery of public social services, as well as to enhance administrative
governance, reduce corruption, curtail bureaucratic red-tape, avert fraudulent
transactions, strengthen financial inclusion, and promote ease of doing business;

WHEREAS, under Section 3 of RA No. 11055, the PhilSys shall provide citizens
and resident aliens with sufficient proof of identity as a means of simplifying public and
private transactions, with the view of eliminating the need to present other forms of
identification especially when transacting with the government;

WHEREAS, Section 7 of RA No. 11055: (i) directs all government agencies,
including government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), to incorporate in
their identification systems and databases the PhilSys Number (PSN) of covered
individuals, which shall be the standard number for an individual across all agencies
of the government; and (ii) provides that the Philippine Identification (PhillD) serves as
the official government-issued identification document for dealing with all national
government agencies, local government units (LGUs), GOCCs and government
financial institutions (GFIs);

WHEREAS, Section 12 of RA No. 11055 provides that for purposes of
establishing proof of identity for transacting business with any government agency and
the private sector, the presentation of the PhillD or PSN shall constitute sufficient proof
thereof, subject to proper authentication;

WHEREAS, Section 13 of RA No. 11055 provides that: (i) the PhillD shall be
honored and accepted, subject to authentication, in all transactions requiring proof or
verification of a citizen’s or a resident alien’s identity; and (ii) the PSN and biometrics
of an individual, as authenticated through the PhilSys, shall be honored and accepted,
notwithstanding the absence or non-presentation of a PhillD;

WHEREAS, Section 20 of RA No. 11055 mandates the Philippine Statistics
Authority (PSA) to gradually synchronize and consolidate all existing government-

initiated identification systems into a single integrated and interconnected identification
system; and

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to direct the whole-of-government to
undertake preparatory steps to ensure that the PhilSys and its key components are
properly integrated in the processes, databases, systems and services of all
government agencies, to facilitate interconnectivity, make transacting with the
government convenient and cost-efficient for the benefit of the general public, and
ensure the effective implementation of RA No. 11055;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Integration of PhilSys into Government Processes, Databases,
Identification Systems and Services. All government agencies, instrumentalities,
departments, bureaus, offices, LGUs, GOCCs, GFls, state universities and colleges,
as well as other chartered institutions (hereafter “Covered Agencies”) are hereby
directed to incorporate and integrate in their respective processes, databases,
identification systems and services, the PSN and PhillD of registered individuals, as
well as the other components and features of the PhilSys. It is understood, however,
that the PhilSys integration shall not grant Covered Agencies access, in any form, to

The Covered Agencies shall prioritize PhilSys integration to enable the use of
PhilSys-enabled services, involving, among others, online authentication processes
and proper controls for the PhillD, including features such as real-time authentication
and validation, as established by the PSA, within two (2) years from the launching of
the said services in their respective agencies. Towards this end, all Covered Agencies
shall perform the following:

a. Identify processes and services within their respective agencies that can
utilize the PhilSys, to enable, among others, online and paper-less
transactions, as well as the removal of duplicates and ghost records from
registries;

b. Determine the appropriate types and quantity of biometric authentication
devices that need to be procured;

c. Develop their respective 2-year work plans (PhilSys Integration Plan),
indicating the activities to be covered by the integration initiative, the
timelines to fully implement said integration, the responsible units therefor,
and the budget for the same;

d. Incorporate PhilSys integration as a priority initiative in their respective
strategic plans and programs, such as the Information System Strategic
Plan;

e. Coordinate with and enter into formal agreements with the PSA to ensure
successful, efficient and effective implementation of the PhilSys integration;
and

f. Publish in their respective annual reports, or in any equivalent document,
the agency’s PhilSys Integration Plan, including the status of its
implementation.

Consistent with Section 18 of RA No. 11055, reasonable and appropriate
organizational, technical, and physical security measures shall be put in place in the
planning and implementation of the PhilSys integration, to ensure that PhilSys
Registry, as well as other registered information, are protected from unauthorized
access, use and disclosure, and against accidental or intentional loss, destruction or
damage.

Section 2. Monitoring. All Covered Agencies are directed to submit to the
PhilSys Policy and Coordination Council (PSPCC), their PhilSys Integration Plans
within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Circular. For purposes of monitoring
compliance with the herein directives, all Covered Agencies are required to submit
quarterly status reports to the PSPCC until completion of their respective workplans.

Section 3. PSA Support. The PSA, through its PhilSys Registry Office, is
directed to support the Covered Agencies, as well as the private sector, in the
planning, analysis, integration, piloting and scaling of use cases.

Section 4. Interoperability of Databases and Systems. The PSA, together
with the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT), shall
ensure that all information databases and systems to be developed by government
entities shall be synchronized to facilitate interoperability of government-initiated
identification systems, ensure efficient and more reliable government transactions,
and secure access to information and services. In this regard, the DICT shall ensure
that future information technology developments of the government shall include the
PSN as a field, and shall be fully capable of being integrated with the PhilSys.

Section 5. Repeal. All issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof, which
are inconsistent with this Circular, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7t: dayof february _ inthe year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By authority of the President:

4».

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA, _
_ Executive 2 Secretary “e

Ps ns IED COPY

3 i
ofr, os mie :
fy 2 reun DIRECTOR IV poi?