Office of the Iresident
of va htlippines
Ma

acanang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 79

OPERATIONAL CAPACITY TO BE ADOPTED BY GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES DURING A MODIFIED
ENHANCED COMMUNITY QUARANTINE

WHEREAS, on 02 August 2020, President Rodrigo Roa Duterte placed Metro
Manila and the Provinces of Laguna, Cavite, Rizal, and Bulacan under a modified
enhanced community quarantine (MECQ), effective 04 August 2020;

WHEREAS, the Omnibus Guidelines on the Implementation of Community
Quarantine in the Philippines issued by the Inter-Agency Task Force for the
Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF), provides for, among others, the
operational capacity that may be adopted in agencies and instrumentalities of the
government, including government -owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), as
well as local government units (LGUs) under each community quarantine
classification;

WHEREAS, the Civil Service Commission (CSC) issued Memorandum Circular
No. 10 (s. 2020), providing for the Revised Interim Guidelines for Alternative Work
Arrangements and Support Mechanisms for Workers in the Government During the
Period of State of National Emergency Due to COVID-19 Pandemic; and

WHEREAS, to ensure the continuous delivery of services in government
agencies and instrumentalities, while observing the guidelines on community
quarantine, there is a need to lay down the work arrangements that should be
observed by government offices under MECQ;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Definition of Terms. As used herein, the following terms shall be
understood thus:

a) Operational capacity — the number of employees or workers who can be
permitted or required to physically report to work on-site in a particular
agency of the government, generally expressed as a percentage of the total
workforce in such agency;

Skeleton workforce — the operational capacity which utilizes the smallest
number of people needed for a government agency to perform its basic
functions.

=

Section 2. Operational capacity in MECQ. All government agencies and
instrumentalities of the executive branch, including GOCCs, located in all geographical
areas placed under MECQ, shall adopt a skeleton workforce up to a maximum of 50%
operational capacity at any given time, unless a higher operational capacity is required
in agencies providing health and emergency frontline services, border control, and
other critical services.

Section 3. Alternative work arrangements. All agencies, including every
office and unit therein, shall ensure that the delivery of their respective services are
not hampered or impaired. Towards this end, all heads of agencies, while maintaining
compliance with the operational capacity provided herein, shall adopt the most
appropriate alternative work arrangements for their respective agencies, in
accordance with the relevant rules and regulations of the CSC.

Section 4. Application to other agencies. The offices of the legislative and
judicial branches of government, independent constitutional commissions and bodies,

and LGUs located in areas placed under MECQ, are strongly urged to adopt the
provisions of this Circular.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect
immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of August, in the Year of our Lord
Two Thousand and Twenty.

By Authority of the President:

fe ce
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary (+

  

  
   
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

  
      

 

ATTY. CONCEPCIO€ E. FERROLIRO-ERAD

Isl f. DIRECTOR IV