Office of the President
of the 3hilippines

Halacafiang
MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. _12

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND
THE PUBLIC INVESTMENT PROGRAM FOR THE PERIOD 2017-2022

WHEREAS, the 1987 Philippine Constitution mandates the independent economic and
planning agency of the government to implement continuing integrated and coordinated
programs and policies for national development after consultations with the appropriate
public agencies, various private sectors, and local government units;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 292 (s. 1987) or the Administrative Code of 1987
provides that the State shall ensure that all socio-economic programs and activities of the
government shall be programmed within the context of well-formulated and consistent long,
medium, and short-term development plans and policies to promote both the growth of the
economy and the equitable distribution of the benefits of such growth to the members of
society;

WHEREAS, EO No. 5 (s. 2016) adopted AMBISYON NATIN 2040, the twenty-five-year
long term vision for the Philippines, to wit: “By 2040, the Philippines shall be a prosperous,
predominantly middle-class society where no one is poor; our peoples shall live long and
healthy lives, be smart and innovative, and shall live in a high-trust society,” as well as the
concomitant overall long-term goals of tripling real per capita incomes and eradicating
hunger and poverty by 2040, if not sooner;

WHEREAS, the United Nations General Assembly, of which the Philippines is a member,
adopted Resolution No. 70/1 on 25 September 2015, laying down seventeen goals as the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in order to engage in efforts to eradicate
poverty, and promote inclusive and sustainable growth for all;

WHEREAS, the President's 0+10-Point Socio-Economic Agenda lays down the priority
strategies that have direct and positive impact on the lives of the Filipino people in order to
attain genuine inclusive growth;

WHEREAS, AMBISYON NATIN 2040, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the President's 0+10-Point Socio-Economic Agenda need to be translated into specific and
coherent strategies, policies and programs, at the national and local levels, in order to
ensure the achievement of the goals stated therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered that:

SECTION 1. The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) shall
coordinate the preparation of the Philippine Development Plan (PDP), Public Investment
Program (PIP) and Regional Development Plans/Investment Programs for the period 2017-
2022 to be jointly formulated by the executive and legislative branches of the government,
with the participation of other sectors, including the marginalized and private sectors.

SECTION 2. All departments, offices and instrumentalities of the government,
including government-owned or controlled corporations (GOCCs), shall formulate their
respective medium-term development plans and action programs. These plans and
programs shall have a results-oriented focus on national development goals and shall be in
line with AMBISYON NATIN 2040, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
President's 0+10-Point Socio-Economic Agenda.

SECTION 3. The PDP shall contain the following basic elements:

a. Development goals and objectives;

b. Strategic policy framework to attain such goals and objectives; and

c. Results Matrix, which contains a list of indicators that can be monitored to
determine the progress of the plan.

SECTION 4. The PDP shall be submitted to the NEDA Board and the Legislative
Executive Development Advisory Council by January 2017.

SECTION 5. All departments, offices and instrumentalities of the government,
including GOCCs, shall draw inputs from their respective regional offices. The regional
development concerns of the various government entities shall be consistent with the
regional development plans.

SECTION 6. All plans of the local government units shall be consistent with the
regional development strategies, physical framework and local needs.

SECTION 7. All sectors of society, both public and private, shall be consulted to the
fullest to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related to the plans herein
mentioned.

SECTION 8. The planning guidelines to be followed in the formulation of plans and
programs shall be issued by the NEDA Secretariat and shall be made an integral part of
this Circular.

SECTION 9. The Department of Budget and Management shall provide the funds
necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Circular, subject to the usual
accounting and auditing requirements.

SECTION 10. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this24thday of _ October __, in the Year of our Lord

Two Thousand and Sixteen.

By authority of the President:

a fe

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary A
CERTIFIED COPY: —
| MARIANO M. DIMAANDAL
DIRECTOR [9 b aed

Src. ____MALACARUNG REGIE