Office of the President
of the Philippines
Malacanang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 97.

INSTITUTIONALIZING WHOLE-OF-GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR
THE NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR FINANCIAL INCLUSION 2022-
2028

WHEREAS, Article XII, Section 1 of the Constitution provides that the goals of
the national economy are a more equitable distribution of opportunities, income, and
wealth; a sustained increase in the amount of goods and services produced by the
nation for the benefit of the people; and an expanding productivity as the key to raising
the quality of life for all, especially the underprivileged;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, along with other nations, have actively pursued
financial inclusion, to provide the citizenry, especially the most vulnerable sectors,
effective access to appropriate financial products and services, for the purpose of
enhancing their financial health;

WHEREAS, the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion, launched in 2015,
provided the vision, strategic objectives, and guiding principles that would promote
financial inclusion;

WHEREAS, to accelerate financial inclusion in the country, the Financial
Inclusion Steering Committee, established under Executive Order No. 208 (s. 2016),
updated the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion to include priority initiatives,
targets, and key performance indicators which will guide the government and
stakeholders;

WHEREAS, consistent with the long term vision under Ambisyon Natin 2040,
as well as the strategies under the Updated Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022,
the government recognizes the significance of financial inclusion as a policy objective
that will lay the groundwork for wide-ranging, sustainable and equitable national
development;

WHEREAS, as a shared blueprint that aspires to achieve financial inclusion
towards broad-based financial resilience, the adoption and implementation of the
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion demands cooperation and support from the
whole-of-government; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to institutionalize government support for the
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion to ensure that measures, policies, programs,
and other efforts of the government on financial inclusion are coordinated and
harmonized, as well as to encourage its adoption in local programs and policies, all
for the purpose of ensuring the Strategy’s effective implementation;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Whole-of-Government Support for the National Strategy for
Financial Inclusion (NSFI). All departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of the
government, including state universities and colleges (SUCs), government-owned or
-controlled corporations (GOCCs), and foreign-based government agencies, are

hereby directed to support the implementation of the NFSI, in line with their respective
functions and mandates. Particularly, the whole-of-government shall:

i. Incorporate relevant priority initiatives under the NSFI in their respective
work programs, policies and budgets;

ii. Participate, as requested, in working groups created by the Financial
Inclusion Steering Committee and other NSFI initiatives; and

iii. Provide relevant data, upon request, subject to data sharing regulations, for
purposes of monitoring and evaluation of the NFSI’s implementation.

Section 2. Financial Inclusion as a Subnational Development Agenda. All
Regional Development Councils (RDCs) and equivalent bodies are enjoined to adopt
financial inclusion as a development agenda. RDCs and Local Development Councils
(LDCs) are highly encouraged to reflect financial inclusion objectives, priorities, and
targets, in accordance with the NSFI, in their regional and local plans and programs.

All local government units (LGUs) are likewise encouraged to promote financial
inclusion within their respective jurisdictions, particularly in their capacity development
programs, provincial development and physical framework plans, as well as other local
planning, programming and budgeting, local legislation, project development,
implementation, and monitoring and evaluation activities.

Section 3. Role of the Financial Inclusion Steering Committee (FISC). The
FISC shall coordinate with and provide technical assistance to RDCs and LGUs in the
implementation of this Circular, particularly as regards the incorporation of NSFI
objectives, priorities and targets in their respective plans and programs. The FISC
shall also conduct information, education and communication activities towards
building public understanding on the NSFI.

Section 4. Funding. Funds necessary for the implementation of this Circular
shall be charged against the appropriations of concerned government agencies with
respect to their NSFl-related programs, projects and activities, subject to the usual
accounting and auditing requirements, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Repeal. All issuances, rules, and regulations or parts thereof, which
are inconsistent with this Circular are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity. The Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, Philippines, this23xday of June in the
Year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By authority of the President:

e te
‘SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA~—-

Executive Secretary