Office of the President
of pia ilippines

alacatiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 94

PROVIDING FOR THE REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES FOR
REDUCING ON-SITE WORKFORCE IN GOVERNMENT OFFICES
BELOW THE MINIMUM SET FORTH UNDER THE ALERT LEVEL
SYSTEM, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE MEMORANDUM
CIRCULAR NO. 86 (S. 2021) AND MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO.
93 (s. 2021)

WHEREAS, Article II, Section 15 of the Constitution declared it a policy of the
State to protect and promote the right to health of the people;

WHEREAS, the President, through Executive Order No. 151 (s. 2021)
approved the nationwide implementation of the Alert Level System and the adoption
of the “Guidelines on the Implementation of Alert Levels System for COVID-19
Response in Pilot Areas”; / /

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular (MC) No 93 (s. 2021) provides for the
required on-site workforce in government agencies and instrumentalities under the
Alert Level System, and further provides that the provisions of MC No. 86 (s. 2021) on
compliance with health protocols in the workplace and temporary closure of premises
of government agencies and instrumentalities shall continue to be observed during the
implementation of the Alert Level System;

WHEREAS, with the recent surge of COVID-19 cases in the country, there are
reports that government offices are finding it difficult to comply with the minimum on-
site workforce provided in the Alert Level System and MC No. 93 due to the increasing
number of COVID-19 positive cases among their personnel, and the need to observe
isolation and quarantine protocols for such personnel and their close contacts;

WHEREAS, there is a need to balance health considerations and the
continuous delivery of public services, even in situations where the number of COVID-
19 cases suddenly increase;

NOW THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. Amendment of MC No. 86 (s. 2021). Section 3 of MC No. 86 (s.
2021) is hereby amended, thus:

“Section 3. Reduction of On-site Workforce and Temporary
Closure of Premises. In all cases, the reduction of on-site workforce
below the minimum provided in the Alert Level System and the temporary

closure of premises, shall be regarded as extreme measures, reserved
for situations where the spread of COVID-19 in the workplace has
become overwhelming and unmanageable. Such reduction of on-site
workforce and closures shall be governed by the following rules:

a. The head of an agency or instrumentality considering to reduce its on-
site workforce in, or to temporarily close, its main or central office shall
submit to the head of the department exercising control or supervision
over it, or to which it is attached, a request for clearance to do so. The
request shall state the proposed duration of such measure and must be
supported by verified data and other documentation which the
department head deems fit to require. No reduction of on-site workforce
or closure shall be implemented until such clearance is obtained from the
head of the department.

 

b. The reduction of on-site workforce in, or temporary closure of, branches,
and regional or field offices, can be decided by the head of the concerned
department, agency or instrumentality. In the case of agencies or
instrumentalities, they shall notify the head of the department exercising
control or supervision over them, or to which they are attached, of the
reduction of on-site workforce or the temporary closure, and the
measures adopted to ensure continuous and uninterrupted delivery of
public service. This is without prejudice to the discretion of the

- department head to require prior clearance from his or her office before
implementation of such measures.

 

c. Agencies or instrumentalities not under the control or supervision of or
attached to any department, as well as departments considering the
reduction of the on-site workforce in, or the temporary closure of, their
main or central offices, shall submit their request for clearance to the
Office of the President. The heads of these departments or agencies can
also act upon requests for_the reduction of on-site workforce in, or
temporary closure of, their branches, and field or regional offices, subject
to the submission by such heads of the same requirements stated in (b)
above, to the Office of the President.

 

 

d. Reduction of on-site workforce or temporary closures merely to conduct
disinfection of premises shall not be allowed. Such activity shall be
undertaken after office hours or on weekends.

e. Agencies or instrumentalities implementing the reduction of on-site
workforce or temporary closure shall ensure that there will be manned

hotlines, on-site or off-site, to respond to the immediate concerns of their
respective stakeholders.

 

 

Section 2. Amendment of MC No. 93. Section 3 of MC No. 93 is hereby
amended, thus:

“Section 3. Continuous effectivity of Memorandum Circular (MC)
No. 86 (s. 2021). The provisions of MC No. 86 (s. 2021), as amended,
on compliance with health protocols in the workplace, and the

 

conditions therein for the reduction of on-site workforce or temporary
closure of premises of government agencies and instrumentalities,
shall continue to be observed under the Alert Level System.”

Section 3. Effectivity. This Memorandum Circular shail take effect
immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7t4 day of January __, in the Year of our
Lord Two Thousand and Twenty-two.

By Authority of the President:

“

(——49 *s

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

  

Ol

a