@ffice of the Jrestdent
of the Philtppines
Malacaniang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 78

REPEALING MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 11 (S. 2010) AND
DIRECTING THE TRANSFER OF REGIONAL OFFICES OF NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES IN REGION IX FROM ZAMBOANGA CITY
TO PAGADIAN CITY PURSUANT TO EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 429 (S.

WHEREAS, to guarantee the effective delivery of the field services of government
employees, Executive Order (EO) No. 429 (s. 1990) reorganized the administrative
regions of Mindanao and designated Pagadian City as the regional government center
and Zamboanga City as the commercial and industrial center of Region |X;

WHEREAS, pursuant to EO No. 429, Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 75 (s. 2004)
directed all regional offices of all departments and agencies of the National Government
to transfer from Zamboanga City to Pagadian City, except the Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI), Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) and Department of
Tourism (DOT), which shall all remain in Zamboanga City, but shall establish presence
in Pagadian City;

WHEREAS, MC No. 11 (s. 2010), as amended, imposed a moratorium on the
transfer of regional offices from Zamboanga City to Pagadian City and directed that a
study be conducted on the economic and social costs thereof;

WHEREAS, the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Board
Regional Development Committee has determined that the designation of Pagadian City
increased the accessibility to the public of the regional government center, and fostered
inclusive growth which resulted in economic vibrancy for the rest of the region; and

WHEREAS, the designations of Pagadian City as the regional government center
and Zamboanga City as the commercial and industrial center of Region IX are consistent
with the 10 Point Socioeconomic Agenda of the Administration to accelerate rural
development, as well as the development strategy espoused in the Regional Spatial
Development Framework 2016 to 2045 approved by the NEDA — Regional Development
Council (RDC) IX;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. The moratorium on the transfer of regional offices from Zamboanga
City to Pagadian City, imposed under MC No. 11, as amended, is hereby lifted.

Section 2. The remaining regional offices of all departments and agencies of the
National Government in Region IX situated in Zamboanga City, or wherever they are

currently located, are hereby ordered to transfer to Pagadian City, except those of the
DTI, DOLE and DOT, which shall remain in Zamboanga City, but shall establish presence
in Pagadian City. The transfer of these agencies, to be supervised by the NEDA RDC IX
in coordination with the City Government of Pagadian City, must be completed within two
(2) years from the effectivity of this Circular.

Section 3. All departments, bureaus, agencies, and offices of the National
Government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations and_ state
universities and colleges, are hereby directed to extend the necessary support, including
technical and logistical assistance, in the implementation of this Circular.

Section 4. Any violation of this Circular shall be dealt with in accordance with Civil
Service laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. The funding requirements to operationalize the transfer to Pagadian
City of the remaining regional offices shall be sourced from their respective office budgets
or, in the absence thereof, from the budget of their mother departments or agencies.

Section 6. MC No. 11 is hereby repealed. All other issuances, or parts thereof,
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Circular are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 7. If any part or provision of this Circular is held unconstitutional or invalid,
other parts not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 8. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this25thiay of June , in the Year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

By Authority of the President:

’

/———__6 Le
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

   
 

  

Office of the Presklent
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFAED COPY

ATTY. COMCEPCH

bu wom. DI vg