Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 07

CONDUCT OF THE THIRD-QUARTER (2016) NATIONWIDE SIMULTANEOUS EARTHQUAKE DRILL ON 28 SEPTEMBER 2016

WHEREAS, Section 2 (d) of Republic Act (RA) No.  10121 or the “Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 201O”  provides that it is the policy of the state to adopt and implement a coherent, comprehensive, integrated, efficient and responsive disaster risk reduction program incorporated in the development plan at various levels of government adhering to the principles of good governance;

WHEREAS, according   to   the   Philippine   Institute   of   Volcanology   and Seismology, the 100-kilometer West Valley Fault Line, which traverses certain cities and towns in Metro Manila, is considered to be ripe for movement, and the cities and towns therein including nearby provinces may experience earthquakes with a magnitude of up to 7.2 which may cause significant damage to property and loss of lives;

WHEREAS, quarterly  Nationwide  Simultaneous  Earthquake  Drills (NSED) have been held since 2009, which aim to engage the participation of the government and the private sector so that disaster preparedness will be ingrained in the people’s consciousness;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered:

SECTION 1. Nationwide Simultaneous Earthquake Drill . The Third-Quarter (2016) NSED shall be held on 28 September 2016.

SECTION   2. Participation of Government Agencies and Instrumentalities. All  heads  of  government  departments,  bureaus  and  offices, including government-owned or -controlled corporations and local government units (LGUs),  are  enjoined  to  authorize  and  encourage  their  respective officials  and employees  to  participate  in the  NSED.  Further, they are  accorded discretion to exempt  their  officials  and  employees,  who  shall  form  part  of  such effort,  from observing regular office hours, without prejudice to the regular and efficient delivery of government services, subject to applicable laws, rules and regulations

SECTION 3. Implementing Agencies. The National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council and the Office of Civil Defense shall lead in the implementation of this Circular and shall perform the following functions:

(a) Plan and implement a nationwide earthquake drill on 28 September 2016;

(b) Prepare a schedule of activities to be observed during the Third-Quarter (2016) NSED;

(c) Closely coordinate with other agencies involved in disaster response for purposes of implementing this Circular;

(d) Encourage and coordinate earthquake drill initiatives of all LGUs;

(e) Encourage the participation and call on the assistance of the private sector, including volunteer and civic organizations, in the implementation of this Circular;

(f) Disseminate information to the media and the general public regarding the conduct of the nationwide simultaneous earthquake drill;

(g) Submit a report on the implementation and evaluation of the Third-Quarter (2016) NSED;

(h) Perform other functions consistent with the implementation of this Circular.

SECTION 4. Repeal. All issuances,  orders, rules, and regulations or parts thereof  which  are  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this  Circular  are  hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. Separability. If any provision of this Circular is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 26th day of September, in the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Sixteen.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd). SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA Executive Secretary