Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 03

ENJOINING ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES TO STRICTLY OBSERVE AND COMPLY WITH THE REQUIRED WORK HOURS

WHEREAS , Section 2 of the Republic Act No. 6713, otherwise known as the “Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees,” provides that it is the policy of the State to promote a high standard of ethics in the public service and requires government personnel to discharge their duties with utmost responsibility, integrity, competence, and loyalty, act with patriotism and justice, lead modest lives, and uphold public interest over personal interest.

WHEREAS , Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of Executive Order (EO) No. 292 (s. 1997) (Omnibus Rules) states that each head of the department or agency shall require all officers and employee under him to strictly observe the prescribed office hour through a daily time record of attendance of all the officials and employees under him, including those serving in the field or on the water;

WHEREAS , Section 5, Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules, provides that officers and employees of all department and agencies except those covered by special laws shall render not less than eight (8) hours of work a day for five (5) days a week or a total of forty (40) hours a week exclusive of time for lunch, which as a general rule shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 and from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on all days except Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays;

WHEREAS , Section 6, Rule XVII of the said Omnibus Rules, states that flexible working hours may be allowed subject to the discretion of the head of department or agency, provided that the weekly working hours shall nor be reduced on the event the department or agency adopts the flexi-time schedule in reporting for work;

WHEREAS , Section 46 (b), Chapter 7, Subtitle A, Title I, Book V of EO no. 292 considers neglect of duty, inefficiency of performance of official duties, loafing or frequent unauthorized absences from duty during regular office hours, and conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the service as grounds for disciplinary actions;

WHEREAS , it has been reported that many government officials and employees have been remiss in their obligation to render the required government work hours;

NOW THEREFORE , in order to ensure the observance of the highest ethical standards among public officials and employees, the following are hereby ordered:

This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 8th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and sixteen.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd). SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA Executive Secretary