Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 05

ORDERING THE SUBMISSION OF PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFERS

WHEREAS, Section 2(a) of Administrative Order No. 2(s.2010) created the Presidential Situation Room (PSR) for the purpose of monitoring events, situations and  developments   that  have  national  security  implications,  including  those  with serious diplomatic,  political and peace and order ramifications;

WHEREAS, the PSR also provides the President with intelligence  and crisis support and serves as the National Crisis Management Operations Center for various contingencies and crises;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the President to have timely and full access to adequate and accurate information on all urgent and critical events and incidents affecting national interest, even on matters not directly affecting national security, to ensure efficient, prompt and effective government action on all potential or actual crisis situations;

NOW THEREFORE, it is hereby directed as follows:

Section 1.  Submission of Reports to the PSR. All departments, agencies, bureaus, and instrumentalities of the National Government shall submit reports to the PSR on matters within their respective mandates, which are of urgent and critical nature and/or of national interest, warranting the immediate attention of the President.

For this purpose, all concerned shall submit to the National Security Council Secretariat the name of their designated focal person who shall coordinate with and shall be in charge of preparing and transmitting their report to the PSR.  Such reports should be concise and submitted daily as may be necessary, not later than 5:00 p.m. of each day.

Section 2. Presidential Daily Briefer. Upon receipt, the PSR shall evaluate and consolidate the reports into a Presidential Daily Briefer containing matters of urgent and critical nature and/or of national interest.  The PSR shall promptly submit the Briefer to the President, through the Presidential Management Staff.

Section 3. Separability. If any provision of this Circular is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsist

Section 4. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Sixteen.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd). SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA Executive Secretary