Office of the President
of the 3pbiltppines

SHlalacatang
MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 57

REMINDING ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICES, AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR
-CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS, GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS, STATE UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES, AND
LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS, TO ENSURE THE TIMELY
COMPLETION OF GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS

WHEREAS, pursuant to Sections 3 (e), 3 (f) and 9 of Republic Act (RA) No.
3019, or the “Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act,” a public officer who causes undue
injury to the Government, through gross negligence in the discharge of his or her
functions, and who neglects or refuses, without sufficient justification, to act within a
reasonable time on any pending matter, for the purpose of obtaining some material or
pecuniary benefit or advantage, shall be punished with imprisonment and perpetual
disqualification from public office;

WHEREAS, Section 65, Rule XXI of the revised Implementing Rules and
Regulations of RA No. 9184, or the “Government Procurement Reform Act,” provides
that public officers, including private individuals in collusion with such public officers,
who delay without justifiable cause the screening for eligibility, opening of bids,
evaluation and post evaluation of bids, and awarding of contracts, including those for
government infrastructure projects, shall suffer the penalty of imprisonment, in addition
to the penalty of temporary disqualification from public office, without prejudice to the
provisions of RA No. 3019 and other penal laws;

WHEREAS, Section 46 (b), Chapter 7, Subtitle A, Title 1, Book V of Executive
Order (EO) No. 292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987,” considers neglect of duty
and inefficiency in the performance of official duties as grounds for disciplinary action;

WHEREAS, unfinished government infrastructure projects cause great
inconvenience and serious damage to the prejudice of the general public, and
adversely affect the delivery of basic services;

WHEREAS, the development goals of accelerating infrastructure development
and ensuring efficient governance remain as overriding objectives of the government
under the Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022;

WHEREAS, pursuant to EO No. 24 (s. 2017), the Department of Public Works
and Highways (DPWH), as Chair of the Infrastructure Cluster, is tasked to lead in (i)
enhancing the delivery of public infrastructure by ensuring efficient and transparent
management of assets and resources; (ii) improving the quality and reliability of public
infrastructure and public investment efficiency; (iii) strengthening implementation
capacity and budget execution of government agencies which are involved in

infrastructure development; and (iv) ensuring equitable access to infrastructure
services.

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

1. All heads and concerned officials and employees of departments, bureaus and
offices, including government-owned or —controlled corporations (GOCCs),
government financial institutions (GFls), state universities and colleges
(SUCs), and local government units (LGUs) shall strictly observe the laws,
issuances and policies pertaining to the timely completion of government
infrastructure projects, including the imposition of appropriate sanctions for
infractions and violations thereof;

2. The abovementioned heads and concerned officials shall ensure that in
undertaking government infrastructure projects, all measures to promote the
safety of, and mitigate inconvenience to the public are in place; and

3. The DPWH shall take appropriate measures to ensure the compliance of
concerned government agencies and instrumentalities, GOCCs, GFls, SUCs
and LGUs with this Circular.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.
DONE in the City of Manila, this7thday of February , in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Nineteen.

By authority of the President:

/——— &
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary