MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 57

REASSIGNMENT OF RESPONSIBILITIES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT/OFFICE OF THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY

In the exigency of the service, the following changes in functions and responsibilities are hereby directed:

1. The responsibility of processing Presidential issuances (Executive Orders, Proclamations, Administrative Orders, Memorandum Orders, Memorandum Circulars) is hereby reassigned to Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs Manuel B. Gaite.

2. Deputy Executive Secretary Arthur P. Autea shall continue to have responsibility for the processing of pardons, parole and executive clemency. In addition, he shall handle the review and resolution of appealed cases as may be assigned to him by the Executive Secretary or indorsed by the Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs.

3. Deputy Executive Secretary Jose T. Tale is hereby tasked to assist the Executive Secretary on regional and community development concerns, and as such shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Assist the Executive Secretary in overseeing the Cabinet Officers for Regional Development (CORD) System, pursuant to AO No. 34, dated May 2, 2002.

b. Focal point in OP/OES in coordinating with NAPC and the KALAHI Program, as well as in enhancing linkages between the national and local government and private sector on various poverty reduction initiatives, such as Gawad Kalinga; focal point in OP/OES in pursuing the concept of a debt for poverty reduction scheme.

c. Focal point in OP/OES in coordinating with HUDCC and DENR in connection with the President’s priority socialized housing projects.

d. Other functions and responsibilities as the President or the Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

Memorandum Circular No. 47, dated August 15, 2003 and other previous memorandum orders/circulars which are inconsistent herewith are amended and modified accordingly.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Manila, 12 February 2004

By authority of the President:

Executive Secretary