MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 88

AUTHORIZING GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS TO ATTEND THE NATIONAL CONVENTION ON “SUSTAINING THE REAL ESTATE BOOM”

WHEREAS, in commemoration of the Urban Development Week declared under Proclamation No. 257 dated September 16, 2002, the National Real Estate Association (NREA) will be holding a National Convention & Exhibition on September 22 to 24, 2005 at Megatrade Hall 3, SM Megamall, EDSA, Mandaluyong City, with the theme: “Sustaining the Real Estate Boom”;

WHEREAS, the convention is designed to undertake a program where the Government and the private sector can pursue a comprehensive and continuing program to create a new Filipino community to uplift the condition of the underprivileged and homeless citizens, optimize the productivity of land and urban resources, develop the use of industrial and commercial areas to generate more economic opportunity for the people, encourage more effective people’s participation in the urban development process and improve the capability of local government units to achieve the goals set by our laws;

WHEREAS, the presentations and discussions during the convention among, the government officials and the private sector will push forward the government’s state of readiness in the implementation of the laws, rules and regulation on the matter and the private sectors major participation to achieve such goals.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, EDUARDO R. ERMITA, Executive Secretary, by authority of the President, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. All heads of departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations and their subsidiaries, government financial institutions arid local government units from the Provincial Governors, City Mayors, Municipal Mayors and/or their concerned officials/employees are hereby enjoined to attend the convention on official time.

Sec. 2. Participants shall actively participate in the discussions and in resolutions of critical issues.

Sec. 3. Because of the need for the government and private sector to be knowledgeable of the law, rules and regulations on the matter, all pertinent documents shall be given to the participants who shall submit all documents to the head of their office, including reports on current issues, resolutions and all recommendations for the effective compliance of all laws relative thereto.

Sec. 4. Government participants will attend the convention on official time with expenses allowable at rates prescribed in accordance with current COA, CSC and DBM policies chargeable against the funds of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17 th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

By authority of the President:

Executive Secretary