MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 136

HOUSING FAIR 2007 FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTOR EMPLOYEES AND OVERSEAS FILIPINO WORKERS

WHEREAS, it is the Policy of the State to afford employees the requirements of decent human settlement and to provide them with ample opportunities to improve their quality of life;

WHEREAS, the National Shelter Program of the government addresses the housing requirements of both the informal and formal sectors of society, including employees in the public and private sectors;

WHEREAS, the government, through the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) and its key shelter agencies, namely, the Pag-IBlG Fund, the National Home Mortgage finance Corporation (NHMFC), the Home Guaranty Corporation (HGC), the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), and the National Housing Authority (NHA), and the government financial institutions with home lending operations, have agreed to forge a strategic alliance towards the attainment of the goals and objectives of the National Shelter Program;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 662 (s. 1995) declared the month of October every year as National Shelter Month;

WHEREAS, in celebration of the National Shelter Month, Memorandum Circular No. 112 was issued on September 7, 2006 for the conduct of a Housing Fair up to April 2007 and offered for sale the eligible acquired properties of shelter agencies and government financial institutions under uniform and reasonable terms and conditions to government employees and members of the Social Security System (SSS) and Pag-IBIG Fund;

WHEREAS, the various stakeholders, after assessing the conduct of the Housing Fair held in 2006, have agreed to expand the program and offer for sale the eligible acquired properties of shelter agencies and government financial institutions not only to government employees and members of SSS and Pag-IBIG Fund but also to private sector employees and Overseas Filipino workers (OFWs) as a form of non-wage benefit or incentive;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. A “Housing Fair 2007” shall be conducted in October 2007 in celebration of the National Shelter Month.

SECTION 2. The disposition of eligible acquired properties of the key shelter agencies and government financial institutions, including those that have not been auctioned off, shall be opened to all government employees, private sector employees, and Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs).

For this purpose, the requirement for government agencies to publish their acquired properties prior to disposition shall be temporarily lifted during the duration of the Housing Fair.

SECTION 3. Payments for housing units that will be sold during the Housing fair shall be subject to salary deduction; provided, that the authorized deductions shall not reduce the monthly net take-home pay of any employee to an amount lower than Three Thousand Pesos (P3,000.00) pursuant to Section 41 of Republic Act No. 9336.

SECTION 4. An Inter-agency Committee is hereby created to draw up the guidelines and set forth the terms and conditions for the sale of eligible acquired properties under the program.

National Housing Authority

Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

Government Service Insurance System

Social Security System

Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation

SECTION 5. All employers are hereby enjoined to allow their interested employees to participate in the Housing Fair.

SECTION 6. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25 th day of July in the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary