MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 112

HOUSING FAIR FOR EMPLOYEES IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR

WHEREAS, it is the Policy of the State to afford employees in the public sector the requirements of decent human settlement and to provide them with ample opportunities to improve their quality of life;

WHEREAS, the National Shelter Program of the government addresses the housing requirements of both the informal and formal sectors of society, including employees of the public sector;

WHEREAS, the Government through the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC), its key shelter agencies, namely, the Home Development Mutual Fund (HDMF), the National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation (NHMFC), the Home Guaranty Corporation (HGC), the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), an d the National Housing Authority (NHA), and its partners in the private sector, notably the Subdivision and Housing Developers Association Inc. (SHDA), the Chamber of Real Estate and Builders Association (CREBA), the Organization of Socialized Housing Developers of the Philippines (OSHDP), the National Real Estate Brokers Association (NAREA), the Philippine Association of Real Estate Brokers (PAREB) and other real estate organizations, and the government financial institutions with home lending operations, collectively hereinafter referred to as “Parties”, have agreed to forge a strategic alliance towards the attainment of the goals and objectives of the National Shelter Program;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 662 (s. 1995) declares the month of October every year as National Shelter Month;

WHEREAS, the Parties, in sharing a common goal and vision, have agreed to launch and implement an affordable housing program for the government employees as a form of non-wage benefit/incentive;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order;

SECTION 1. A Housing Fair shall be conducted in October 2006 in celebration of the National Shelter Month. The Housing Fair, which shall run up to April 2007, shall offer for sale the eligible acquired properties of shelter agencies and government financial institutions, under uniform and reasonable terms and conditions.

SEC. 2. The disposition of eligible acquired properties of the key shelter agencies and government financial institutions, including those that have not been auctioned off, shall be opened to all government employees, including members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Philippine National Police, Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, Bureau of Fire Protection, elective officials, and employees of local government units. The acquired properties of the Social Security System and the Home Development Mutual fund shall also be offered to their respective members under the same terms and conditions provided to the government employees.

For this purpose, the requirement for government agencies to publish their acquired properties, prior to disposition, shall be temporarily lifted during the duration of the Housing Fair.

Payments for housing units that will be sold during the Housing Fair shall be subject to salary deduction; provided that the authorized deductions shall not reduce the monthly net take-home pay of any employee to an amount lower than Three Thousand Pesos (P3,000.00) pursuant to Section 41 of Republic Act No. 9336.

SEC. 3. An Inter-agency Committee shall be created to set forth the terms and conditions for the sale of eligible acquired properties under this program. The Inter-agency Committee shall be composed of at the following:

National Housing Authority

Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

Social Security System

Government Service Insurance System

Land Bank of the Philippines

Development Bank of the Philippines

Philippine Government Employees Association

Private Developer Groups

SEC. 4. All government employers are hereby enjoined to allow their interested employees to participate in the Housing Fair.

SEC. 5. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7 th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary