Office of the President
of the Philippines

Malacatiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1

DECLARING VACANT CERTAIN POSITIONS IN THE DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES,
AGENCIES AND BUREAUS IN THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT AND FIXING
RULES THEREFOR TO ENSURE CONTINUOUS AND EFFECTIVE DELIVERY OF
SERVICE

Effective noontime of 30 June 2022, the following are deemed separated from
service, and the positions held by them in the departments, offices, agencies and
bureaus of the Executive Department are declared vacant:

1. All Presidential appointees whose appointments are classified as co-terminous;

2. All Presidential appointees occupying positions created in excess of the
authorized staffing pattern;

3. All non-Career Executive Service Officials occupying Career Executive Service
positions; and

4. Contractual and/or casual employees.

In the exigency of the service and to ensure the continuous and effective
delivery of government services, the vacancy shall be addressed in accordance with
the following:

1. Vacancy in the heads of departments, offices, agencies and bureaus where no
replacement has been appointed or designated, shall be filled up by the next-
in-rank and most senior official as Officer-in-Charge (OIC).

The OIC shall perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the office
until 31 July 2022, or until a replacement has been appointed or designated,
whichever comes first. :

2. All non-Career Executive Officials (non-CESO) occupying Career Executive
Service (CES) positions in all the agencies of the Executive Branch shall remain
in office and continue to perform their duties and discharge their responsibilities
on a hold-over capacity until 31 July 2022, or until their resignations have been
accepted and/or their respective replacements have been appointed and/or
designated, whichever comes first.

3. Affected contractual and/or casual employees whose contracts expire on 30
June 2022 shall continue in service until 31 July 2022, unless otherwise earlier
terminated or renewed by the heads of the hiring agencies in accordance

their specific needs and requirements and subject to pertinent administrative
and auditing rules and regulations.

Services rendered by the officials and personnel referred to in paragraphs 2
and 3 shall be compensated in accordance with existing civil service, budgeting,
accounting and auditing laws and rules.

Finally, officials and personnel referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 are hereby
directed to effect an orderly and complete turnover of records, documents, books,
equipment and other properties of their respective offices to their successors and/or
the highest career official in their respective agencies.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of June 2022.

   

Executjve Secretary

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFI