Office of the resident
of the Whilippines
Mlalacafiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 21

ENSURING EFFICIENCY IN PROCESSING OF REQUESTS FOR
PRESIDENTIAL ISSUANCES, AUTHORIZATIONS, AND OTHER
APPROVALS

In the interest of efficiency in processing of requests for Presidential issuances,

authorizations, and other approvals, the following are hereby ordered:

1.

Government agencies and instrumentalities shall ensure strict compliance with the
strengthened standards of Complete Staff Work (CSW), pursuant to Memoranda
Circular Nos. 72 (s. 2019) and 02 (s. 2022). Proposals or requests for Presidential
issuances, authorizations, and other approvals shall be embodied in a
Memorandum, which shall contain a concise statement of the background/history
of the request, justification and/or rationale, legal basis, agency coordination, _
potential problems, and fund availability. A printed draft of the action documentor
proposed issuance requested from the OP, along with an editable electronic copy,
and copies of comments and/or recommendations signed or endorsed by

,Department Secretaries or Heads of Agencies concerned, together with a

statement by the proponent that the necessary coordination or consultations were
made with other relevant government entities, shall be attached to the cover
Memorandum.

Requests that fail to comply with the strengthened standards of CSW shall be
returned to the proponent.

2. Government agencies and instrumentalities, whose inputs, comments and/or

recommendations are requested by the Office of the Executive Secretary (OES),
or Office of the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary (OSDES), Office of the Deputy
Executive Secretary for General Administration (ODESGA), Office of the Deputy
Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs (ODESLA), Office of the Deputy Executive
Secretary for Finance and Administration (ODESFA), and Presidential
Management Staff (PMS) shall respond to the request within the period prescribed
by the aforementioned offices.

2.1. In case of failure to respond within the prescribed period, and upon proof of
receipt of the request for comment, the department, agency, bureau, or office
whose comment was sought shall be considered as having interposed no
objection to the proposal or position of the proponent.

2.2 \f the department, agency, bureau, or office could not comply within the
prescribed period due to lack of available data or that the proposal consists
of voluminous records, and such other meritorious reasons, it shall notify in

writing the OES, OSDES, ODESGA, ODESLA, ODESFA, or PMS, as the
case may be.

3. As may be requested by the OES, OSDES, ODESGA, ODESLA, ODESFA, or
PMS, government agencies and instrumentalities shall participate in any and all
coordination meetings or briefings relative to a particular request.

4. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 148th day of May , in the
Year of our Lord Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

By authority of the President:

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ATTY. CONCEPCION E OLING-ENAD

Ee RN eg