MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 50

GUIDELINES ON THE ISSUANCE OF TRAVEL AUTHORITIES AND
TRAVEL ENTITLEMENTS TO PARTICIPATING OFFICIALS AND
PERSONNEL OF AGENCIES TRAVELLING ABROAD _IN
CONNECTION WITH PRESIDENTIAL TRIPS

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 77 (s. 2019) provides that all
government expenses for official travels must be fairly reasonable, cost effective, and
within the financial capability of the government;

WHEREAS, Section 3 of EO No. 77 provides that official foreign travels shall
only cover trips that: (i) are essential to the effective performance of an official or
employee’s mandates or functions; (ii) are required to meet the needs of the agency
or office involved or there is substantial benefit to be derived by the State; (iii) the
presence of the official or employee is critical to the outcome of the meeting or activity;
and (iv) projected expenses are not excessive or involve minimum expenditure;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Administration to ensure prudent and judicious
use of government resources, especially in the issuance of travel authorities and
entitlements for officials and personnel joining Presidential trips abroad; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all executive departments, bureaus, and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Coverage. This Circular shall cover officials and personnel of
national government agencies (NGAs), including state universities and colleges
(SUCs), government -owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), and government
financial institutions (GFls), travelling in connection with Presidential trips abroad.

Section 2. Role of the Office of Presidential Protocol. The Office of
Presidential Protocol (OPP), with initial inputs from the Department of Foreign Affairs
(DFA), and in coordination with concerned offices within the Office of the President,
shall assess the necessity of the participation of an agency and its representatives in
the Presidential trip and thereafter submit a recommended list of participants for the
President's approval. Only officials and personnel included in the final approved list
from the OPP shall be issued travel authorities, with corresponding entitlements,
whenever applicable. If the head of agency, acting as the approving authority, issues

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

a travel authority to a subordinate personnel who has not been in the final approved
list from the OPP, the resulting travel will be deemed unauthorized.

Section 3. Participation of Agencies in Presidential Trips. In accordance
with Section 9 of EO No. 77, which requires trips involving delegations to be limited to
the barest minimum number of participants, any concerned office or agency sending
officials or personnel in connection with a Presidential trip abroad, shall only be
allowed a maximum number of two (2) representatives, including its Principal. The
names of such participants shall be submitted by the head of agency to the OPP for
approval.

In circumstances where an agency finds the participation of more than two (2)
representatives to be necessary and indispensable during the Presidential trip, the
head of agency shall submit the proposed composition of the agency delegation to the
OPP, with sufficient justifications (i.e., specific roles and functions of each person in
the proposed agency delegation, and the events or activities which require the
attendance of the agency and its officials and personnel).

The DFA and/or concerned agencies shall ensure that all proposals for
Presidential trips shall be submitted, as far as practicable, at least three (3) months
prior to the proposed date of travel for approval, scheduling, and other preliminary
preparations.

In line with the foregoing, all heads of concerned agencies shall similarly submit
the proposed composition of their delegation, including the names of the agency
representatives and other supporting documents to the OPP at least three (3) months
before the scheduled departure date for regular regional and multilateral meetings, or
at least seven (7) working days before the departure date in the case of bilateral visits,
non-regular international engagements, or other extremely justifiable cases.

Section 4. Claim for Actual Accommodation Expenses. The provisions
governing entitlement to accommodation expense under EO No. 77 shall continue to
be in effect. However, consistent with EO No. 77, actual accommodation may only be
authorized for officials at the level of Assistant Secretary and higher, or those of
equivalent rank. For all other personnel, accommodation expenses shall be strictly
limited to the prescribed component of the Daily Subsistence Allowance.

Section 5. Room sharing arrangements. In all cases, room sharing shall, as
far as practicable, be implemented.

Section 6. Transportation Expenses. In accordance with Section 12 of EO
No. 77, in case officials and employees authorized to travel abroad shall not be
provided with transportation by the host country or sponsoring organization, they shall
be allowed transportation expenses for economy class, which does not include
premium economy class. For long-haul trips, described as flights exceeding four (4)
hours without counting lay-overs, of officials holding the positions of Assistant
Secretary and above, or those of equivalent ranks, business class airfares may be
authorized, subject to approval of the OP.

Section 7. Non-compliance. Any travel authority and/or travel entitlement
granted in violation of the provisions of this Circular shall be considered without effect.

In addition, failure to comply with this Circular may result in the filing of
administrative actions for misconduct, insubordination and other related offenses
under the Civil Service Commission Revised Rules on Administrative Cases in the
Civil Service and/or relevant laws, rules and regulations against the erring
official/personnel.

All heads of agencies, SUCs, GOCCs and GFls shall ensure that all their
personnel are informed of the foregoing.

Section 8. Repeal. All Circulars, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this Circular are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 9. Separability. If any provision of this Circular is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 10. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 13th day of May in the year of
our Lord Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ATTR. ., ESPINO
yy ACTING DIRECTOR IV

 

  

or
‘LIP!

vii

PBBM004545