Office of the President

Malacaiang

 

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 105

DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES TO SUPPORT THE OBSERVANCE
OF THE 2025 DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION AND CONTROL
WEEK

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9165 or the “Comprehensive
Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002” declares it a policy of the State to safeguard the integrity
of its territory and the well-being of its citizenry, particularly the youth, from the harmful
effects of dangerous drugs, and to defend the same against acts or omissions
detrimental to their development and preservation;

WHEREAS, Section 77 of RA No. 9165 provides that the Dangerous Drugs
Board (DDB) shall be the policy-making and strategy-formulating body in the planning
and formulation of policies and programs on drug prevention and control, and shall
develop and adopt a comprehensive, integrated, unified, and balanced national drug
abuse prevention and control strategy;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 124 (s. 2001) declared the third week of
November of every year as “Drug Abuse Prevention and Control (DAPC) Week” and
enjoined all government agencies, professional, civic and religious organizations, and
the mass media to extend cooperation with and support to DDB in the annual
celebration of the DAPC Week, to increase awareness and understanding of the
adverse effects of drug abuse not only on the health of our people but also on our
social, economic, and political development of our country;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9165 emphasizes the participation of families, educational
institutions, labor organizations, and local government units (LGUs) in the prevention
of drug abuse and the promotion of rehabilitation and treatment programs;

WHEREAS, there is a need to emphasize collective action and resilience in the
fight against drug abuse, and foster public support for rehabilitation, prevention, and
community-based interventions, especially among the youth and vulnerable
communities; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the

power of control over all the executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

BAGONG PILIPINAS

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

All national government agencies and_ instrumentalities, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and state universities and colleges, are
hereby directed to render full support and participation in the programs and activities
during the 2025 DAPC Week.

LGUs, non-government organizations, and the private sector are hereby
encouraged to engage in appropriate initiatives in support of the programs and
activities for the 2025 DAPC Week.

The funding requirements for the implementation of this Circular shall be
charged against the available appropriations of the concerned agencies, subject to
pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules, and regulations.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By authority of the President:

 

fy of the President

VG RECORDS OFFICE