Office of the resident

fHlalacaiang

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 74

ADOPTING THE PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR
CULTURE AND THE ARTS 2024-2029, AND DIRECTING THE
IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, Section 14, Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the
State shall foster the preservation, enrichment, and dynamic evolution of a Filipino
culture based on the principle of unity in diversity in a climate of free artistic and
intellectual expression;

WHEREAS, Section 15, Article XIV of the Constitution declares it a policy of
the State to conserve, promote, and popularize the nation’s historical and cultural
heritage and resources;

WHEREAS, Section 8 of Republic Act No. 7356 or the “Law Creating the
National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA)” established the NCCA to,
among others: (a) formulate policies for the development of culture and arts;
(b) coordinate and implement policies and programs of its attached agencies on
culture and arts development; (c) conserve and promote national culture and arts;
and (d) preserve Filipino cultural heritage;

WHEREAS, the NCCA crafted the Philippine Development Plan for Culture
and the Arts (PDP-CA) 2024-2029, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, to
serve as the national blueprint for the advancement of the country’s culture and arts
sector;

WHEREAS, the PDP-CA 2024-2029 endeavors to intensify the
implementation of policies and programs on culture and arts under the
PDP 2023-2028, which underscores the vital role of the sector in attaining national
development; and

WHEREAS, the NCCA, through Board Resolution No. 2024-387, approved
the PDP-CA 2024-2029, and resolved to endorse the same to the Office of the
President;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:
The PDP-CA 2024-2029 is hereby adopted as the blueprint for growth and

development of the country’s culture and arts sector. The NCCA shall lead the
implementation of the PDP-CA 2024-2029.

BAGONG PILIPINAS

As the lead agency in-charge of formulating and implementing policies and
programs on culture and arts, the NCCA is hereby further directed to:

1. Coordinate, collaborate and establish institutional partnerships with concerned
government agencies and other stakeholders to ensure the attainment of the
goals and objectives set forth in the PDP-CA 2024-2029;

2. Monitor and assess the implementation of the PDP-CA 2024-2029 and submit
an annual report to the Office of the President, through the Executive Secretary,
on the progress, emerging concerns and recommendations thereon; and

3. In coordination with the Presidential Communications Office, disseminate
official copies of the PDP-CA 2024-2029 to all concerned government
agencies, and undertake information and awareness campaigns on the plans
and programs specified therein.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all concerned agencies and
instrumentalities of the National Government, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations are hereby directed, and all local government units and
the private sector are hereby encouraged, to undertake efforts in support of the
implementation of the PDP-CA 2024-2029, and the plans and programs specified
therein.

The funding requirement for the implementation of this Circular shall be
charged against the existing appropriations of the respective agencies, subject to
applicable laws, rules and regulations.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th dayof November , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President:

 

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY