Oftice of the President

Slalacanang

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 87

DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES, AND ENCOURAGING LOCAL GOVERNMENT
UNITS AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR, TO PROMOTE AWARENESS OF
THE PHILIPPINES AS A MARITIME AND ARCHIPELAGIC NATION

WHEREAS, Section 1, Article | of the Constitution provides that the national
territory comprises the Philippine archipelago, with all the islands and waters embraced
therein, and that the waters around, between, and connecting the islands of the
archipelago, regardless of their breadth and dimensions, form part of the internal waters
of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, Section 2, Article XII of the Constitution mandates the State to protect
the nation’s marine wealth in its archipelagic waters, territorial sea, and exclusive
economic zone, and reserve its use and enjoyment exclusively to Filipino citizens;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 12064 or the “Philippine Maritime Zones Act”
determined the country’s maritime zones;

WHEREAS, RA No. 12065 or the “Philippine Archipelagic Sea Lanes Act”
provided for the system of archipelagic sea lanes and air routes;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 316 (s. 2017) declared September as the Maritime
and Archipelagic Nation Awareness Month (MANA Mo) to raise national consciousness
on maritime and archipelagic issues and policies;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 57 (s. 2024) designates the National
Maritime Council (NMC) as the central inter-agency coordinating body responsible for
formulating the strategic direction, policies, and guidelines on maritime security and
domain awareness;

WHEREAS, Section 4 of EO No. 57 directs the Presidential Office for Maritime
Concerns (POMC) to provide administrative, technical, and secretariat support to NMC;

WHEREAS, to raise and deepen public understanding of the country’s maritime
and archipelagic issues and concerns, it is imperative to strengthen public awareness,
national consciousness, and intergenerational appreciation of the Philippine national
territory and maritime zones; and

BAGONG PILIPINAS

WHEREAS, there is a need to harmonize, integrate, and synchronize efforts
among government agencies and instrumentalities, and to foster inter-agency
cooperation and collaboration in advancing maritime and archipelagic awareness,
towards sustainable development, security, and protection of the country’s maritime
domain and heritage;

NOW THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

The NMC, through POMC, shall take the lead in the formulation and
implementation of year-round programs and activities to promote awareness of the
Philippines as a Maritime and Archipelagic Nation, and in the organization of activities
in the annual celebration of MANA Mo every September.

All national government agencies and __ instrumentalities, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations, are hereby directed, and all local
government units and the private sector are hereby encouraged, to: (a) actively support
and promote the conduct of relevant programs, campaigns, and initiatives that raise
awareness of the Philippines as a Maritime and Archipelagic Nation; and (b) render full
support and cooperation in the implementation of activities in observance of the annual
MANA Mo celebration every September.

The Presidential Communications Office is hereby directed to implement
appropriate communication strategies and information dissemination measures to inform,
educate, and engage the general public in supporting the programs and activities that
promote awareness of the Philippines as a Maritime and Archipelagic Nation, including
the annual celebration of MANA Mo every September.

The funding requirements necessary for the initial implementation of this Circular
shall be charged against current and available appropriations of concerned agencies,
subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations.
Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary for the continued implementation of this
Circular shall be included in the budget proposals of said agencies, subject to the usual
budget preparation process.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 11th day of July , in the
Year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By authority of the President: