Office of the Wrestdent

Malacanang

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 100

ADOPTING THE 2024 NATIONAL DISASTER RESPONSE PLAN AND
DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, Section 2(d) of Republic Act (RA) No. 10121 or the “Philippine
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act” declares it a policy of the State to
adopt and implement a coherent, comprehensive, integrated, efficient and
responsive disaster risk reduction and management approach, consistent with the
principles of good governance and within the context of poverty alleviation and
environmental protection;

WHEREAS, Section 6 of RA No. 10121 provides that the National Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) shall develop vertical and
horizontal coordination mechanisms among sectoral agencies and_ local
government units (LGUs) for a more coherent implementation of disaster risk
reduction and management policies and programs;

WHEREAS, under Section 8 of RA No. 10121, the Office of Civil Defense
(OCD) shall administer a comprehensive national defense and disaster risk
reduction and management program, and provide leadership in the development of
strategic and systematic approaches in the implementation of measures to reduce
vulnerabilities, risks of hazards and consequences of disasters;

WHEREAS, the NDRRMC, through Resolution No. 2 (s. 2024),
recommends the adoption of the 2024 National Disaster Response Plan (NDRP),
which provides for disaster risk reduction and management initiatives which aim to
preserve lives, provide immediate assistance to affected communities, and
minimize exacerbation of emergency situations through an established and
effective disaster response and early recovery operations;

WHEREAS, it is imperative for all national government agencies and
instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, and
LGUs, to support and cooperate towards the successful implementation of the 2024
NDRP;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

The 2024 NDRP is hereby adopted. The NDRRMC, through the OCD, shall
lead the implementation of the 2024 NDRP.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all concerned agencies and

instrumentalities of the National Government, including government -owned
or -controlled corporations are hereby directed, and all LGUs are hereby

BAGONG PILIPINAS

encouraged, to undertake efforts in support of the implementation of 2024 NDRP,
and the plans and programs specified therein.

The OCD, in coordination with the Presidential Communications Office, is
hereby directed to disseminate the official copy of the 2024 NDRP to all concerned
government agencies and offices.

The funding requirement for the implementation of this Circular shall be
charged against the existing appropriations of the respective agencies, subject to
applicable laws, rules and regulations.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of September , inthe
Year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By authority of the President:

 
 
  

MALACAHANG REC :
CERTIFIED CO!

ATTY. LOVEW ¥. TOLENTINO-NAVA
GIRECTOR IV _ Kall