Oftice of the President

HHlalacatang

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 75

ADOPTING THE NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY 2024, AND
DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, Section 5, Article II of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to maintain peace and order, protect life, liberty, and property, and promote
general welfare;

WHEREAS, Section 7, Article || of the Constitution provides that national
sovereignty, territorial integrity, national interest, and the right to self-determination
are paramount considerations of the Philippines in its relations with the international
community;

WHEREAS, under Chapter 2, Title VIII, Book IV of Executive Order (EO) No.
292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987,” as amended, the National Security
Council (NSC) is mandated to, among others: (ii) coordinate and formulate policies
on national security; (i) advise the President regarding the integration of domestic,
foreign, military, political, economic, social, and educational policies related to
national security; and (ii) coordinate the implementation of policies of various
government agencies on matters concerning national security;

WHEREAS, EO No. 37 (s. 2023) approved and adopted the National
Security Policy (NSP) 2023-2028 which outlines the country’s policy objectives and
priority areas, in pursuit of a free, resilient, peaceful, and prosperous maritime and
archipelagic nation, enabled and protected by a reliable defense and public safety
system;

WHEREAS, the National Security Council (NSC), in consultation with
various government agencies, civil society organizations, the academe, and the
private sector, crafted the National Security Strategy (NSS) 2024 to operationalize
the policies and objectives set forth in the NSP 2023-2028, and serve as a roadmap
for the transformation of the security sector;

WHEREAS, the National Intelligence Board, through Board Resolution No.
2024-001, resolved to endorse the NSS 2024 to the Office of the President; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VI! of the Constitution vests in the President
of the Philippines the power of control over all executive departments, agencies,
bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

BAGONG PILIPINAS

The NSS 2024 is hereby adopted. The NSC shall lead the implementation of
the NSS 2024. For this purpose, the NSC shall:

1. Coordinate, collaborate, and establish institutional partnerships with concerned
government agencies and other stakeholders to ensure the implementation of
the strategies set forth in the NSS 2024, subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations;

2. Monitor and assess the implementation of the NSS 2024, and submit an annual
report to the Office of the President, through the Executive Secretary, on the
progress, emerging concerns and recommendations thereon; and

3. In coordination with the Presidential Communications Office, disseminate
official copies of the NSS 2024 to all concerned government agencies, and
undertake information and awareness campaigns on the plans and programs
specified therein.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all concerned agencies and
instrumentalities of the National Government, including local government units, and
government-owned or -controlled corporations are hereby directed, and the private
sector is hereby encouraged, to undertake efforts in support of the implementation
of the NSS 2024 and the plans and programs stipulated therein.

The funding requirement for the implementation of this Circular shall be
charged against the existing appropriations of the respective agencies, subject to
applicable laws, rules and regulations.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 20th dayof December , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President:

Office of the President

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ove Vv,
Atty. LAWELY Eb ertrINO-NAVA
df * NG DIRECTOR IV