» Ollice of the President __
HMalacatiana

  

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 78

DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES TO SUPPORT THE FILIPINNOVATION
AWARDS

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11293 or the “Philippine
Innovation Act,” declares it a policy of the State to foster innovation in the country as
a vital component of national development and sustainable economic growth;

WHEREAS, Section 11 of RA No. 11293 mandates the National Innovation
Council (NIC) to develop strategies to promote the creation of new ideas that will be
developed into new and quality products, processes, and services aimed at improving
the welfare of and creating livelihood opportunities for low-income and marginalized
groups;

WHEREAS, the NIC, through Resolution No. 1 (s. 2024), resolved to approve
the conduct of the National and Regional Innovation Awards and Competition (NRIAC)
or the “Filipinnovation Awards;”

WHEREAS, the Filipinnovation Awards is an annual competition that aims to:
(i) bring out the best in Filipino innovators and level the playing field, allowing them to
demonstrate their talents on equal footing; (ii) serve as a platform to leverage social
marketing and social mobilization by connecting innovators with industry stakeholders,
potential partners, and distribution channels and attract the attention of local and
foreign investors; and (iii) ease the pathway for innovators to navigate the challenges
of bringing their products to market, fostering a more robust innovation ecosystem in
the Philippines; ‘

WHEREAS, the Filipinnovation Awards aims to highlight innovations that foster
a dynamic innovation ecosystem in line with the transformation agenda set forth in
RA No. 11293, the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028, and the National
Innovation Agenda and Strategy Document 2023-2032;

NOW THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

All government agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or
-controlled corporations, are hereby ordered, and all local government units and the
private sector are hereby encouraged to extend full support and cooperation in the
conduct of programs and activities for the Filipinnovation Awards.

 

BAGONG PILIPINAS

The Presidential Communications Office, in coordination with the National
Economic and Development Authority, is hereby directed to develop effective ways of
disseminating information and raising awareness about the programs and activities for
the Filipinnovation Awards.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, Philippines, this7th dayof March in the
Year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By authority of the President:

 

     
 
   
  
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTHNED COPY

ATTY. LOVEVZK\! TOLENTINO-NAVA
LEO DIR CTOR IV