@Office of the President
of the Philippines
Malaraiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 53

ADOPTING THE NATIONAL OBJECTIVES FOR HEALTH 2023-2028,
AND DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, Section 15, Article ll of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health
consciousness among them;

WHEREAS, Section 11, Article XIil of the Constitution mandates the State to
adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development which shall
endeavor to make essential goods, health and other social services available to all the
people at affordable cost;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11223 or the “Universal Health
Care Act” mandates the State to adopt, among others: (a) a framework that fosters a
whole-of-system, whole-of-government, and whole-of-society approach in the
development, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of health policies, programs
and plans; and (b) a people-oriented approach for the delivery of health services that is
centered on people's needs and well-being, and cognizant of the differences in culture,
values, and beliefs;

WHEREAS, Section 19 of RA No. 11223 further provides that the Department of
Health (DOH), Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), and local
government units (LGUs) shall endeavor to integrate health systems into province-wide
and city-wide health systems;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028, anchored on AmBisyon
Natin 2040 which reflects the collective long-term vision and aspirations of the Filipino
people, highlights the promotion of good health as one of the key strategies towards
economic and social transformation;

WHEREAS, consistent with the abovementioned State policies, and pursuant to
DOH’s mandate as the lead agency responsible to set the country's policy direction on
health, the National Objectives for Health (NOH) 2023-2028 was formulated to serve as
the country’s medium-term strategy for strengthening the country’s health sector; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative for all national government agencies and
instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), and
LGUs to support and cooperate towards the successful implementation of the NOH

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

The NOH 2023-2028, which outlines the 8-Point Action Agenda for the
development of the Philippine health sector, is hereby adopted.

As the lead agency in-charge of formulating and adopting policies and programs
for health, the DOH, in coordination with the DILG, is hereby directed to:

a. Formulate and disseminate plans and guidelines that will ensure that all stakeholders
have comprehensive understanding of the NOH 2023-2028;

b. Establish a robust monitoring and evaluation framework for the implementation of the
8-Point Action Agenda;

c. Facilitate capacity-building programs and workshops for LGUs and _ relevant
stakeholders; /

d. Coordinate and collaborate with the private sector, civil society organizations, and
international bodies;

e. Ensure a participatory approach by involving communities, beneficiaries, and such
other relevant stakeholders; and

f. Ensure that strategies under the NOH 2023-2028 are integrated, as applicable, in the
annual operations plans of LGUs.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all concerned agencies and
instrumentalities of the National Government, including GOCCs, are hereby directed, and
all LGUs are hereby encouraged, to undertake efforts in support of the implementation
of the NOH 2023-2028.

The DOH, in coordination with the Presidential Communications Office, is hereby
directed to disseminate an official copy of the NOH 2023-2028 to all concerned
government agencies and offices.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this -4th day of June , in the year

of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By authority of the President:

 
    

ERSAMIN
ecretary

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ACTING” DIRECTOR IV