Office of the resident

Malacatiang

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 82

FURTHER PRESCRIBING THE GUIDELINES FOR’ THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 313 (S. 1987)

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 313 prohibits officials of the Philippine
government to visit Taiwan and to receive Taiwanese officials visiting the Philippines;

WHEREAS, EO No. 313 also provides that no official activity relating to Taiwan
shall be carried out without the clearance of the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA);

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 148 (s. 1992) implements EO No.
313 by providing Guidelines governing restrictions on travel to Taiwan and contact
with representatives of Taiwan by Philippine government officials, among others;

WHEREAS, MC No. 148 further provides that Philippine government officials
visiting Taiwan shall provide the DFA with a report on their travel and that no
agreements, memoranda of understanding, exchange of notes or similar documents
shall be concluded with any Taiwanese organization or agency without clearance from
the DFA and an authority to sign from the Office of the President (OP); and

WHEREAS, EO No. 15 (s. 2001) authorizes the Manila Economic and Cultural
Office, Inc. (MECO), a non-stock and non-profit corporation created under Batas
Pambansa Big. 68 or the “Corporation Code of the Philippines,” as amended, to assist
the Philippine Government in, among others: (a) formulating and implementing
programs that aim to attract and promote investments from Taiwan to Philippine
industries and businesses; and (b) facilitating and fostering exchanges between
Philippines and Taiwan especially in the fields of trade and economic cooperation,
tourism, culture, education, and science and technology;

NOW, THEREFORE, to further maximize opportunities for the development
and expansion of the Philippines’ priority areas of investments, the following are
hereby ordered:

Ais Restrictions on travel to Taiwan and contact with representatives of Taiwan
shall strictly apply to the President, Vice President, Secretary of Foreign Affairs,
and Secretary of National Defense. Philippine government officials intending to
visit Taiwan for economic, trade and investment purposes, shall travel using
their ordinary passports and without using their official titles. Further, they are
required to: (a) inform MECO of the purpose of their visit prior to their departure;
and (b) coordinate with MECO during their visit.

BAGONG PILIPINAS

2. Philippine government officials travelling to Taiwan for economic, trade and
investment purposes shall submit to MECO and DFA a report on their travel.

3. Philippine government officials and/or agencies, through MECO, may receive
delegations from Taiwan for economic, trade and investment purposes. In this
regard, Philippine government officials and/or agencies shall inform MECO at
least five (5) days prior to the visit and shall submit a report to MECO and DFA
regarding such a visit. :

4. No agreements, memoranda of understanding, exchange of notes or similar
documents shall be concluded with any Taiwanese organization or agency
without clearance from the DFA and, as may be necessary, an authority to sign
from OP.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 15th day of April , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By order of the President:

Office of the President
MALACAN@NG RECORDS OFFICE

CERWINED COPY
\ TOLENTINO-NAVA

DIRECTOR 1V