MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 3

AMENDING AND - SUPPLEMENTING MEMORANDUM
CIRCULAR NO. 1, series of 2022 BY EXTENDING THE TERM
OF OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
COVERED THEREIN AND FIXING THE RULES THEREFOR,
AND PROHIBITING NEW CONTRACTS AND DISBURSEMENT
OF EXTRAORDINARY FUNDS

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 1, series of 2022 declared certain
positions in the departments, offices, agencies, and bureaus in the Executive Branch
vacant effective 30 June 2022 and established rules in order to ensure continuous and
effective delivery of public service;

WHEREAS, MC No.1 declared vacant effective noontime of June 30, 2022
certain positions in the Executive Department and provided for the manner of addressing
the resulting vacancies. The designated Officers-in-Charge (OICs) of departments,
offices, agencies and bureaus, as well as non-Career Executive Officials (non-CESO)
occupying Career Executive Service (CES) positions in hold-over capacities
and affected contractual or casual employees were directed to perform the duties and
discharge their responsibilities until 31 July 2022 or until a replacement has been
appointed or designated, whichever comes first;

WHEREAS, in order to ensure the continuous and effective delivery of
government services there is a need to amend and supplement MC No. 1 by extending
the term of office of government officials and employees covered therein;

WHEREAS, there is a need to supplement MC No. 1 in order to ensure that no
new contract, project, or disbursement of extraordinary funds is made by a department,
agency, bureau, and office until the appointment is made by the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, VICTOR D. RODRIGUEZ, Executive Secretary,
by authority of the President, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., do hereby declare:

1. All OlCs of departments, agencies, bureau and office, non-CES officials
occupying CES positions and contractual or casual employees covered
herein shall continue to perform their duties and discharge their functions
until 31 December 2022 or until a replacement has been appointed or
designated, whichever comes first.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

2. All officials and employees covered by this Memorandum Circular are
mandated to lawfully perform their duties and functions, and submit
bi-monthly performance reports to their respective heads of the
department, agency, bureau, office, or instrumentality; otherwise, they will
be held accountable.

3. MC No. 1 and this Memorandum Circular, insofar as they declared certain
positions vacant and provided for the rules to address the vacancies, do
not apply to government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs),
government instrumentalities with corporate powers, government
corporate entities, and government financial institutions, which shall
continue to be governed by their respective charters, articles of
incorporation and by-laws in relation to Republic Act 10149 or the GOCC
Governance Act of 2011.

4. Except for those involved in the food, transportation and energy sectors,
or except when authorized by the President in meritorious cases, the
following shall not enter into new contracts or projects or disburse
extraordinary funds:

a. OlCs of departments, offices, agencies, instrumentalities and
bureaus covered herein;

b. GOCCs, government instrumentalities with corporate powers,
government corporate entities, and government financial
institutions, until such time that new sets of appointive directors
have been appointed and chief executive officers elected in
accordance with their respective charters, articles of incorporation
and by-laws in relation to Republic Act 10149 or the GOCC
Governance Act of 2011; and

c. The free port and special economic zone authorities, until such time
that new sets of appointive directors have been appointed and chief
executive officers elected.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27" day of July 2022.

  

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY