Office of the President
of the Philippines
Salacatiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 47

DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES, AND ENCOURAGING ALL LOCAL
GOVERNMENT UNITS, TO SUPPORT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
THE ENHANCED PARTNERSHIP AGAINST HUNGER AND
POVERTY PROGRAM

WHEREAS, Section 11, Article XIII of the Constitution provides that the State
shall adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development which
shall endeavor to make essential goods, health, and other social services available to
all at affordable cost;

WHEREAS, Paragraph 2, Article 11 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights provides that States Parties, such as the
Philippines, shall recognize the fundamental right of every person to be free from
hunger, and undertake efforts to improve production, conservation, and distribution of
food;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 101 (s. 2020), as amended by EO No.
27 (s. 2023), established the Inter-Agency Task Force on Zero Hunger (Task Force
on Zero Hunger) and mandated the same to, among others, coordinate and rationalize
all government efforts to attain zero hunger, improve nutrition, and promote
sustainable agriculture;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028 underscores the
importance of a whole-of-government approach to ensure food security and proper
nutrition;

WHEREAS, the Enhanced Partnership Against Hunger and Poverty (EPAHP)
Program, one of the banner programs of the Task Force on Zero Hunger, aims to
institutionalize efforts to mitigate hunger, and promote food and nutrition security by
linking Community Based Organizations (CBOs) to prospective markets and providing
credit assistance to support food production, processing and distribution;

WHEREAS, it is imperative for all government agencies and instrumentalities
to support the continuous and effective implementation of the EPAHP Program to
bolster government efforts towards attaining zero hunger, food and nutrition security,
and sustainable agriculture; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the duty to
ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered.

The Task Force on Zero Hunger is hereby directed to ensure the continuous
and effective implementation of the EPAHP Program. To this end, the Task Force on
Zero Hunger, in coordination with relevant government agencies, shall carry out the
following measures, subject to existing laws, rules, and regulations:

a. Strengthen institutional feeding programs of partner agencies;

b. In partnership with government financial institutions (GFls), extend credit
assistance to support food production, processing, and distribution;

c. Link participating CBOs to prospective markets;

d. Enhance provision of farm production technologies and extension of services to
government-assisted family farms and rural-based organizations;

e. Enhance sustainability of the EPAHP Program through implementation of policies
that will engage the private sector, and institutionalize mechanisms in LGUs;

f. Adopt Community Participation Procurement to encourage CBOs to participate in
the EPAHP Program; and

g. Construct, repair, and improve irrigation facilities and appurtenant structures in
irrigable areas in the countryside.

All national government agencies and instrumentalities, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and GFls, are hereby directed, and all
local government units are hereby encouraged, to extend full support and cooperation
to the Task Force on Zero Hunger relative to the implementation of the EPAHP
Program.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 19th day of April , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By authority of the President:

  

  
   
  

   

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

 

   

ATU. EN. ESPINO
> Gt-zy ACTING DIRECTOR IV