MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 51

REQUESTS FOR AUTHORITY TO NEGOTIATE AND/OR SIGN
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS, FOREIGN LOAN AGREEMENTS,
FOREIGN GRANT AGREEMENTS, AND GUARANTEES

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution provides that the
President shall have control of all executive departments;

WHEREAS, Section 20, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution states that the
President may contract or guarantee foreign loans on behalf of the Republic of the
Philippines with the prior concurrence of the Monetary Board, and subject to such
limitations as may be provided by law;

WHEREAS, the President, as the sole organ of the country’s foreign relations
and the constitutionally assigned chief architect of the country’s foreign policy, is
vested with the exclusive power to conduct and manage the country's interface with
other states and governments;

WHEREAS, Section 2, Chapter 1, Title 1, Book IV of Executive Order (EO) No.
292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987,” mandates the Department of Foreign Affairs
(DFA) to be the lead agency that shall advise and assist the President in planning,
organizing, directing, coordinating and evaluating the total national effort in the field of
foreign relations;

WHEREAS, under Section 3 (5), Chapter 1, Title Il, Book IV of EO No. 292, the
Department of Finance (DOF) is directed to undertake and supervise activities related
to the negotiation, servicing, and restructuring of domestic and foreign debt incurred
or guaranteed by the government and its instrumentalities;

WHEREAS, Section 51, Chapter 12, Book | of EO No. 292 provides that
contracts in behalf of the Republic of the Philippines shall be executed by the
President, unless authority therefor is expressly vested by law or by him in any other
public officer;

WHEREAS, the General Appropriations Act requires departments, bureaus,
offices and instrumentalities of the National Government, including Constitutional
Offices enjoying fiscal autonomy, state universities and colleges (SUCs) and
government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), except those engaged in
banking, to secure the approval of the President, the concurrence of the Monetary
Board, the issuance of a Forward Obligation Authority (FOA) by the Department of

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Budget and Management (DBM) for project loans, or the issuance of a Development
Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC) resolution covering the full amount in the
case of program loans, and an equivalent document for those undertaken by GOCCs,
as well as other conditions provided by pertinent laws, prior to the execution of foreign
or domestic loan agreements;

WHEREAS, the General Appropriations Act requires prior clearance and
approval by the President, or his authorized representative, based on the
recommendation of the Secretary of Finance, prior to the acceptance of grants, in cash
or in kind, from governments of foreign countries, their agencies and instrumentalities
or multilateral institutions or organizations;

WHEREAS, EO No. 459 (s. 1997) establishes the Guidelines in the Negotiation
and Ratification of International Agreements;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 16 (s. 2017) directs departments,
agencies, instrumentalities, bureaus, and offices of the government, including GOCCs
and SUCs, to secure authorization from the Office of the President (OP) prior to the
negotiation and/or signing of international agreements, and agreements covering
borrowings, guarantees, and foreign grants;

WHEREAS, MC No. 72 (s. 2019), as reiterated by MC No. 02 (s. 2022) and MC
No. 21 (s. 2023), requires the conduct of complete staff work (CSW) for all requests
for Presidential issuances, authorizations and/or approvals, to be signed by the
President or the Executive Secretary “by authority of the President’; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative to clarify and streamline the existing processes with
regard to requests for authority to negotiate and/or sign international agreements, as
well as foreign loan agreements, foreign grant agreements, and guarantees, and
strictly enforce the same, with the end in view of ensuring the efficient and effective
delivery of crucial government programs and projects;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Authority to Negotiate and/or Sign. Authorization from the
President must be secured prior to the negotiation and/or signing of international
agreements or foreign loan agreements, foreign grant agreements, and guarantees.

Section 2. Endorsing Agencies. All heads of departments, agencies,
instrumentalities, bureaus, and offices of the government, including GOCCs and
SUCs, are hereby directed to coordinate closely with the DFA, as endorsing agency,
prior to the negotiation and/or signing of international agreements.

For foreign loan agreements, foreign grant agreements, and guarantees, all
heads of departments, agencies, instrumentalities, bureaus, and offices of the
government, including GOCCs and SUCs, shall coordinate closely with the DOF, as
endorsing agency, prior to the negotiation and/or signing of the said agreements.


The DFA or the DOF, as the case may be, shall endorse the request for Special
Authority to the OP, unless it determines that the nature or scope of the agreement
does not require prior authority from the OP.

Section 3. Requirements for International Agreements. The DFA shall
evaluate the request for authority to negotiate and/or sign international agreements to
ensure timeliness of its submission, and completeness of all its supporting documents.
If the DFA finds merit in the request, it shall endorse the same to the President,
accompanied by the following documents: (i) letter of the proponent agency; and (ii)
copy of the draft agreement.

While the submission of certificates of concurrence is not mandatory for the
evaluation of a request for Special Authority, the DFA may, upon its determination,
require any relevant agency to provide its concurrence to the international agreement.

Section 4. Requirements for Foreign Loan Agreements, Foreign Grant
Agreements, and Guarantees. The DOF shall evaluate the request for authority to
negotiate and/or sign foreign loan agreements, foreign grant agreements and
guarantees to ensure timeliness of its submission, and completeness of all its
supporting documents. If the DOF finds merit in the request for Special Authority to
negotiate and/or sign foreign loan agreements, it shall endorse the same to the
President, accompanied by the following documents:

a. Letter of the proponent agency;

b. Copy of the draft loan agreement, reflecting the latest terms and conditions of
the proposed borrowing or guarantee;

c Concurrence of the Monetary Board;

d. Statement of compliance with the conditions provided by pertinent laws; and

e. FOA from the DBM for project loans, or a DBCC resolution covering the full

amount in the case of program loans, and equivalent document for those
undertaken by the GOCCs. In the issuance of a FOA, the DBM shall consider
the budgetary implications of foreign-assisted projects.

On the other hand, if the DOF finds merit in the request for authority to negotiate
and/or sign foreign grant agreements, it shall endorse the same to the President,
accompanied by the following documents: (i) letter of the proponent agency; and (ii)
copy of the draft grant agreement. If the project or program being funded by such grant
includes the payment of government counterpart financing, the DOF shall require all
government agencies/entities obligated to co-finance to submit their respective
certifications confirming their commitment to assume/pay the applicable government
counterpart.

Section 5. Agreements to be Negotiated or Concluded During Presidential
Trips. For international agreements, foreign loan agreements, foreign grant
agreements, and guarantees, proposed to be signed at the host country during a
Presidential trip thereat, either the DFA or the DOF, as the respective endorsing
agency, shall also request for a prior approval from the Office of Presidential Protocol
that the negotiation and/or signing of such agreement be included in the approved


itinerary of the Presidential trip. Such approval shall be submitted together with the
request for Special Authority to be endorsed to the OP, in accordance with Sections 3
and 4 of this Circular.

Section 6. Observance of Complete Staff Work. All heads of departments,
agencies, instrumentalities, bureaus, or offices, including GOCCs and SUCs, are
directed to strictly observe and comply with the requirements and standards of CSW
under MC No. 72, before requesting for the subject authority from the President. The
DFA or the DOF, as the case may be, shall ensure that the requests endorsed to the
OP are evidence-based, inclusive, and holistic.

Failure to comply with the requirements and standards of CSW herein provided
shall be sufficient basis for the OP to not act on the request or return the same to the
endorsing agencies.

Section 7. Period for Submission of Special Authorities for International
Agreements. To give the OP sufficient time to evaluate and process the request for
Special Authority, the DFA must endorse the request with complete supporting
documents, to the OP at least ten (10) working days before the desired date of
issuance of the requested authority.

In the event that the request does not conform with the aforementioned 10-day
timeframe, or lacks supporting documents, said request shall be returned to the DFA.
The DFA Secretary, instead of the head of the proponent agency, may then proceed
with the negotiation and/or signing of the pertinent agreement, in accordance with the
authority conferred upon him by virtue of EO No. 459, unless said agreement involves
a matter of national security or it qualifies as a treaty, in which case, OP approval is
necessary. The DFA shall be responsible in determining whether an international
agreement falls under the category of a treaty or an agreement concerning national
security.

Section 8. Period for Submission of Special Authorities for Foreign Loan
Agreements, Foreign Grant Agreements, and Guarantees. To give the OP
sufficient time to evaluate and process the request for authority, the DOF must
endorse the request with complete supporting documents, to the OP at least ten (10)
working days before the desired date of issuance of the requested authority.

The DOF will ensure that the abovementioned 10-day timeframe is taken into
consideration and incorporated into the indicative timeline for negotiating and
executing foreign loan agreements, foreign grant agreements, and guarantees. If a
request does not comply with the 10-day period, or lacks supporting documents, the
same shall be returned to the DOF.

The DOF may, after coordination with the relevant development partners,
resubmit the pertinent request to the OP with a revised timeline for evaluation,
negotiation and execution of the subject agreement already incorporating in the
revised timeline the required 10-day period for the OP to thoroughly study and
evaluate such request and its accompanying documents. Any resubmitted request
which does not comply with the 10-day period shall also be returned to the DOF.


Section 9. Grant of Authority. Authorization for the negotiation and/or signing
of an international agreement, or an agreement covering foreign borrowing, guarantee,
and foreign grant shall be in writing through a Special Authority, as well as through a
Full Power, Letter, or Memorandum signed by the President or the Executive
Secretary “by authority of the President.”

Section 10. Repeal. MC No. 16 (s. 2017) is hereby repealed. All other circulars,
rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of
this Circular are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 11. Separability. If any provision of this Circular is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 12. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 13th day of May in
the Year of our Lord Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

   
   
    
   

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

?
wf N. ESPINO
ACTING DIRECTOR IV

MER OSIU 24

  

  
  

PHILIPPINE!

0 ATT OY

PBBM004550