@ffice of the President
of the 3btlippines
Slalacafiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 40

APPROVING AND ADOPTING THE PHILIPPINE POPULATION AND
DEVELOPMENT PLAN OF ACTION 2023-2028, AND DIRECTING
THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, Section 4 of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 79 (s. 1972) established
the Commission on Population (POPCOM) to formulate and adopt coherent,
integrated and comprehensive long-term plans, programs and recommendations on
population as it relates to economic and social development, which shall be submitted
to and approved by the President;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 71 (s. 2018) renamed the POPCOM as the
Commission on Population and Development (CPD);

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2023-2028 recognizes the
role of the country's demographic condition in increasing its capacity to bring back the
country to a high-growth trajectory and enable economic and social transformation for
a prosperous, inclusive and resilient society;

WHEREAS, the CPD crafted that Philippine Population and Development Plan
of Action (PPD-POA) 2023-2028 to serve as the overall blueprint for inter-agency
collaboration to optimize demographic opportunities and address remaining
population challenges in order to accelerate the attainment of the Administration's
socioeconomic development agenda under the PDP 2023-2028; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative for all concerned national government agencies
and instrumentalities, and local government units (LGUs) to support and cooperate
towards the successful implementation of the PPD-POA 2023-2028;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Pursuant to Section 4 of PD No. 79, the PPD-POA 2023-2028 is hereby
APPROVED and ADOPTED.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all concerned agencies and
instrumentalities of the National Government, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations are hereby directed, and all LGUs are hereby encouraged,
to undertake efforts in support of the implementation of the PPD-POA 2023-2028, and
the plans and programs specified therein.

As the lead agency in-charge of formulating and adopting comprehensive

long-term plans and programs on population, the CPD is hereby directed to:

Coordinate, collaborate and establish institutional partnerships with concerned
government agencies and other stakeholders to ensure the attainment of the goals
and objectives set forth in the PPD-POA through whole-of-government approach;

Monitor and asses the implementation of the PPD-POA at all levels and submit
annual reports to the Office of the President, through the Office of the Executive
Secretary, on the progress and emerging concerns in the implementation thereof.

Undertake comprehensive population and development research, establish or
analyze population databases, and enable institutions at the national, regional and
local levels to optimize and/or address the impact of population dynamics in their
sectoral and local development agenda or strategies, subject to existing laws, rules
and regulations; and

Build public and institutional awareness on the impact of population dynamics on
socioeconomic development.

This Circular shall take effect immediately upon publication in the Official

Gazette.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 14th dayof November _, in the year of

our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

By authority of the President:

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

. GARVIDA
“-2g4 ACTING DIRECTOR IV