Office of the resident

Flalacaiang

   

ena

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 73

APPROVING AND ADOPTING THE MICRO, SMALL, AND
MEDIUM ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2023-2028, AND
DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, under Section 7 of Republic Act (RA) No. 6977, as amended by
RA No. 9501 or the “Magna Carta for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs),” the MSME Development (MSMED) Council shall be attached to the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), and shall be tasked to, among others: (a)
help establish the needed environment and opportunities conducive for the growth
and development of the MSME sector; (b) coordinate and integrate various
government and private sector activities relating to MSME development; and (c)
recommend to the President and Congress all policy matters affecting MSMEs;

WHEREAS, Section 6 of RA No. 6977, as amended, mandates the DTI, in
consultation with the private sector, to formulate and submit for the President's
approval a six-year MSME Development Plan (MSMEDP);

WHEREAS, the MSMED Council, through Resolution No. 2 (s. 2024),
resolved to endorse the MSMEDP 2023-2028 for the President's approval;

WHEREAS, the MSMEDP 2023-2028 will serve as the blueprint towards
empowering the MSME sector to become more robust and globally competitive,
taking into consideration the role of said sector in fostering sustainable and dynamic
economic development;

WHEREAS, under the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028,
accelerating digitalization and innovation of MSMEs and startups are among the
key strategies to revitalize the country’s industry sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Pursuant to Section 6 of RA No. 6977, as amended, the MSMEDP
2023-2028 is hereby APPROVED and ADOPTED.

As the lead agency in charge of formulating and adopting policies and
programs for the development of the MSME sector, the DTI, through the MSMED
Council, is hereby directed to:

1. Coordinate, collaborate and establish institutional partnerships with concerned

government agencies and other stakeholders to ensure the attainment of the
goals and objectives set forth in the MSMEDP 2023-2028;

BAGONG PILIPINAS

2. Monitor and assess the implementation of the MSMEDP 2023-2028 and submit
annual reports to the Office of the President, through the Office of the Executive
Secretary, on the progress, emerging concerns, and ways forward, in the
implementation thereof; and

3. In coordination with the Presidential Communications Office, disseminate official
copies of the MSMEDP 2023-2028 to all concerned government agencies, and
undertake information and awareness campaigns on the plans and programs
specified therein.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all concerned agencies and
instrumentalities of the National Government, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations are hereby directed, and all local government units are
hereby encouraged, to undertake efforts in support of the implementation of the
MSMEDP 2023-2028, and the plans and programs specified therein.

The roles and responsibilities of agencies relative to the implementation of
key programs under the MSMEDP 2023-2028 are enumerated in Annex A of this
Circular.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President:

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

 

daca ie)
Digitalization of MSMEs

DESCRIPTION
Digitalization of MSMEs shall be
pursued by simplifying access to
Al-driven systems and ensuring
access to a wide-range of state-
of-the-art laboratories and
testing facilities for the
enhancement of MSME
operations.

ANNEX A

AGENCY-IN-CHARGE
DTI, Department of
Science and Technology
(DOST), and Department
of Information and
Communications
Technology (DICT)

 

Streamlining of Business
Process Registration

The Electronic Local
Government Unit System shall
be promoted and implemented
at the local level, towards a
more efficient registration
process for MSMEs. The said
system aims to streamline and
improve the delivery of local
government services such as,
issuance of business permits
and processing of business tax
payments.

Department of the Interior
and Local Government,
DICT, and Anti-Red Tape
Authority

 

Expansion of the
Machine Learning-Based
Credit Scoring Model

The Machine Learning-Based
Credit Scoring Model, an Al tool
used to improve credit
assessments and loan approval
processes for microenterprises,
shall be expanded to include
small and medium loan
applications.

Small Business
Corporation, in
coordination with Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas

 

Full Implementation of
RA No. 11057 or the
“Personal Property
Security Act”

Section 26 of RA No. 11057
mandates the establishment of a
national registry to facilitate the
registration of, among others,
movable assets as collateral,
and enhancing MSME access to
loans and financial transactions.

Land Registration Authority

 

Elevating Capabilities for
Higher Productivity

Programs and initiatives aimed
at strengthening financial
literacy and skills, and upskilling
programs shall be conducted
with the aim of enhancing the
productivity and competitiveness
of the MSME sector.

DTI, DOST, Department of
Labor and Employment -
National Wages and
Productivity Commission,
and Technical Education
and Skills Development
Authority

 

Revamping the One
Town, One Product
(OTOP) Program and its
facilities!

 

 

The OTOP program, which aims
to drive local economic growth
by enabling communities to
determine, develop, and
promote products that are
rooted in its local culture, shall
be expanded to include other
locally produced products and
services across the country.

 

DTI, in coordination with
local government units

 

 

' Including, among others, the (a) OTOP Retail and Learning Center; (b) OTOP Grand Food Hall;

(c) OTOP Lifestyle Store; and (d) Bagong Pilipinas Marketplace.