Office of the President

Malacaiiang

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 104

APPROVING THE TATAK PINOY STRATEGY AND DIRECTING THE
IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, Section 1, Article XII of the Constitution declares it a policy of
the State to promote industrialization and full employment based on sound
agricultural development, through industries that make full and efficient use of
human and natural resources, and which are competitive in both domestic and
foreign markets;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11981 or the “Tatak Pinoy
(Proudly Filipino) Act” declares it a policy of the State to encourage, support, and
promote the production and offering of Philippine products and services that are
increasingly diverse, sophisticated, and globally competitive;

WHEREAS, Section 7 of RA No. 11981 mandates the Tatak Pinoy Council
(TP Council) to, among others, formulate and submit for the President's approval
the Tatak Pinoy Strategy (TPS), which shall outline the strategy and action plans at
the national, provincial, city, and municipal levels, to expand and diversify the
productive capacities of domestic enterprises and empower them to produce
increasingly sophisticated goods and services that can compete in the global
market;

WHEREAS, according to the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), the
TP Council formulated the TPS through an inclusive, consultative, and evidence-
based process in coordination with government agencies, the business sector,
research institutions, and other key stakeholders;

WHEREAS, the TP Council, through Resolution No. 02 (s. 2025), resolved
to endorse the TPS for the President's approval; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative for all national government agencies and
instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs), and local government units (LGUs) and the private sector, to support
and cooperate towards the successful implementation of the TPS;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:
The TPS, as formulated and endorsed by the TP Council pursuant to RA No.

11981, and attached to this Circular, is hereby APPROVED. The TP Council,
through the DTI, shall lead and oversee the implementation of the TPS.

BAGONG PILIPINAS

In accordance with their respective mandates, all concerned agencies and
instrumentalities of the National Government, including GOCCs, are hereby
directed, and all LGUs and the private sector are hereby encouraged, to undertake
efforts in support of the implementation of the TPS, and the strategies and action
plans outlined therein, and within ninety (90) days from the issuance of this Circular,
to submit to the TP Council a compliance plan detailing specific actions to align with
the TPS.

The DTI, in coordination with the Presidential Communications Office, is
hereby directed to disseminate the official copy of the TPS to all concerned
government agencies and offices, and to make the TPS publicly accessible through
the DTI’s official website and other appropriate platforms to promote transparency
and stakeholder engagement.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24th dayof October , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By authority of the President:

ATTY. LOVE I V. TOLENTINO-NAVA
wos orn _j/ DIRECTOR IV