Office of the President

flalacaiang

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 72

ADOPTING THE NATIONAL HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH
MASTER PLAN 2020-2040, AND DIRECTING THE
IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF :

WHEREAS, Section 15, Article Il of the Constitution declares it a policy of
the State to protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health
consciousness among them;

WHEREAS, Section 23 of Republic Act No. 11223 or the “Universal Health
Care Act,” mandates the Department of Health (DOH), together with relevant
stakeholders, to formulate and implement a National Human Resources for Health
Master Plan (NHRHMP) that will provide policies and strategies for the appropriate
generation, recruitment, retraining, regulation, retention and reassessment of health
workforce based on population health needs;

WHEREAS, the NHRHMP 2020-2040 was crafted by the DOH, in
coordination with relevant stakeholders, to serve as the blueprint for the
management and development of the country’s Human Resources for Health
(HR);

WHEREAS, the adoption of the NHRHMP 2020-2040 is aligned with one of
the strategies under the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028, particularly in
ensuring sustainable and equitable distribution of health infrastructure and human
resources, and contributes to the attainment of United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals Goal 3, which aims to ensure healthy lives and promote the
well-being of people;

WHEREAS, the Social Development Committee, through Resolution No. 3
(s. 2024), approved the NHRHMP 2020-2040 and resolved to endorse the same to
the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

The NHRHMP 2020-2040 is hereby adopted as the country’s long-term plan
for HRH management and development. The Department of Health (DOH) shall
lead the implementation of the NHRHMP 2020-2040.

As the lead agency in-charge of formulating and adopting policies and
programs for health, the DOH is hereby directed to:

a. Monitor HRH plans of the national and local governments, and ensure their

BAGONG PILIPINAS

b. Coordinate and collaborate with private sector, civil society organizations, and
relevant stakeholders relative to the implementation of plans and programs

c. In coordination with the Professional Regulation Commission, establish and
maintain a national health workforce registry, and promulgate guidelines for
efficient and effective implementation thereof; and

d. Institutionalize the HRH Network and create Technical Working Committees,
as necessary, to deliberate and take appropriate actions on technical issues
concerning implementation of the NHRHMP 2020-2040.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all national government
agencies and instrumentalities are hereby directed, and all local government units
are hereby encouraged, to support the implementation of the NHRHMP 2020-2040,
and the plans and programs specified therein.

The funding requirements for the implementation of this Circular shall be
charged against the existing appropriations of the respective agencies, subject to
applicable laws, rules and regulations.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 28th dayof October , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President:

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIBIED COPY

TOLENTINO-NAVA
NG DIRECTOR IV