of the Philippines
Malacañang

PRESCRIBING THE RECITAL OF THE BAGONG PILIPINAS HYMN
AND PLEDGE DURING FLAG CEREMONIES

WHEREAS, Section 18 of Republic Act (RA) No. 8491 or the
“Flag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines” directs all government offices, including
local government units (LGUs), to conduct a flag raising ceremony every Monday
morning and flag lowering ceremony every Friday afternoon;

WHEREAS, Section 19 of RA No. 8491 authorizes the Office of the President
to issue rules and guidelines for the proper conduct of flag ceremonies;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular No. 24 (s. 2023), which launched Bagong
Pilipinas as the Administration’s brand of governance and leadership, directs all
national government agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) and state universities and colleges (SUCs), to be
guided by Bagong Pilipinas principles; and

WHEREAS, Bagong Pilipinas, which is characterized by a principled,
accountable and dependable government, reinforced by unified institutions of society,
is envisioned to empower Filipinos to support and participate in all government efforts
in an all-inclusive plan towards deep and fundamental social and economic
transformation in all sectors of society and government;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered.

To further instill the principles of the Bagong Pilipinas brand of governance and
leadership among Filipinos, all national government agencies and instrumentalities,
including GOCCs and educational institutions, such as SUCs, are hereby directed,
and LGUs are hereby encouraged, to integrate the recital of the Bagong Pilipinas
Hymn and Pledge in the conduct of weekly flag ceremonies, subject to existing laws,
rules and regulations.

For this purpose, the heads of all national government agencies and
instrumentalities shall ensure that the Bagong Pilipinas Hymn and Pledge, which are
annexed to this Circular, are properly disseminated within their respective institutions
and offices.

The Presidential Communications Office is hereby directed to implement
effective measures to communicate and disseminate the Bagong Pilipinas Hymn and
Pledge to all government offices and the public.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 4th day of June , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.



Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

A Yn. ESPINO
%6-t-104 ACTING DIRECTOR IV



BAGONG PILIPINAS

BAGONG PILIPINAS HYMN

TIME FOR CHANGE

Time for change
Because it is necessary

Let us help each other
To develop our beloved country

Time for change
Because it is necessary
Let us help each other
To develop our beloved country

Time for change
And fix what needs to be fixed
It should just be the duty
Of every citizen here in our country

Make the change
Towards progress
Strive to do good
And so that we can improve
Let us be proud of in the world and show
The New Filipino and New Philippines

Time for change
Let us patronize our own
And it is right to practice
Rather than prioritize others over us

Time for change
And lead in any field
Victory is honor
We will offer it to the country

Filipinos have repeatedly proven
The skill and strength, beauty and talent
Ready to compete
Anytime
The new Filipino, the New Philippines

Time for change
Let us make our lives brighter
There will be a good future
The results of the New Philippines
Make the change
Towards progress
Strive to do good
And so that we can improve
Let us be proud of in the world and show
The new Filipino and New Philippines.

TIME NOW!

BAGONG PILIPINAS

BAGONG PILIPINAS PLEDGE

PLEDGE TO THE NEW PHILIPPINES

As a Filipino, I proudly
will live the New Philippines.

The great, brave and honorable lineage is in my blood,

I will always carry in my heart, mind and spirit
my love for my culture and homeland;

Together with every citizen, I will offer my talent
and skills to the development of my Country;

Possessing excellence in accordance with
international standards;

I will be an instrument in promoting well-being,
wisdom and peace.

I will unite and participate in the endeavors
of the government because development is
not only the responsibility of a few.

I will uphold and protect the honor,
freedom and interests of my beloved country:

As a Filipino with love, concern and compassion;
not selfish but for the greater good;
I will take the path towards a
New Philippines!