Office of the Jresident
of the Whilippines
Slalacafiang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 22

MANDATING ALL NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES TO STRICTLY IMPLEMENT WATER
CONSERVATION MEASURES

WHEREAS, the United Nations General Assembly, through Resolution
No. 64/292 dated 28 July 2010, recognized the right to safe and clean drinking water
and sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all
human rights;

WHEREAS, Section 16, Article II of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to protect and advance the right of the people to a balanced and healthful
ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 22 (s. 2023) created the Water Resources
Management Office (WRMO) in the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR), as the apex government body tasked to harmonize all policies,
projects and programs of all government agencies in the water resource sector, and
shall ensure the implementation of the Water Resources Management Plan; and

WHEREAS, with the probability of the El Nifio phenomenon occurring within the
next few months, there is an urgent need to implement water conservation measures
to avert a looming water crisis not just in Metro Manila, but in all other areas of the
country experiencing water scarcity;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. The WRMO and its network of agencies with water-related functions
shall take the lead in the implementation of a nationwide water conservation program,
in coordination with other relevant government agencies.

Section 2. All national government agencies and instrumentalities, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and state universities and colleges, are
hereby directed to identify and implement specific, quantifiable and attainable water
conservation measures that will result in ten percent (10%) water volume reduction of
their respective first quarter (January to March 2023) water consumption.

Section 3. The Local Water Utilities Administration (in case of Water Districts),
National Water Resources Board (in case of local government-run water service
providers [WSPs]), and Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (Corporate

and Regulatory Offices) (in case of its two concessionaires, Maynilad and Manila
Water), are hereby directed, and private WSPs are hereby encouraged, to submit to
the WRMO a monthly supply-demand projection highlighting if there is any likelihood
of a deficit in water supply in the near future.

Government-run WSPs are hereby directed and private WSPs are hereby
encouraged to implement water conservation measures, such as but not limited to
non-revenue water management and water pressure management.

Section 4. National Government-run WSPs are hereby directed, and local
government-run WSPs are hereby encouraged, to immediately complete their projects
to reduce non-revenue water and upgrade water distribution pipes. Local government
units are encouraged to process the requests of WSPs for waterworks within a
reasonable period of time.

Section 5. The WRMO shall identify strategies towards water conservation,
monitor compliance of government agencies and instrumentalities with the
aforementioned water conservation measures, and provide quarterly updates to the
Office of the President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary, on the progress
thereof.

Section 6. If any part or provision of this Circular is held unconstitutional or
invalid, other parts not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 7. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this Circular are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 8. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th day of June , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

By authority of the President:

 

 

2 ayaa.