Office of the resident

Slalacaiang

 

 

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 83

ADOPTING THE NATIONAL ACTION PLAN FOR UNITY, PEACE,
AND DEVELOPMENT 2025-2028, AND DIRECTING THE
IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF

WHEREAS, Section 5, Article Il of the Constitution provides that the
maintenance of peace and order, protection of life, liberty and property, and promotion
of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings
of democracy;

WHEREAS, Section 9, Article II of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and
independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through po icies that
provide adequate social services, promote full employment, rising standara of living,
and improved quality of life for all;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 70 (s. 2018) created the National Task
Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict (NTF-ELCAC) to ensure a whole-of-
nation approach to end insurgency and local communist armed conflict in the pursuit
of the country’s peace agenda;

WHEREAS, under EO No. 70, the NTF-ELCAC is mandated to, among others,
formulate and implement a National Peace Framework which shall contain crinciples,
policies, and plans that aim to address the root causes of insurgency and armed
conflict, and include mechanisms for localized peace interventions;

WHEREAS, taking into account the evolving security and peace environment
in the country, the NTF-ELCAC, in coordination with relevant government agencies
and the orivate sector, facilitated the crafting of the National Action Plan for Unity,
Peace and Development (NAP-UPD) 2025-2028, which outlines specific action plans
and strategies to further operationalize the whole-of-nation approach in addressing the
root causes of insurgency and local armed conflict and attaining inclusive and
sustainable peace in the country;

WHEREAS, the NAP-UPD 2025-2028 is anchored on the National Security
Policy 2023-2028 and the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028 which underscore
the Administration’s thrust to pursue an integrated, transparent, people-centered, and
human rights-based peace and security policy;

NOW THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

BAGOMG PILIPINAS

The NAP-UPD 2025-2028, which is annexed to this Circular, is hereby adopted
as the nation’s strategic blueprint to end the Communist Party of the Philippines-New
People’s Army-National Democratic Front insurgency and armed conflict, and attain
inclusive and sustainable peace. .

The NTF-ELCAC, consistent with its mandate, shall lead the implementation of
the NAP-UPD 2025-2028. For this purpose, the NTF-ELCAC shall perform the
following duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules, and regulations:

a. Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the programs, activities, and projects
under the NAP-UPD 2025-2028, and submit annual reports to the Office of the
President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary, regarding the
implementation thereof;

b. Study and as may be necessary, recommend measures that will further enable
and support the attainment of the objectives of the NAP-UPD 2025-2028,
including, among others, strengthening of existing agency monitoring mechanisms
and/or creation of Project Management and Development Offices at the national
level and Unity, Peace and Development Centers at the local level, as well as the
establishment of an Overseas Coordinating Committee, subject to-existing laws,
rules and regulations, to oversee peace and development initiatives; and

c. Engage the private sector, civil society organizations, and other stakeholders for
monitoring and feedback with regard to the implementation of the NAP-UPD.

In accordance with their respective mandates, all departments, agencies,
bureaus, and offices of the National Government, including state universities and
colleges and government-owned or -controlled corporations are hereby directed, and
all LGUs and the private sector are hereby encouraged to support the implementation
of the NAP-UPD 2025-2028, as well as the programs, activities, and projects specified
therein.

The funding requirements for the implementation of this Circular shall be
charged against the existing appropriations of concerned government agencies and
LGUs, subject to applicable laws, rules, and regulations.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of May , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By authority ithe President:

Leer deze
‘LUCAS P. B AMI
: Executive Se etary

fy