MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 71

COORDINATING THE ACTIVITIES OF THE DIFFERENT RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT IN CONNECTION WITH THE CAMPAIGN FOR THE COMPLETE RESTORATION OF PEACE AND ORDER AND WITH DISASTERS CAUSED BY NATURAL CALAMITIES

For the purpose of coordinating the activities of the different relief organizations of the Government in connection with the campaign for the complete restoration of peace and order and with disasters caused by typhoons, floods, fires, earthquakes and other natural calamities, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that:

1. The mobilization, accommodation and care of evacuees and population in troubled areas shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Manager of the Philippine National Red Cross.

2. The sanitation and medical services to be rendered to the evacuees and population in the troubled areas shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Director of Health.

3. The procurement, storage and supply of food, clothing, medicine and other basic necessities shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the General Manager of the Philippine Relief and Trade Rehabilitation Administration (PRATRA).

4 . The distribution of food, clothing, medicine and other basic necessities among the evacuees and population in the troubled areas and other places in the Philippines where relief is needed, due to emergency other than natural disasters, shall be under the direction, control and supervi­sion of the Commissioner of Social Welfare in cooperation with the President’s Action Committee on Social Amelioration (PACSA).

5. The maintenance of order and the security of the whole population in troubled areas shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Chief of Constabulary with jurisdiction over the local police forces.

6. In cases of disasters caused by typhoons, floods, fires, earthquakes and other natural calamities, the relief work shall be undertaken by the Philippine National Red Cross which may call on the Social Welfare Commission, the PACSA, or the PRATRA whenever assistance is necessary.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Administrative Order No. 71 : Coordinating the activities of the different relief organizations of the Government in connection with the campaign for the complete restoration of peace and order and with disasters caused by natural calamities. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44 (10), 3723-3724.

Administrative Order No. 71, October 29, 1948