MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 157

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COMMITTEE ON ECAFE MATTERS

WHEREAS, the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE), as conceived by the United Nations General Assembly and created on March 28, 1947, by virtue of a resolution passed by .the Economic and, Social Council, is charged with the accomplishment of the fol­lowing objectives:

(1) To initiate and participate in measures for facilitating concerted action for the economic reconstruction of Asia and; the Far East, for raising the level of economic activity in said region and for maintaining and strengthening the economic relations of these areas both among themselves and with countries of the world;

(2) To make or sponsor such investigations and studies of economic and technological problems and development within the countries of Asia and the Far East as the Commission deems appropriate;

(3) To undertake or sponsor the collection, evaluation and dissemination of such economic, technological and statistical information as the Commission deems appropriate; and

(4) To recommend and follow up the implementations of the resolutions of the Commission by the individual member-countries, with a view to achieving the above objectives.

WHEREAS, the Philippines is one of the active members of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE), which is one of the regional economic commissions, established by the United Nations;

WHEREAS, the ECAFE Secretariat has recommended as necessary and expedient the creation of a national ECAFE Committee in each of the member-governments, to act as liaison agency for securing quick exchange of information between the ECAFE Secretariat and the Philippine Government and between the various governments in the ECAFE region and to work for the implementation of resolutions or studies approved or undertaken by the Commission and the ECAFE Secretariat, respectively.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of thePhilippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine Committee on ECAFE matters, which shall act in accordance with paragraph 3 hereof; make or sponsor studies and submit measures for facilitating concerted action for the economic reconstruction of the country, for raising the level of economic activity in the country and for maintaining and strengthening the economic relations between the Philippines and the other countries under the ECAFE region; undertake or sponsor the collection, evaluation and dissemination of economic, technological and statistical information and to refer the same for appropriate actions by the respective government agencies or bureaus concerned. The Committee shall be composed of the Undersecretary of Commerce and Industry, as Chairman, and a representative each of the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Central Bank of the Philippines, the Office of Economic Coordination, and the Director of Commerce, as members. The Chairman shall appoint the Secretary of the Committee.

The Chairman is hereby authorized to call upon any officer or employee of any Department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including the corporations owned or controlled by it, for such assistance as may be needed by the Philippine Committee on ECAFE matters for the proper discharge of its functions and duties.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Administrative Order No. 157 : Creating the Philippine Committee on ECAFE Matters. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (6), 2812-2813.