MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 226

REPRIMANDING PROVINCIAL GOVERNOR ADELMO Q. CAMACHO OF BATAAN

This is an administrative case against Provincial Governor Adelmo Q. Camacho of Bataan for (1) nepotism, (2) extravagance in the expenditure of public funds, (3) threats and intimidation, (4) dishonesty, (5) falsification and attempt to commit fraud through falsification and (6) vindictiveness. The case was looked into by the Integrity Board and in the course of the investigation all the charges were either withdrawn or dropped by the Board with the exception of charges (3) and (5). The Integrity Board found charge (3) duly proven. Charge (5) refers to alleged collection of per diem to which he was not entitled, and is the subject matter of a pending criminal case against respondent in the Court of First Instance of Bataan.

It appears that in the morning of October 17, 1952, two vouchers of the respondent—one for traveling expenses in the sum of P160 (Exhibit A) and the other in the amount of ₱50 for the purchase of linoleum—were presented by his messenger to Mr. Alfonso Reyes, bookkeeper in the office of the Provincial Treasurer of Bataan. The bookkeeper did not approve the traveling expense voucher Exhibit A for unavailability of funds for the purpose and informed the messenger of this fact and requested him to secure a supplemental special budget (Exhibit B) to cover the voucher in question, in accordance with the instructions of the provincial treasurer. About 11:30 in the morning of the same day respondent pleaded with Mr. Reyes to approve the voucher, but the latter refused to do so for want of a corresponding supplemental budget to cover the same. Angered by Mr. Reyes’ refusal respondent tore the voucher to pieces, threw the torn pieces on the floor and, in a loud voice and threatening mood, told Mr. Reyes that if the latter could not fix the voucher by twelve noon of that day something would happen. In view of the menacing attitude of the respondent, Mr. Reyes had to pass the voucher in question and submitted the same to the assistant provincial treasurer who likewise affixed his signature thereon, thereby enabling the respondent to collect the amount of ₱160 on October 22, 1952. Several days after the incident of October 17, 1952, the personnel of the offices of the provincial treasurer and the provincial auditor gathered together at the request of the respond­ent and the latter apologized publicly to them.

The above conduct displayed by the respondent does not only speak very poorly of him but shows a contemptible official threat and intimidation on his part unbecoming the chief executive of a province. The fact that he publicly apologized to the employees is an acknowledgement of his fault.

Courtesy and politeness constitute a norm of conduct that should be observed and practised at all times by those in the public service, however high the positions they occupy may be. A lowly employee of the Government is as much entitled to considerations of courtesy and respect as any official of high rank. In this case the bookkeeper was simply performing his duties according to the instructions of his superior.

In view of the foregoing, and upon the recommendation of the Integrity Board, Governor Adelmo Q. Camacho is hereby reprimanded with a warning that a repetition of similar act will be dealt with more severely. His suspension is considered sufficient punishment and he is hereby reinstated in office.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Administrative Order No. 226 : Reprimanding Provincial Governor Adelmo Q. Camacho of Bataan. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (12), 5275-5276.

Administrative Order No. 226, December 4, 1953