MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 193

ON THE ADMINISTRATIVE CASE OF FORMER GOVERNOR PERFECTO FAYPON OF ILOCOS SUR

During the incumbency of Mr. Perfecto Faypon as provincial governor of Ilocos Sur administrative charges involving dishonesty, misconduct in office and irregularity in the administration of the provincial jail were filed against him. These charges were investigated by the Integrity Board which found only the last one to have been substantiated.

It appears that on February 13, 1947, four insular prisoners, two of whom had been sentenced to die and the other two, to life imprisonment, escaped from the provincial jail of Ilocos Sur. These prisoners had been convicted since April and December 1946. According to the respondent, said prisoners were not sent to the New Bilibid Prison within the period prescribed by prison regulations because the practice was to send prisoners to the insular penitentiary in groups of from twelve to twenty for the sake of economy.

This is an admission of inexcusable irregularity in the administration of the provincial prison. The record shows that there had been no attempt to send the prisoners to Muntinlupa for a period of from two to ten months, giving occasion to the four prisoners above mentioned to escape, resulting in the frustration of the administration of justice and the creation of a serious threat to the peace and security of the community. Only one of these dangerous criminals has so far been recaptured. Had these prisoners been sent to Muntinlupa within the period of thirty days fixed in the regulations, most likely they would have had no opportunity to escape.

It also appears that on June 4, 1950, five detention prisoners charged with robbery in band and murder escaped after attacking the guard, three of whom were killed in the course of their recapture by constabulary soldiers. From the evidence on record, it is clear that the provincial jail had not been properly administered and kept.

The acts committed by respondent, which constitute irregularity in the administration of the provincial jail and gross negligence in the custody of prisoners, call for the imposition of an administrative penalty heavier than the period of his suspension from office from November 13 to December 31, 1951, the expiration of his term of office. Considering, however, that he is no longer in office, the period of his suspension without salary shall be deemed a sufficient punishment.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September in the year or Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1952). [Administrative Order Nos. : 51 – 266]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.