MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 259

REMOVING MR. FRANK H. DANAO FROM OFFICE AS PROVINCIAL TREASURER OF LANAO

This is an administrative case against Mr. Frank H. Danao, Provincial Treasurer of Lanao, for dishonesty resulting from his complicity in the commission of the crime of estafa through falsification of a commercial document from which he was sentenced by the Court of First Instance of Lanao to suffer a prison term, to indemnify, jointly with his co-accused, the offended party in the sum of ₱6,345.20, etc.

It appears that on February 18, 1948, the respondent, in his capacity as provincial treasurer of Lanao, paid to Liwalog Bangon the value of a check belonging to Lt. Anongcar Gumanod covering the latter’s arrears in pay, knowing full well that the one cashing it was not its lawful owner, thereby facilitating the perpetration of the offense. It also appears that in so paying the check respondent was motivated by a desire to obtain personal profit for himself, he having retained and received the sum of ₱1,345.20 out of its total value of ₱6,345.20.

The foregoing shows not only dishonesty but a criminal disposition on the part of respondent rendering him unfit to remain in the public service. Accordingly, and upon recommendation of the Secretary of Finance, Mr. Frank H. Danao is hereby removed from office as Provincial Treasurer of Lanao, effective as of July 17, 1948, the date of his suspension.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Administrative Order No. 259 : Removing Mr. Frank H. Danao from office as Provincial Treasurer of Lanao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50 (1), 29-30.

Administrative Order No. 259, December 28, 1953