MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 148

FINING AND REPRIMANDING MR. LEON R. BARINAGA, CITY TREASURER-ASSESSOR OF BASILAN.

Mr. Leon R. Barinaga, city treasurer-assessor of Basilan, stands charged with irregularities in connection with the acquisition of office supplies and materials.

An examination of the record discloses that in violation of existing regulations respondent purchased and carried in stock as of June 30, 1950,.supplies and materials (consisting mostly of printed forms) which would take the City of Basilan more than one year and a half to consume, and that the acquisitions were made without benefit of public bidding.

Taking up respondent’s explanation, the mere fact requisitions for supplies and materials could not be filled on time by the Procurement Office and that when the printed forms were ordered from the open market the same were not available in the Bureau of Printing does not justify their acquisition in quantities that would last more than six months. He could have acquired just enough to meet the actual needs of the city. Furthermore, he should have obtained first the required approval of the Department Head before ordering his printing jobs outside the Bureau of Printing.

Neither is his reason for dispensing with public bidding acceptable, it appearing that the supplies involved were acquired, not under the direct order and payment system as alleged by him, but from traveling merchants from Manila and Cebu City without the intervention of the Procurement Office.

The foregoing shows respondent to have been remiss in the performance of his duties.

Wherefore, Mr. Leon R. Barinaga is hereby fined in an amount equivalent to one month’s pay and, reprimanded and warned that commission of similar irregularity in the future will be dealt with more severely.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Administrative Order No. 148 : Fining and reprimanding Mr. Leon R. Barinaga, City Treasurer-Assessor of Basilan. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines , 47 (3), 1091-1092.