MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 142

ADMONISHING PROVINCIAL TREASURER JOSE C. ORTEZA OF SAMAR

This is an administrative case against Mr. Jose C. Orteza, provincial treasurer of Samar, for alleged irregular purchases of supplies and materials amounting to over P45,000.

It appears that respondent made certain purchases of office supplies and materials without public bidding from Manila dealers who had called at his office. He claims, however, that the prices paid did not exceed those quoted to him by the Purchasing Agent. The quotations, it turned out, had been tampered with, evidently by the dealer who had received the letter from the office of the Purchasing Agent and delivered it to the office of respondent. This circumstance accounts for the payment of higher prices than what should have been paid.

Respondent explains that he had to avail of the offers of dealers coming to Catbalogan in the interest of the service on account of the delay in the filling of orders by the then Division of Purchase and Supply and the expenses entailed in sending a deputy to Manila to make arrangement with the Purchasing Agent regarding the matter. He also states that public biddings were not called on the ground, among others, that there were then no local dealers in office supplies and materials and that he considered the letters of the Purchasing Agent addressed to him as sufficient to authorize him “to purchase the supplies and materials from the dealers involved.”

Respondent’s explanation is not entirely satisfactory. The regulations governing the acquisition of supplies are clear enough and respondent should at least have consulted the Secretary of Finance before dispensing with the public bidding. Obviously he failed to observe the regulations strictly. It does not appear, however, that there was overstocking of the supplies and materials purchased nor was there any trust fund used. Moreover, the sum involved is insignificant, considering the size and classification of the Province of Samar.

Inview of the foregoing, respondent is hereby admonished to comply strictly with existing rules and regulations on the purchase of supplies and materials and warned that repetition of similar irregularity will be dealt with more severely.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Administrative Order No. 142 : Admonishing Provincial Treasurer Jose C. Orteza of Samar. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines , 47 (3), 1085-1086.