MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 80

RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ISSUANCE OF LICENSES FOR THE PURCHASE OF PALAY AND/OR RICE UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 384, DATED NOVEMBER 19, 1948

For the purpose of further implementing the provisions of Executive Order No. 184, dated November 19, 1948, and Administrative Order No. 75, dated November 22, 1948, regarding the issuance of licenses by the National Rice and Corn Corporation (NARIC) to private persons or entities for the purchase of palay and/or clean rice at the price, and under the terms and conditions, prescribed under said Executive Order, the following rules and regulations are hereby promulgated:

1. All licenses issued by the NARIC shall be effective only during the lifetime of said Executive Order No. 184, but not exceeding one year from the date of promulgation thereof, unless (1) they are revoked earlier by the NARIC or (2) cancelled upon request of the licensee;

2. The NARIC may revoke and cancel any license for any of the following causes:

a . In the event that the licensee becomes insolvent or in some way or another fails to perform the operations for which the license was granted;

b . In the event that the licensee violates any rule, regulation or directive of the NARIC, or any provision of Executive Order No. 184;

c . If any bribe, commission, gift, or advantage is given, promised or offered, directly or indirectly, by the licensee to any officer or employee of the NARIC or of any other Government entity designated to carry out and enforce Executive Order No. 134; and

d. In the event that public interest so demands.

3. In such localities as the NARIC may deem necessary, it shall issue official prices for palay to be paid by licensed purchasers as well as maximum prices for rice to be paid by the ultimate consumers.

4. The licensees shall finance and undertake their respective operations on their own account and risk.

5. The licensee shall keep books of accounts with daily entries and render monthly reports to the NARIC on purchases, stocks, milling recoveries, deposits and sales. All books and records of the licensee shall be subject to inspection by duly authorized representatives of the NARIC.

6. Areas of operation of licensees may be delimited by the NARIC if and when it so deems necessary.

7. The NARIC reserves the right to purchase all or any portion of the stocks of palay and/or rice of the licensee or direct its sale if and when the NARIC so deems necessary for the effective implementation of Executive Order No. 184.

These rules and regulations shall take effect as of January 15, 1949.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Administrative Order No. 80 : Rules and regulations governing the issuance of licenses for the purchase of palay and/or rice under Executive Order No. 384, dated November 19, 1948. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (1), 24-25.

Administrative Order No. 80, January 21, 1949