MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 255

SUSPENDING MR. RAMON DADO, JR., AS PROVINCIAL TREASURER OF SURIGAO

This is an administrative case against Supervising Treasurer Ramon Dado, Jr., now Acting Provincial Treasurer of Bohol, who is charged with lewd and lascivious behavior and improper use of government car committed while he was provincial treasurer of Surigao. Upon his request, a formal investigation of the charges was conducted by the Department of Finance, and he was given full opportunity to present his side of the case.

After carefully going over the record of the case, I am convinced that the respondent committed the lewd and lascivious acts imputed to him by Mesdames Caridad B. Paquee and Juanita A. Buniel and Miss Urbana Alapag. These women had no motive to testify falsely against him. In testifying against him, they were evidently imbued with no other purpose than to seek redress for the indignities to which they had been subjected by the respondent. The offense committed on Mrs. Paquee is aggravated by the fact that she is the wife of the municipal treasurer of Cantilan, Surigao, then a subordinate of the respondent.

Wherefore, and in accordance with the recommendation of the Secretary of Finance, Mr. Ramon Dado, Jr., is hereby suspended from office for a period of four months without pay, effective as of the date of his preventive suspension by reason of this case. He is further severely reprimanded and warned that commission of similar acts in the future will be a sufficient cause for his separation from the service.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Administrative Order No. 255 : Suspending Mr. Ramon Dado, Jr., as Provincial Treasurer of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (12), 5307-5308.

Administrative Order No. 255, December 23, 1953