MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 182

REMOVING MESSRS. ARSENIO VILLANUEVA AND PEDRO S. NAJARRO FROM OFFICE AS VICE-MAYOR AND ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE, RESPECTIVELY, OF CEBU CITY

This is an administrative case against Messrs. Arsenio Villanueva and Pedro S. Najarro, vice-mayor and assistant chief of police, respectively, of Cebu City, for alleged misconduct in office through, falsification of public documents. The charge was investigated by the Integrity Board, through a special investigator, which found the following facts to have been duly established:

That, implementing the directive of this Office and that of the Commissioner of Civil Service for replacement of non-eligible patrolmen of the Cebu City police force by civil service eligibles, Acting Mayor Elizalde dismissed a number of temporary patrolmen who were non-eligibles and whose separation from the service was recommended by the acting chief of police because of their unsatisfactory record;

That among those dismissed were patrolmen Margarito Palang, Leodegario Lopez, Melanio Fuentebella, Wilfredo Rojo, Dalmacio Bacalso and Numeriano Teves, who were individually advised by letters dated September 12, 1951, of the termination of their connection with the police force effective at the close of business hours on September 15,1951;

That to counteract the effect of the dismissal order with respect to the above-named patrolmen and save them from being separated from the service for lack of civil service eligibility, respondents, conspiring with each other, made it appear that they had been appointed detectives and transferred to the secret service division, where no civil service eligibility is required, since August, 1951, by virtue of appointments signed by respondent vice-mayor, as acting mayor, which were dated August 13, 1951, and made effective August 16, 1951, although they were prepared about the middle of September, 1951;

That before the issuance of these antedated appointments, respondent assistant chief of police had called a conference of civil service eligible members of the detective force, following which he recommended to his co-respondent the appointment of eligible detectives as patrolman and the appointment of the six non-eligible temporary patrolmen as members of the detective force; and

That although the six patrolmen involved were ostensibly appointed and transferred to the detective force as of August 16, 1951, they continued to render service and receive salary up to August, 31, 1951, as patrolmen.

In the light of the foregoing, the Integrity Board found the respondents guilty of the charge and recommended their separation from the service. After going over the record, I fully agree with the Board’s finding and recommendation. By their dishonest conduct in falsifying official records, both respondents have shown that they are totally unfit to remain in the public service.

Wherefore, Messrs. Arsenio Villanueva and Pedro S Najarro are hereby removed from office as vice-mayor and assistant chief of police, respectively, of Cebu City, effective upon receipt of notice hereof, without prejudice to the taking of such criminal action against them as the facts of the case may warrant.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1952). Administrative Order No. 182 : Removing Messrs. Arsenio Villanueva and Pedro S. Najarro from office as vice-mayor and Assistant Chief of Police, respectively, of Cebu City. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48 (6), 2102-2103