MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 187

DROPPING THE CHARGES AGAINST CITY ATTORNEY APOLINARIO E. SOGUECO OF PASAY CITY

City Attorney Apolinario E. Sogueco is charged by Ruben Valenzuela and Romeo Gonzales with dereliction of duty, partiality and favoritism for (1) deliberately allowing their complaint for physical injuries with abuse of authority filed with his office against certain policemen of Pasay City to prescribe due to protracted investigation the roof and (2) immediately filing a case in court against them, without giving them a chance to be heard in the preliminary investigation, when said policemen filed against them a complaint for rape which resulted in its dismissal for lack of merit.

After the respondent had filed his answer to the charges, the case was set for hearing the Integrity Board. At the hearing Ruben Valenzuela in his behalf and that of his co-complainant submitted to the Board a written request for withdrawal of their complaint against the respondent, stating that after mature deliberation they were convinced that he had acted in good faith and pursuant to the dictates of his conscience. The Board granted the request after hearing respondent’s manifestation to the effect that the investigation of the complaint filed by the complainants was conducted throughout by his assistant.

Wherefore, and in accordance with the recommendation of the Integrity Board, the charges City Attorney Apolinario E. Sogueco of Pasay City are hereby dropped and said respondent exonerated.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and the Independence of Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1952). Administrative Order No. 187 : Dropping the charges against City Attorney Apolinario E. Sogueco of Pasay City. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48 (8), 3155.