MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 243

EXONERATING PROVINCIAL GOVERNOR JUAN F. TRIVINO OF CAMARINES SUR

This is an administrative case against Provincial Governor Juan F. Trivino of Camarines Sur for alleged insubordination, dereliction of duty arid grave abuse of authority. The charges were looked into by the Integrity Board which found the same without merit and accordingly recommended respondent’s exoneration.

After going over the papers of the case, I am satisfied that respondent’s failure to act on the complaint filed by the complainants herein against the municipal mayor of Bato, Camarines Sur, for supposed abuse of authority in removing them from the police force was due to a justifiable cause, to wit, the pendency in the Bureau of Civil Service of the appeal of the complainants herein from the decision of the Municipal Council of Bato, Camarines Sur, finding them guilty in the administrative case preferred by the mayor against them, which case and that against the mayor are interrelated; and that his failure to comply with the directives of my office on the matter was attributable to reasonable causes, including postponements requested by the complainants themselves and the fact that the provincial board had already made use of the allowable number of special sessions in a month.

In view of the foregoing, the charges against Provincial Governor Juan F. Trivino are hereby dismissed and he is exonerated therefrom.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Administrative Order No. 243 : Exonerating Provincial Governor Juan F. Trivino of Camarines Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50 (1), 20-21.

Administrative Order No. 243, December 23, 1953