MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 68

CREATING AN ACTION COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL AMELIORATION

For the purpose of implementing the six point policy of the President of the Philippines on social amelioration and to provide an effective direction in carrying out the functions of government agencies which can be of effective help in insuring the success of said policy, an Action Committee on Social Amelioration is hereby created. The Commissioner of Social Welfare shall be the Chairman; and one representative each from the Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Public Works and Communications, Education, Health, Justice and Labor, the National Land Settlement Administration, the Rural Progress Administration, the Philippine Relief and Trade Rehabilitation Administration, and one Executive Officer of the Committee shall constitute the membership.

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To coordinate and supervise the activities of the different branches, instrumentalities and agencies of the government with a view to promoting most efficiently the welfare of the people in rural districts.

2. To administer and supervise the distribution of governmental aids in order that the funds may be spent properly for the purposes for which they are intended.

3. To initiate measures in addition to activities now being undertaken, calculated to attain the objective of helping the small farmer in order to make him a productive, contented, and peace-loving citizen.

4. To bring every facility of the government into play for the purpose of effectively helping those who are coming into the fold of the law under the President’s Amnesty Proclamation.

5. To administer the funds assigned by the President from time to time for social amelioration work.

The Secretary or directing head of each of the Departments and government instrumentalities above enumerated shall appoint a representative, who shall be on full time time duty with the Committee, attend all its deliberations, execute plans, supervise field activities, act as liaison officer between the Committee and the Department or government instrumentality he represents, submit reports and recommendations to the Committee and perform such other duties as may be as may be assigned to him by the Committee.

The representatives of the Departments and government instrumentalities duly appointed as members of the Committee shall continue to draw their salaries from their respective departments or organizations, but shall be entitled to receive a per diem of ten pesos from the funds of the Committee whenever they are on duty outside of Manila.

The Committee is hereby empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office, dependency, agency, or instrumentality of the governing for such assistance, data and information as it may need in carrying out its functions.

The Committee shall submit to the President a report of its work from time to time or as the circumstances of each case may require.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd . ) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1948). [Administrative Order Nos. : 51-266]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.