MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 54

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO EXAMINE THE ACTUAL CONDITIONS IN THE SURPLUS PROPERTY COMMISSION

A committee is hereby created to examine the actual conditions in the Surplus Property Commission. The Committee shall be composed of Justice Antonio Horrilleno, Dr. Pio Joven, and Mr. Alfredo Jacinto.

The Committee is empowered and authorized to examine books, documents, papers, or records of the Surplus Property Commission and of any of the departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government and to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such information as it may require in the performance of its functions. Likewise, every department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government shall make available to the Committee, upon the latter’s request, the services or assistance of any official or employee thereof. For this purpose, the Committee is hereby granted all the powers to summon witnesses, administer oaths, and take testimony or evidence relevant to the inquiry and examination under sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code.

The Committee shall submit to the President of the Philippines its report and recommendations as soon as possible but not later than July 31, 1948.

Members of the Committee shall be paid such per diems, transportation and other expenses as may be fixed by the President payable from the funds of the Surplus Property Commission.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Administrative Order No. 54 : Creating a Committee to examine the actual conditions in the Surplus Property Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44 (5), 1454-1455.

Administrative Order No. 54, May 7, 1948