MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 219

DIRECTING THE DIFFERENT EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES, AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE GOVERNMENT TO AVOID DIRECT IMPORTS OF NON-ESSENTIAL GOODS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Government to promote the country’s economic development, protect and encourage local industry, and conserve dollar resources in order to facilitate the importation of capital goods and raw-materials;

WHEREAS, it is necessary in the pursuit of these objectives to restrict the imports of non-essentials and of goods which can be produced locally in sufficient volume; and

WHEREAS, the different Executive Departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government can aid materially in the attainment of said objectives by avoiding the importation of non-essential items and of goods which can be produced locally in adequate quantities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct all Executive Departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government to refrain from the importation of non-essential commodities and to limit their direct imports to essential and highly essential items which may be needed for their operations.

For the purposes of this- Order, essential and highly essential items are those listed- in appendices A, B, and D to Regulation 1 (as amended) implementing Central Bank Circular No. 44.

In case any Department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government requires the importation of any item not included in appendices A, B and D to Regulation 1 implementing Central Bank Circular No. 44, it shall submit a petition to that effect to the Cabinet, giving the reasons why an exception should be made in its particular case.

It is further directed that all Departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government reduce the consumption of imported non-essential items even if these are procurable locally from private importers, and purchase for their needs, as far as practicable, locally-produced goods.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Administrative Order No. 219 : Directing the different executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government to avoid direct imports of non-essential goods, and for other purposes. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (10), 4257-4258.