MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 83

CREATING A TECHNICAL COMMITTEE TO PREPARE AN INTEGRATED PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT CENTERED IN THE MARIA CRISTINA POWER SYSTEM

For the purpose of drafting a program of industrial development centered in the Maria Cristina power system, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Technical Committee composed of the following:

The Committee shall prepare an integrated plan of development centered in the Maria Cristina power system, embracing the principal industries that may be established in that area which will utilize the power to be generated and including an economic analysis of the various industries that will be interrelated within the power framework.

It shall also be the duty of the Committee to make a separate report on the proposal to establish an oil refinery in the Philippines, indicating the desirable capacity and the costs involved, the relationship with the existing industries and those that are to be established and the power requirements of the said industries relative to the total requirements for agricultural and other enterprises.

The Committee is hereby empowered to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance, data and information as it may need in carrying out its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Administrative Order No. 83 : Creating a Technical Committee to prepare an integrated plan of development centered in the Maria Cristina power system. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (4), 1644-1645.

Administrative Order No. 83, April 7, 1949