MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 145

REPRIMANDING CITY ENGINEER V. C. CASTRO OF LIPA

This is an administrative case against Mr. V. C. Castro, city engineer of Lipa, in connection with the requisitioning. of gasoline and other inflammable materials.

It appears that in February and March, 1948, respondent requisitioned a number of drums of gasoline, diesel fuel and kerosene ostensibly for the use of the City of Lipa but the supplies were delivered to and dispose of by a Chinaman, in violation of Executive Order No. 897, dated October 24, 1935.

By way of explanation, respondent states that as his office had not yet established a bodega for the storage of inflammable materials and supplies, he had to make ah arrangement with a local gasoline station to secure these supplies from which his office could draw from time to time at contract price plus cost, of transportation; and that the kerosene and other supplies,, which were very scarce, were ordered by him with the understanding that they should be distributed to the consuming public at current prices so as to protect it from having to acquire them at black market prices.

Respondent’s explanation is not satisfactory. The executive order referred to above explicitly prohibits the issuance of requisition for gasoline, oil, etc., except for public use. Such an arrangement as that made by respondent is not only irregular but is also a potential source of graft. Considering, however, that he appears to have acted in. good faith and that there is no showing that he personally profited therefrom, I am inclined to view his case with some measure of leniency.

Wherefore, respondent V. C. Castro is hereby reprimanded and warned to be more careful in administering his office, particularly ill the acquisition of equipment, supplies and materials; otherwise a more drastic action will be taken against him.

Done at the City of Manila, this 6th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Administrative Order No. 145 : Reprimanding City Engineer V. C. Castro of Lipa. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines , 47 (3), 1088-1089.