MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 202

COORDINATING THE ACTIVITIES OF THE DIFFERENT RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT IN CONNECTION WITH THE CAMPAIGN FOR THE COMPLETE RESTORATION OF PEACE AND ORDER AND WITH DISASTERS CAUSED BY NATURAL CALAMITIES

For the purpose of coordinating the activities of the different relief organizations of the Government in connection with the campaign for the complete restoration of peace and order and with disasters caused by typhoons, floods, fires, earthquakes and other natural calamities, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that:

1. The mobilization, accommodation and care of evacuees and population in troubled areas shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Manager of the Philippine National Red Cross.

2. The sanitation and medical services to be rendered to the evacuees and population in the troubled areas shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Director of Health.

3. The procurement, storage and supply of food, clothing, medicine and other basic necessities shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the General Manager of the Price Stabilization Corporation (PRISCO).

4. The distribution of food, clothing, medicine and other basic necessities among the evacuees and population in the troubled areas and other places in the Philippines where relief is needed, due to emergency other than natural disasters, shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Social Welfare Administrator.

5. The maintenance of order and the security of the whole population in troubled areas shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Chief of Constabulary with jurisdiction over the local police forces.

6. In cases of disasters caused by typhoons, floods, fires, earthquakes and other natural calamities, the relief work shall be undertaken by the Philippine National Red Cross which may call on the Social Welfare Administration or the PRISCO whenever assistance is necessary.

This Order supersedes Administrative Order No. 71, dated October 29, 1948.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1952). Administrative Order No. 202 : Coordinating the activities of the different relief organizations of the government in connection with the campaign for the complete restoration of peace and order and with disasters caused by natural calamities. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48 (11), 4750-4751.