MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 249

EXONERATING MAYOR FELIX P. AMANTE OF BACOLOD CITY

This is an administrative case against Mayor Felix P. Amante of Bacolod City filed by then Acting Provincial Governor Leon C. Miraflores of Negros Occidental and five mayors of that province for serious abuse of authority, usurpation of power and gross misconduct. The charges were investigated through a special investigator by the Integrity Board which found them not sufficiently established.

In connection with the charge for gross misconduct, it appears that on June 13, 1952, respondent went to the provincial capitol to attend the second day of the Sugarcane Planters Convention but was denied admission by Acting Governor Miraflores for not being provided with proper credentials as required by Mr. Alfredo Montelibano. In view of Governor Miraflores’ stubborn refusal to let respondent in despite the latter’s insistence that as a planter and director of the Bacolod-Murcia Planters Association he had a right to attend the convention, a discussion ensued between the two in the course of which respondent asked Governor Miraflores whether he was acting as a porter or janitor of Mr. Montelibano, to which the governor retorted that he was just doing his duty as executive of the province in maintaining peace and order, for he was the one who issued the permit for the use of the social hall of the capitol. When Governor Miraflores told Mayor Amante to see Mr. Montelibano, the respondent said that nobody could stop him because he had a perfect right to attend the convention for being a planter and director of the Bacolod-Murcia Planters Association and because as mayor of Bacolod City he had jurisdiction over the capitol as a public building in the maintenance of peace and order. At this juncture Governor Miraflores revoked the permit for the use of the social hall, and it was announced that the convention would be held somewhere in Talisay, Negros Occidental

The Board found no valid reason for Governor Miraflores’ refusal to admit respondent into the convention hall, the latter being the mayor of Bacolod City and a planter and director of the Bacolod-Murcia Planters Association, aside from the fact that Mr. Ildefonso Coscolluela was permitted to enter the hall without being required to produce the necessary credentials which he in fact did not have. However, it observed that there was no justification for the respondent to insult Governor Miraflores by asking him whether he was a porter or janitor of Mr. Montelibano. The Board noted the existence of strained and unfriendly relations between the two officials due to factional differences to which the sad occurrence was traceable.

After carefully going over the record of the case, I concur in the Board’s findings and observations.

Wherefore, and upon the recommendation of the Integrity Board, City Mayor Felix P. Amante is hereby exonerated of the charges, with the admonition to observe courtesy and respect in his dealings with other government officials and the general public so as to avoid repetition of unfortunate incidents like the one which took place in the provincial capitol of Negros Occidental on June 13, 1952.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Administrative Order No. 249 : Exonerating Mayor Felix P. Amante of Bacolod City. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (12), 5299-5301.

Administrative Order No. 249, December 23, 1953