MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 143

SUSPENDING JUSTICE OF THE PEACE ANTONIO FUENTECILLA OF SAN FELIPE AND SAN NARCISO, ZAMBALES.

This is an administrative case against Mr. Antonio Fuentecilla, justice of the peace of San Felipe and San Narciso, Zambales, who stands charged with habitual drunkness, gambling, playing politics in his official actuations, and negligence in the performance of his duties.

The record of the case does not show the above charges to have, been substantiated, except that of negligence. It appears that respondent failed to render, without any justifiable reason, his decision in a certain criminal case for less serious physical injuries despite the lapse of four months from its submission. His explanation that he deferred rendering his judgment so as to afford the parties an opportunity to reach an amicable settlement which was reportedly under way, the realization of which would save him from the embarrassment of rendering a decision that would antagonize the municipal mayor who was allegedly a vindictive person, is altogether unsatisfactory. The case having been submitted for decision, it was his duty to decide it one way or another, without fear of displeasing anybody. By his admission, it has been established that he not only unduly delayed the administration of justice but also displayed a weakness of character which does not become a judge who should at all times inspire respect and faith and confidence in our courts of justice.

In view of the foregoing and it appearing that before the war respondent was also, found negligent and inefficient in the performance of his duties as justice of the peace of San Marcelino, Zambales, and warned against commission of similar irregularity, I am constrained to take drastic action against him.

Wherefore, respondent Antonio Fuentecilla is hereby suspended from office as justice of the peace of San Felipe and San Narciso, Zambales, for a period of three months without pay. He is also warned that commission of similar irregularity in the future will be sufficient cause for his removal from the service.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Administrative Order No. 143 : Suspending Justice of the Peace Antonio Fuentecilla of San Felipe and San Narciso, Zambales. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines , 47 (3), 1086-1087.