MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 242

REPRIMANDING CAPTAIN EULOGIO SAMIO, DEPUTY CHIEF OF THE MANILA FIRE DEPARTMENT

This is an administrative case against Captain Eulogio Samio, Deputy Chief of the Manila Fire Department, filed by Captains Jesus Cruz and Braulio Alona, of the same department, charging the former with (1) collaboration with the Japanese, (2) irregularities in the quartermaster stores, (3) falsification of public documents and perjury, and (4) inefficiency.

The charges were investigated by the Integrity Board, in the course of which the first one was dropped. After investigation the Board found the second and third charges not satisfactorily established. However, it found him, under the last charge, remiss in the performance of his duties in connection with the fires which broke out at Juan Luna and Tecson Streets and Orozco and Chica Streets on December 31, 1951, and January 26, 1952, respectively, for not responding promptly to the first fire alarm calls so as to assume command of operations as required by the regulations.

In its report the Board noted the complainants’ attitude, which they openly admitted by reason of their seniority, that either one of them and not the respondent should have been appointed to the position of deputy chief of the fire department. It also noted the existence of jeolousies among these three officials in their desire for promotion, instead of mutual cooperation and harmony in the best interest of the service.

After going over the papers of the case, I concur in the findings and observations of the Board.

Wherefore, and upon the recommendation of the Integrity Board, respondent Eulogio Samio is hereby reprimanded and warned that repetition of similar negligence or irregularity in the future will be dealt with more severely. The complainants and respondent are hereby enjoined to observe mutual respect and cooperation, so vital and necessary to the efficiency of the service, otherwise drastic action will be taken against them.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Administrative Order No. 242 : Reprimanding Captain Eulogio Samio, Deputy Chief of the Manila Fire Department. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50 (1), 19-20.

Administrative Order No. 242, December 23, 1953