MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 29

POSTPONING THE SALE OF THE LOT OF THE METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT BONDS, VALUED AT P500,000, SCHEDULED TO TAKE PLACE ON DECEMBER 1, 1936.

WHEREAS, by virtue of Administrative Order Numbered Six, dated February twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, it has been ordered and decreed that the Commonwealth bonds to be issued pursuant to the provisions of Act Numbered Three thousand seven hundred eleven in the amount of two million five hundred thousand pesos for the purchase of equivalent par amount of bonds of the Metropolitan Water District for the purpose of obtaining funds for the completion of the extension of the water supply and sewerage system of said District, should bear the following dates:

WHEREAS, the Metropolitan Water District Board, on the fourteenth day of September, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, by Resolution Numbered One hundred fourteen, duly adopted and approved by the Secretary of Finance, pursuant to the provisions of section five of Act Numbered Two thousand eight hundred thirty-two, as amended by Act Numbered Four thousand seventy-nine, has requested the postponement of the sale of the lot of the Metropolitan Water District bonds, valued at five hundred thousand pesos, scheduled to take place on December first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, to some future date as may be decided upon;

Now, therefore, pursuant to the provisions of Act Numbered Three thousand seven hundred eleven, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, in the name and in behalf of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, hereby authorize and direct the postponement of the sale of the lot of the Metropolitan Water District bonds, valued at five hundred thousand pesos, scheduled to be sold on December first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, to such future date as may be determined later.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fifth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 29. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 957.