MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 163

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO STUDY AND RECOMMEND THE DISCONTINUANCE OF NON-ESSENTIAL SERVICES DURING THE PERIOD OF THE EMERGENCY AND OTHER MEANS OF REALIZING SAVINGS IN THE AUTHORIZED APPROPRIATIONS IN ORDER TO PROVIDE FUNDS FOR THE PROTECTION AND DEFENSES OF THE CIVILIAN POPULATION

WHEREAS, the present international situation demands the strictest economy in government expenditures, as funds must be provided for the extraordinary needs created by the present emergency, especially those related to the protection and defense of the civilian population;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution and the laws of the Philippines, do hereby order, that:

1. The Secretary of Finance and the Commissioner of the Budget shall constitute a committee which is hereby designated to study the activities that are being undertaken by the various departments, bureaus, and offices of, and the corporations and enterprises owned or controlled by, the Government, and to recommend the discontinuance or suspension of those that can be dispensed with during the period of emergency. In the case of services that must be continued in operation, the committee shall determine and recommend the minimum personnel that shall be provided therefor.

2. The appropriations or portions thereof saved as a result of the economy measure prescribed herein, are, upon release, hereby made available for expenditures by the Civilian Emergency Administration. For this purpose, the Commissioner of the Budget shall examine all proposals made by the Civilian Emergency Administration and any of its administrators or agencies, and recommend the same or parts thereof, pursuant to the provisions of section 7-I (4) of Commonwealth Act No. 246, as may, in his opinion, be necessary to enable the Civilian Emergency Administration and its administrators or agencies to discharge fully and without delay the duties and responsibilities vested upon them. Pending approval of such proposals, the Civilian Emergency Administration and its administrators or agencies are authorized to obligate up to 25% of the funds requested for the purposes specified in said proposals, but not to exceed P50, 000. 00.

3. In the employment of personnel, the Civilian Emergency Administration shall, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the President, select its force from those of the Departments, bureaus, offices, and corporations owned or controlled by the Government services and activities of which have been discontinued or suspended by virtue of this or subsequent orders.

4. The Civilian Emergency Administration is hereby empowered to call on any official, office, branch or dependency of the Government for such data and assistance as it may require, and may ask for the detail to the said Administration of any official or employee of any bureau or office of the Government. Such detail shall be arranged directly with the chief of the bureau or office concerned and is considered approved. In case of disagreement, the matter shall be submitted to the President for decision.

5. Except when essential for the preservation of life or when specifically authorized by the President, no furniture and equipment shall be acquired.

Done at the City of Baguio, this 6th day of December, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON

By the president: (Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Administrative Orders Nos. : 117 – 168]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.