MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 1

DISCHARGING FROM MILITARY SERVICE CERTAIN CADETS AT THE PHILIPPINE MILITARY ACADEMY

Whereas, the following named cadets of the Philippine Military Academy,

have been found guilty of maltreating and abusing first year members of the cadet corps, in flagrant violation of the standing orders of the Academy and in utter disregard of personal admonitions of the faculty with regard to the offense of hazing;

Whereas, drastic punishment is necessary to be imposed in order to emphasize the Government’s determination to stamp out and destroy the contemptible practice of maltreating subordinates at the Military Academy; for any military superior taking advantage of his subordinate, who may not resent the act, is not only guilty of gross misconduct in a military sense, but he also violates the true standards of a gentleman;

Whereas, the mission of the Military Academy is to produce an officer corps of efficiency, imbued with patriotism, pride and self-respect and that while disciplinary methods in that institution must teach subordination of the individual but must not produce or permit servility;

Whereas, in the further development of its military academy, the Philippine Army is privileged to take advantage of the better practices and experiences in similar schools throughout the world, with West Point and Annapolis as the best models;

Whereas, the defense alleged in favor of the above-mentioned cadets that the faults committed by them have become almost customary and have been tacitly condoned in the Philippine Military Academy;

Whereas, if this is true, there is the greater reason for taking the most drastic action, if it is desired to correct instantly and completely that state of things and that it might serve in the future as a warning to any upperclassman who may be so disposed to humiliate and bemean his subordinates and lowerclassmen; and

Whereas, far more important that mere academic and technical training of the cadets in the Academy is their development into a body distinguished by personal integrity, gentlemanly habits, professional efficiency, and high patriotism—a cadet corps capable of producing the men who must lead the future Philippine Army in its high mission of defending our country;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested hereby resolve to discharge as I hereby discharge the cadets abovenamed, effective immediately.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-ninth day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Administrative Order No. 1. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 915-916.