MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 31

ACCEPTING THE RESIGNATION OF DR. JACOBO FAJARDO, DIRECTOR OF THE BUREAU OF HEALTH

This is the administrative decision in the case against Dr. Jacobo Fajardo, Director of the Bureau of Health.

Doctor Fajardo was accused of having committed certain irregularities in the performance of his duties. The commissioner of Civil Service made an exhaustive investigation of all the charges presented against Dr. Fajardo and the papers were subsequently referred by me to the Honorable Secretary of Public Instruction, who also very carefully reviewed all the facts submitted by the investigator.

I have personally gone thoroughly over the record of the case and I am satisfied that the chargers affecting D. Fajardo’s honesty have not been proven. There was no evidence to support the complaint that Dr. Fajardo had accepted a bribe from Antero Azaña, a leper who was at that time detained in the San Lazaro Hospital in Manila. It was conclusively shown that on the date when it was claimed Dr. Fajardo received the bribe he was absent from Manila. I am also satisfied that the charge in which it is alleged that the wife of Dr. Fajardo had sold some pieces of jewelry to leper Antero Azaña is unfounded.

However, the sum total of the facts recorded in the investigation has convinced me that his withdrawal from the Government will be in the best interest of the Health Service, and since Dr. Fajardo had signified his desire to submit his resignation s Director of Health and had actually presented it before the present investigation was started, but had withheld it only in view of the charges against him which he first wanted investigated, action on said resignation was temporarily held in abeyance. Now that the investigation has been completed and the findings are as I have stated above, I deem it advisable to accept Dr. Fajardo’s resignation which he desires to be considered, and I do hereby accept it, effective as of the date it was presented, June nineteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six.

Done at the City of Manila, this ninth day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 31. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 1153.