MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 42

REQUIRING HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS TO FURNISH THE COMMISSIONER OF THE BUDGET WITH COPIES OF PLANTILLAS AND APPOINTMENTS OF PERSONNEL ISSUED OR APPROVED BY THEM, AND REGULATING THE SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT OF PERSONNEL.

Whereas, it is essential that the Commissioner of the Budget be kept informed of the appointment and assignment of the personnel of the National Government in order that, he can properly perform his duties in the supervision of the expenditure of the authorized appropriations; and

Whereas, the appointment and assignment of personnel should conform to the provisions of the laws that authorize their appropriations or their employment;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order and decree that—

1. Heads of Departments and dependencies of the National Government shall furnish the Commissioner of the Budget with copies of the appointments of personnel which they may issue or approve from September first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, as well as Copies of the plantillas of the personnel respectively under them as of August thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and thereafter as of January first, each year. Such plantillas shall be typewritten on legal bond paper, 8 by l3 inches, and shall show the following information:

Name of employee

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-eighth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.2. Whenever the Head of any, Department or dependency of the National Government deems it necessary for the good of the service to assign any officer or employee outside of the Bureau or Office where he is regularly employed, or to perform, within the same Bureau or Office a kind of work which is different from that for which the position he occupies has been provided, the said Head of Department or dependency shall issue an order stating the necessity for such special assignment and a copy of the order shall be furnished to the Budget Office, but no such special assignment shall be made for more than thirty days without the approval of the President.

MANUEL.L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 42. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 1168-1169.