MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 117

SUSPENDING ISIDRO J. SISON, CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF CEBU, FOR FAILURE TO PAY JUST DEBT

This is an administrative case against Isidro J. Sison, Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Cebu, for willful failure to pay a just debt.

It appears that on January 1, 1936, the respondent executed a promissory note for P120.00 with interest at 1% a month, the interest payable on the first day of each month, in favor of the Firemen’s Relief Association of the City of Manila, payable within six months after the date thereof, or on July 1, 1936. In spite of several letters demanding payment, the respondent has not paid a single centavo on his note, either on account of the principal or the interest thereon. On May 5, 1939, in compliance with a requirement from the Commissioner of Civil Service to show cause why administrative disciplinary action should not be taken against him, the respondent admitted his indebtedness and expressed  his willingness to pay his debt in installment of P2.00 a month, explaining that his failure to honor his obligation is due to the needs of his large family. The Commissioner of Civil Service is not satisfied with the explanation of the respondent and invites attention to the fact that it took the respondent three years within to show his desire to fulfill his obligation and only after a complaint was filed against him.

In view of the foregoing, the respondent, Isidro J. Sison, Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Cebu, is hereby suspended from office for five (5) days and warned that the commission by him of a similar offense in the future will be more severely dealt with. It is further ordered that he settle his obligation with the Firemen’s Relief Association of the City of the City of Manila within six months from the date hereof.

Done at the City of Manila, this 10 th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Administrative Order Nos. : 117 – 168]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.

Administrative Order No. 117, January 10, 1940