MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 138

SUSPENDING REGISTER OF DEEDS MIGUEL VILORIA OF LA UNION FOR DISCOURTEOUS CONDUCT

This is an administrative case filed against Miguel Viloria, Register of Deeds for the province of La Union, for discourtesy in not answering official correspondence.

It appears that a certain private company addressed a letter to the Chief of the General Land Registration Office, requesting cooperation in collecting from the respondent, the balance of the interest due on the latter’s account with the said company. On August 12, 1939, this letter was duly referred to the respondent for his compliance or comment. The respondent, however, failed to answer the correspondence in spite of the fact that five traders were sent to him on August 29, September 15, October 3, October 20, and November 3, 1939, respectively. On December 2, 1939, the Chief of the General Land Registration Office sent a letter to the respondent requesting explanation within three days from his receipt thereof, why administrative action should not be taken against him for his apparent discourtesy in not answering official correspondence. This letter, which was received by the respondent’s janitor-messenger, as shown by the latter’s signature on the registry return receipt, dated October 2, 1939, likewise was not answered by the respondent.

In view of the foregoing, the respondent, Miguel Viloria, Register of Deeds for the province of La Union, is hereby suspended from office for two days, for discourteous conduct. It is further ordered that the respondent reply to the correspondence addressed to him by the Chief of the General Land Registration Office on August 12, 1939, immediately upon receipt of notice hereof.

Done at the City of Manila, this 20th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Administrative Orders Nos. : 117 – 168]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.