MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 57

CREATING A BOARD TO REVISE THE PHILIPPINE MERCHANT MARINE REGULATIONS

It appearing that public interests require complete revision and compilation of the rules and regulations governing vessels under Philippine registry in order to insure the safety of transportation at sea and that such regulations be made available in convenient form for the use of interested parties;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby appoint and constitute a board composed of—

(1) Commander K. L. Hill, U. S. N., retired, Chairman; (2) Mr. William Baxter, Chief, Hulls and Boilers Division, Bureau of Customs, Member; (3) Captain Manuel del Villar, Surveyor of the Port, Bureau of Customs, Member; (4) Mr. Vicente G. Manalo, Chief Enginneer, Transportation Division, Public Service Commission, Member; (5) Mr. Bernardo P. Abrera, Yard Engineer,Marine Railway and Repair Shops, Member; (6) Lieut. S. L. Huff, U. S. N., retired, Member; (7) Mr. G. V. Parkinson, Mechanical Engineer, Earnshaw’s Dock & Honolulu Iron Works, Member; (8) Mr. M. E. Cleland, Jr., Marine Architect, La Naviera Filipina, Inc., Member; and (9) Mr. Mariano Yengco, representing the Asociacion de Navieros de Filipinas, Member,

to revise the Philippine Merchant Marine Regulations as follows:

( a ) Regulations and requirements pertaining to the construction, repair, and stability of the hulls of vessels; load lines and hull machinery ( b ) Requirements for boilers, pressure vessels, propulsive and auxliary machinery and its piping, appurtenances and fittings. ( c ) Requirements for electrical machinery, both main and auxiliary, and radio installations. ( d ) Regulations and requirements governing emergency and safety equipment and emergency drills. ( e ) Inspection requirements, and duties fo the Inspection Service.

The Board shall meet on or before February fifteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, at the Manila Custom-house, and thereafter at such times and places as may be designated by the Chairman, with a view to submitting its report with draft of proposed publication as soon as practicable.

Members of this Board other than Government employees shall be entitled to a per diem of twenty pesos for each day that they attend meetings.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-ninth day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL.L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 57. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 1191-1192.