MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 63

FILLING OF POSITIONS AND PROMOTIONS AND OBSERVANCE OF SENIORITY RULE IN THE CIVIL SERVICE

The following rules governing the filling of positions and promotions in the civil service are hereby promulgated for the information and guidance of all officials concerned:

1. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any positions mentioned in the General Appropriation Act or in any special Act of the National Assembly, the appointment to which position is not by law vested in the President of the Philippines, the corresponding Head of Department is hereby authorized to fill it by original appointment from the employees in the civil service or by regular promotion at the regular rates of compensation, subject to the entrance salaries provided in civil service rules and regulations. Appointment at any such position at a salary of P3,000 or more per annum shall be submitted to the President of its approval.

2. Save in exceptional cases, promotions or increases in salary shall not be made during the first six months after the appointment of an officer or employee, nor more frequently than once in twelve months thereafter, nor more that once class (or one-half of classes C and D) at a time. The question of whether a case is or is not an exceptional one shall be submitted for determination to the Cabinet for its approval.

3. The filling of vacancies and promotions shall be based on seniority and any departure therefrom, in meritorious cases, shall be submitted, with the full records of the case, to the President of approval.

Administrative Order No. 40, dated August 24, 1937, is hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Manila this 17th day of March, in the year or Our Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Administrative Order No. 63. Messages of the President, 4 (1), pp. 1686.