Address of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the delegates to the National Secondary Schools Press Conference

[Delivered at the Auditorium of the Girl Scouts of the Philippines on Padre Faura, February 17, 1956]

MY FRIENDS:

IT GIVES me great pleasure to be here with you today. Despite a heavy schedule, I did not hesitate to accept the invitation to speak before this gathering when I learned that you are the ones who shape, mould, and reflect the opinions and the thinking of our tens of thousands of students in the public high schools of our country. I felt I should not miss this opportunity because there is something of great importance to our country which I wish to discuss with you today.

You come from all over the Philippines—from the different towns and barrios and cities of our country. I am sure that as early as today, all of you have begun to think of what you would want to do after high school—of what course you will take in college and what career you will pursue. I am sure that the thousands of students who read and follow what you write are thinking of the same thing.

One of the most tragic weaknesses of our educational system is that it encourages our students to think only in terms of white-collar careers and white-collar jobs. Somehow our students soon begin to believe that the only decent honorable, and dignified professions, to take are those which will tie them down to some desk in some air-conditioned office in Manila. Thus, after graduating from high school, they flock to Manila in search of a diploma in Law or in Commerce, disdaining any other course which would require them to work with their hands and that they believe would minimize their chances of finding employment in Manila.

We have got to correct this tragic weakness in our educational system. This tendency, in the first place, does not help in any way at all in the solution of our unemployment problem. Our students keep pursuing those careers which in many places, especially in Manila, are already overcrowded. The result is that they do not get a chance to work in their chosen professions, and succeed only in adding their names to the roles of the unemployed.

In the second place, this trend results in draining our towns and rural areas of manpower and trained technicians which they badly need, because the delusion is fostered that it is only the big cities which provide opportunities for comfortable living, advancement, and prestige. Thus, our graduates make a frantic rush for the cities immediately after receiving their diplomas, only to find disillusionment and defeat.

This trend, finally, does not respond to the peculiar needs and challenges of our times and of this stage in our country’s development. This is the atomic age, and if we are to survive and succeed as a nation, we must keep pace with the wonders and miracles that are being wrought daily in the areas of science and technology.

These were the reasons which prompted me, in my recent state-of-the-nation message to Congress, to set down as one of our major guideposts the “adoption of educational reforms geared to the requirements of scientific and economic progress.”

“If we are to participate fully in the blessings of science,” I said then, “we must recast our educational system to train more engineers and scientists. We must revitalize our educational system with emphasis on general scientific, and vocational education.”

The government, I assure you, will do everything possible to comply with this policy guidepost. It is not enough however, that the government institute the necessary reforms. It is far more important that the reforms be understood, appreciated, and accepted by our school-going population. There exists in this country freedom to choose one s career and profession, and for as long as our students refuse to stake their future on technology and science for so long will we lack the skills and the talents that will lead us to the incredible progress that is within our grasp in this day and age.

This, my friends, is where you come in. As editors and staff-writers of your respective school papers, I know that you wield tremendous influence among your fellow-students. I know that you exercise leadership in your respective schools. I urge you to begin laying emphasis, through your school papers and in your other writings, on the opportunities that await students in the fields of science and technology. I urge you to begin preaching the gospel of vocational education, scientific education, technological education. I urge you to re-channel the ambitions of our students from white-collar careers and professions towards the engineering professions, agriculture, medicine, and allied pursuits.

This will be good not only for our country but for the students themselves. They must begin to keep away from the over-crowded professions and train their sights on those careers where the opportunities not only for service and usefulness to country but also for personal self-interest are greatest. As our country grows and our economy expands, as our industries are built up and our trade increases, there will be more and more need for scientists and technologists, and the rewards in these fields will keep growing. You can thus approach the mission I entrust to you today, not only on solid patriotic grounds, but on the basis of the enlightened self-interest of the students themselves.

This is the message and the mission I ask you to carry back with you to your respective provinces, and I hope you will respond to my challenge. In the meantime, I am happy to greet you on the occasion of your annual press conference and to wish that you will have a most fruitful and successful gathering.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s address delivered before the delegates to the National Secondary Schools Press Conference at the Auditorium of the Girl Scouts of the Philippines on Padre Faura, February 17, 1986. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (2) , 609-611.