Address of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines To the Convention of Chinese Chambers of Commerce Chinese Trade Associations in the Philippines

[Delivered on March 26, 1954]

I AM very happy to greet this convention, and I wish to express the hope that your discussions and deliberations here will be most useful to you and to the community in which you live.

Most of you, I believe, have lived in this country for many years. You have enjoyed freedom here and you have prospered. I ask you to remember at all times that you owe this freedom and prosperity to the fact that you live in a democratic community that is proud to count itself as a part of the free world.

Today, this free world of ours is under attack. The enemy is Communism, and its goal is the destruction of freedom and the enslavement of the individual under a dictatorship of terror.

You do not have to be told of the misery and suffering that Communism brings wherever it has grabbed power. Many of you know this from the bitter experience of friends and relatives trapped behind the Iron Curtain in your homeland. Many of you know the clever and vicious methods used by Communists to undermine free nations and bring them to their knees. What all of you here today must realize is that those methods are used right now—constantly—against this nation in which you live and prosper.

You cannot combat this menace by wishing that it will disappear, by merely standing with folded arms and hoping it will never disturb you. You can defeat it only by constant vigilance and action. To exercise such vigilance and to take active part in the effort against Communism is the duty you owe to the community, the safeguard you owe to yourself and your children.

This nation stands firmly in the ranks of the free world. We are committed to a program of vigilance against the encroachments of communism both from within and from without. We are strengthening our military defenses in every way that is practical, and contributing what we can to collective security against aggression.

But military measures in fighting Communism—while important—are not enough. It is on the social front and on the economic front that the enemy can be met and defeated now. This is where you can and must do your part in defending your own freedom and you own well-being.

What are some of the things you can do?

The strength of the free world is in its unity. The enemy knows this and so tries to destroy that unity by every means. In the face of this strategy of the enemy, your duty is to unite in the struggle against Communism regardless of the differences that may divide you in other matters. In exposing communist influences within your own ranks and uprooting them, you will perform an important service to this nation as well as to yourselves.

In a community as large as yours, there are bound to be a few who spoil the reputation of the many. Clean your own house of these undesirable elements and you will achieve stronger unity with your Filipino neighbors.

Many of you are already proving that you can be a strong and constructive force in the life of the community. The “Liberty Wells” program is an example. I am glad that you have demonstrated initiative and zeal in every civic effort to improve the living standards of your community, to reduce the poverty and discontent in which communism breeds.

To strengthen this democracy, we must expand our economy to a point where it provides employment and a decent standard of living for all. Efforts are being made to provide incentives for more and more of our own people to take a greater part in this expansion and development program. This should not alarm you. There is room and need for all who are willing to invest in the future of this country. Your community represents a powerful economic force. Used constructively, this force will always be a welcome ally in our common fight for a strong democracy.

Our common and most pressing enemy is communism. You must concentrate on exposing and defeating its plans. Our common is to build a strong democracy; you can play a mutually beneficial role in this task as a welcome partner. What differences exist between your people and ours are minor and result from the misbehavior of only a very small fraction of your industrious and law-abiding community. We know you can solve this problem among yourselves. For the rest, you may be sure that you are welcome, as good neighbors, to take your place in the affairs of our community, contributing your best effort to the common task of building a stable and prosperous democracy in which freedom is secure.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay addresses the convention of Chinese Chambers of Commerce Chinese Trade Associations in the Philippines, March 26, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(3) , 1010-1012.