YOUR EXCELLENCIES:

ON BEHALF of the people and Government of the Republic of the Philippines, I welcome you to this important conference.

We rejoice that you have honored our invitation to meet in Manila. We trust that here, in the capital city of a country that value freedom and has shown the will to fight for it, you will find inspiration to plan boldly the effective defense of freedom in our part of the world.

Ours is a nation whose love of peace and devotion to freedom have been tested by suffering and sacrifice. We want peace because we have borne the cruelties of war. But stronger than our fear of war is our love of freedom. In the past we have stood up to be counted; in the future we propose to do the same. For the present we regard with high hope this conference of like-minded states that are ready to stand up and be counted in the struggle against aggression and tyranny.

We are met today for no aggressive purpose. We are met here to consider how best we may act jointly to deter aggression or to repel aggression. It is clear that we shall deter aggression only if we declare our readiness to act swiftly to check it by every means in our power, including the use of armed force. And we shall repel aggression only if our planning includes realistic procedures for organizing and carrying out measures for military, political, and economic cooperation, both for long term and for emergency purposes.

This conference will have contributed signally to the maintenance of international peace and security if the participating states adhere closely to three objectives; namely discouragement of aggression before it occurs, early and sound organization of counter measures against aggression when it threatens, and immediate use of such measures if it occurs.

Much has been said about co-existence. In this age of atomic and hydrogen weapons the case for peaceful co-existence between the Free World and the Communist world seems to be on the surface an attractive one. But what kind of co-existence? Our kind, in which free nations of so many different ways of life live today in peaceful cooperation? Or the Communist kind, which means meek submission to the systematic destruction of our free way of life? On this matter we cannot afford to deceive ourselves. We know enough of the tactics and objectives of Communism from its own words and actions to understand clearly that the only way free nations can co-exist with aggressive Communism is to keep strong and remain vigilant. If we put down our guard and become weak and allow ourselves to be deceived, we may achieve co-existence of course, but of the kind that obtains between the lion and the lamb—with the lamb inside the lion.

It is the task of this conference to help build an adequate system of defense around an exposed and threatened sector of the Free World. On the success of this conference may well depend the peace of Asia in the next ten years and the future of freedom in the world for the next thousand years.

The task is formidable and time is running short. I invite you, therefore, to this joint undertaking as one that is worthy of the best and highest that is in us to give.

May the divine wisdom of the Almighty guide your deliberations to achieve peace and freedom for all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library