Address of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Presentation Rally sponsored by the Central Student Organization

[Delivered at the Far Eastern University, Manila, September 25, 1956]

THE YOUTH AND NATIONAL PROBLEMS

ON THIS occasion, my first words must be of commendation and congratulation. I felicitate the new officers of the Central Student Organization. As a firm believer in democracy, I have abiding respect and admiration for those who are elevated to high offices through the free choice of their constituents. I also commend the student body of this university and their government for learning earnestly at this early stage the processes of democracy.

In these processes you may have observed that the means of popular control are still imperfect. The election of officers by ballot is the most direct means of popular control. If properly and honestly conducted, its result reflects the will of the people. But when it is dishonestly held, it can subvert the popular will and make of democracy a mockery and a shame.

Officers honestly elected can be expected to respect public office as a trust, but those who win public office dishonestly are likely to make of public office an opportunity for self-aggrandizement. And when the elective officials turn dishonest and irresponsible, their appointees cannot but follow suit. A corrupt government results.

Student governments, like other human institutions, cannot be expected to be perfect; yet, because they have intelligent electorates and are advised by scholars, they should be able to maintain a high level of integrity and honesty and always respect and uphold the public will. College men should naturally greet signs and manifestations of corruption with disgust and revulsion, a feeling which should intensify with maturity, so that when they themselves become the electors and candidates of the country, they will demand clean elections and honest government.

Nurtured in the atmosphere of science and scholarship, the student governments in our universities should be the training grounds for civic-spirited citizens, honest electors, and dedicated public servants. Only such elements in our population can make our democracy an effective and successful means to progress and achievement. If, on the contrary, student governments produce only future synical citizens, prostituted voters, and corrupt politicians, they have no reason for being and should be abolished as breeding places of dirty politics.

University students, even as they may still be playing at campus politics, have a share of the national responsibility. In fact, in some countries of the world, they are among the most sensitive and perceptive to the dangers that beset the national welfare. Their support and approval are courted by statesmen and politicians, and they are among the first to reflect discontent and disgust through public demonstrations and sometimes disorder when they sense corruption, duplicity, or tyranny. In other countries, however, university students usually confine their interest to campus affairs and very seldom let their voice be heard in the affairs of their elders.

I should like to see Filipino university men and women strike a happy medium between the assertiveness of the first and the unconcern of the second. They may properly place the campus in the stream of national life, but they should avoid the mistaken feeling that they alone can conquer its often treacherous currents. Young and inexperienced, they should maintain an attitude of open-mindedness; they should never forget that they are to seek knowledge more than try to impart it. In the practical affairs of business and politics, they cannot know more than their elders. In all things, they must remember that they are still students truly eager to know, but perhaps still unable to judge.

We do have urgent national problems in whose consideration and solution thoughtful university students can and should participate, not so much that they may help their elders, but more to acquire the proper attitude for themselves. I shall now proceed to name ten of those problems.

Undoubtedly the national problem with which students are most intimately related is the educational work and the oft-repeated fear that its standards are deteriorating. This is the first problem I want to take up. It is true that there have been introduced educational changes and reforms which have proven unwise. Fortunately, they are being gradually corrected. But the students must also contribute to the goal of making our education efficient and effective.

I feel that the students themselves have contributed instead to the much-lamented deterioration by their passivity their unwillingness to work hard, and their dissipation of energy in extraneous matters. It is a fact that modern life offers many distractions in the form of social affairs, movies, radio and television, games, jukeboxes, the “rock ‘n roll,” and many others. Escape from them is often difficult. Yet, if the students are passive and indifferent in the classrooms, they fail not only themselves but also in their part of stimulating their professors into greater effort. Mutual student-professor apathy may well be one of the most dangerous diseases that afflict our education.

We have heard much denunciation of corruption in public office. This, the second problem in my list, is not new. It seems that corruption has been with us for a long time. To eradicate this evil and replace it with the virtue of honesty, firm supervision, and constant vigilance at the top are of help, but are not sufficient. Only when honesty is built-in as a quality in our citizens will it also exist as a part of the personality of officials and employees.

It is therefore of utmost importance that our college students develop a sense of honor and integrity, for they will be the examples of their communities, the future officials and employees of our government. Honesty must begin in the classrooms, the laboratories, the gymnasiums, and the student governments. A college or university which tolerates dishonesty in any form has failed miserably in its duty and responsibility of guiding the youth to fulfillment and achievement.

The third problem to which I want to draw the attention of university students is that of proper approach to public questions. The freedom of speech and press is a democratic boon for which men have died to win and preserve. Its exercise is indispensable to a democracy. But mainly owing to blind partisanships or sheer unintelligent approach, this freedom has more been abused as often as it has been honored in the observance. It has become a habit to criticize but a rare favor to praise.

Our universities and their scholars and, following their examples, their students, should be the source of a counterbalancing influence. If the uninformed and unintelligent, the partisan and the disgruntled, harp and yammer, university men should talk sense and contribute wisdom. Educated in the scientific approach, they should set the example in the impartial, intelligent, and logical consideration of public questions.

This leads to the fourth problem. We have the tendency to accent the negative rather than the positive—to be critical rather than approving, to be destructive rather than constructive. We love loose talk and shy away from solid deed.

This is a tendency which should find no encouragement on a college campus. Students should be oriented to the positive and constructive, on the principle that while any vandal can criticize and destroy, it takes learning and labor, such as taught on the campus, to create and achieve.

Our unemployment situation projects the problem of adjustability, the fifth problem that I wish to mention. The vast majority of our jobless are either unskilled on the one hand or overskilled on the other. That it is difficult for the unskilled to obtain jobs is not unexpected. But that the trained and educated should be unable to employ themselves, is a reflection on the kind of education our colleges offer and our students choose. For one of the landmarks of good education is the adjustability of the individual to changing circumstances.

We have trained teachers, engineers, lawyers, accountants. stenographers, and other professionals and specialists who seem to feel entirely lost outside of their narrow specializations. If this is truly the case, it is evident that they are the victims of the craze for sharply focused, narrow education that has neglected the liberal arts. Since the liberal arts furnish the keys to all the principal departments of human interest, the graduate possesses a universality that gives him the flexibility for adjusting to the vicissitudes of life. It is time for college students to see to it that whatever specialization they may follow, is firmly anchored on the broad base of the liberal arts.

But no matter how well-educated a man may be, he will not be a credit to the nation unless he also possesses civic spirit. The growing lack of civic spirit is the sixth problem I have in mind.

There is an increasing tendency to be self-centered among many of our youth, a tendency which will surely make them islands in themselves—isolated, unconcerned, and uncooperative—when they return to their communities. Democratic freedom can be destructive if it leads to individual selfishness and isolation, but it is useful if it results in cooperation. Since cooperativeness is the mark of good citizenship, our universities must help young men and women to acquire that sense of community which is the basis of civic spirit. Unless citizens feel a share and responsibility in making their community a success, unless they feel a share of guilt in its failure, apathy is their rule of life. Apathetic citizens cannot make a successful democracy.

The problem of leadership is the seventh problem which I commend to university people. In a free country such as ours, composed of thousands of islands stretching over great distances and inhabited by people who are just now emerging from the old curse of poverty and ignorance, there is need for leadership on all levels and departments of activity. The national leadership is impotent unless it is supported by a series of secondary leaderships, forming a continuous chain of initiative reaching down to the very masses. Obviously, the people to man this chain must come mainly from our colleges and universities.

University men and women are meant to be leaders, for leadership is nurtured by superior wisdom combined with the ability to inspire others to exert their utmost for the accomplishment of a given objective. Students acquire the information which, when reflected upon, and integrated with, their general fund of knowledge, becomes wisdom. In their different campus organizations and group activities, they learn the give-and-take of team work, and practice handling men and coordinating their efforts.

The university is the natural training ground for leaders. It is therefore expected to give to the country those men and women of wisdom and inspiration who will awaken our masses to their potentialities and lead them to greater exertion, cooperation, and productivity.

At this early stage of our independence and national growth, we are confronted with the old, yet ever-changing problems of nationalism, internationalism, and patriotism the eighth, ninth, and tenth problems in my list.

Preparing to join the intelligentsia among our citizens, university students cannot be indifferent to the country’s rising nationalism. Indeed, they are often appealed to by those who would stir up nationalistic sentiment in the belief that they are the most responsive and assertive. We must by all means be nationalists—intelligent and constructive nationalists.

But, because nationalism can easily become impulsive and emotional, it can also be dangerous and destructive. It can become jingoistic and can undermine our friendship and amity with other nations. College students and college graduates, being possessed of higher intelligence and reason, can contribute sobriety and thoughtfulness to Filipino nationalism.

Nationalism must be balanced with internationalism. Like citizens, nations cannot live in isolation and be progressive and happy. They must conduct commerce, exchange culture, and band together for self-defense. Thermonuclear weapons have made war, peace, and survival indivisible, making international cooperation and friendship all the more indispensable. College men and women, being heirs to all the cultures of the world, have the best qualification and disposition to promote international friendship. Without sacrifice of our sovereignty, which we can best safeguard by cultivating international friendship with self-respect and dignity, we must avoid neutralism which is the way of the opportunist and the bluff and bluster which are likely to bring us only the contempt of others.

It has become almost old-fashioned to appeal to patriotism, so neglected has been this highest of all national virtues. While being torn between nationalism and internationalism, we shall find sure anchorage on the old-time teachings of patriotism. They are direct and simple: love of our motherland, of our people, of our traditions, and of our achievements.

If I might be permitted to suggest a decalog for the youth, I would list the ten virtues I have described as essential to the proper solution of our public problems—the virtues of conscientious studiousness, of scrupulous honesty and integrity, of open-minded and scientific approach to public questions, of a positive as against the negative attitude, of educating for adjustability to economic vicissitudes, of cultivating civic spirit, of training for leadership, of sober nationalism, of friendly internationalism, and of intense patriotism. If our youth can acquire these qualities, they will pass into manhood and womanhood better-prepared than their predecessors to build this, our motherland, to a great and happy Republic.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Address of President Magsaysay at the Presentation Rally sponsored by the Central Student Organization. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(12) , 5475-5480.