Address of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Manila Suburban Press Club

[Delivered at the Manila Press Club Building, December 27, 1956]

OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE MANILA SUBURBAN PRESS CLUB, DISTINGUISHED HONOREES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

WE are here to honor patriotic citizens in and outside of the Government who, in the judgment of the Manila Suburban Press Club, have contributed signally to the healthy growth of democracy in our country. I congratulate the Club for having instituted these annual awards, and I felicitate this year’s benefactors of democracy for their deeds which have deserved our praise and acclaim. It is itself a great contribution to the healthy growth of democracy to give public recognition to contributions in every form to our healthy democratic growth. For democracy in the Philippines is still in its young and tender years. The democratic principles and processes under which we live have been partly distilled from our experiences as a people and partly inherited from older democracies, especially England and the United States. We are therefore as yet in the process of assimilating democracy. Every effort to make that assimilation thoughtful and conscientious is a genuine contribution to the growth of democracy under our Republic.

But even as we are assimilating democracy, we are called upon to defend it with our lives. There has developed during the last several decades a new menace to freedom and liberty, a menace which has already become a present and active danger in our very midst. Communism has become a steady and creeping threat to the free world. In the Philippines, its adherents have taken up arms against the forces of the Government. I am especially gratified that among those whom we are honoring today are civilian and military men who have actively participated in the patriotic campaign to eradicate the vestigates of the Hukbalahap Communists in our country.

Both the assimilation and defense of democracy will be faster and more effective if we understand democracy clearly and thoroughly. We cannot possibly possess firm loyalty to the democratic way of life unless we also have an intelligent understanding and acceptance of its postulates. It has been said that the fight between Democracy and Communism is a struggle for men’s minds, not for their blind loyalties. We in the Philippines will therefore greatly promote Democracy’s healthy growth if we make a thoughtful attempt to understand it.

Democracy is a government in which public opinion has control. It follows that, in order to play fully its basically important democratic role, public opinion must be formed on the basis of accurate and comprehensive information made available to all citizens. It further follows that, to make available to the people accurate and comprehensive information, the organs of mass communication, especially the press, must be not only free but also responsible.

The freedom of expression, which in most effective form is freedom of the press, has been said to be nearest to the central meaning of liberty. The Commission on Freedom of the Press, chairmanned by Robert M. Hutchins when he was chancellor of the University of Chicago, declared in its report. “Where men cannot freely convey their thoughts to one another, no other liberty is secure. Where freedom of expression exists, the germ of a free society is already present, and the means is at hand for every extension of liberty. Free expression is therefore unique among the liberties as protector and promoters of others.”

Indeed, without freedom of expression, none of the individual rights guaranteed in our Constitution could long last; and, without such rights, our democracy would soon perish. Since the ultimate responsibility for democracy seems to find anchorage in the freedom of expression, it is altogether fitting that the guardians of a free press, like the Manila Suburban Press Club, should themselves encourage other contributions to democracy.

If the press, together with the other organs of mass communication, possesses such a vast share in the development and preservation of democracy, then it is of utmost importance that its guardians understand and accept their tremendous responsibility. According to the famous American historian, Charles Beard, “in its origin, freedom of the press had little or nothing to do with truth-telling . . . most of the early newspapers were partisan sheets devoted to savage attacks on party opponents . . . freedom of the press meant the right to be just or unjust, partisan or nonpartisan, true or false, in news column or editorial column.” But this was quite sometime ago, and it is altogether true that the more the public press has lived down this cold seamy reputation, the greater has been its progress and usefulness and the more effective it has become as the handmaiden of democracy.

The report of the Commission on Freedom of the Press, to which I have already referred, indeed declares that today, such behavior on the part of the press as Beard describes would be branded as sheer social irresponsibility.

“The press must know that its faults and errors have ceased to be private vegaries and have become public dangers,” the report declares. “Its inadequacies menace the balance of public opinion. It has lost the common and ancient human liberty to be deficient in its function of to offer half truth for the whole.” It is now quite established as a principle that the freedom of the press does not include the right to be deliberately or irresponsibly in errors. In the context of the relationship between the public press and democracy, what is the role expected of the Philippine press? I would answer this question by stating simply that the Philippine press should make use of its freedom to the utmost legitimate limits, but, in making use of this freedom in any way, it should keenly feel its responsibility as one of the basic influences in the development of a healthy democracy in our country. The Philippine press must be hospitable to ideas and attitudes different from its own, and it must present them to the public as meriting its attention. Disdaining the role of advocates for certain private causes or certain particular groups, the Philippine press must be faithful to its duty of disseminating truthful, accurate, and full information. It should always remember that “the freedom of the press was intended to guarantee free expression, not to create a privileged industry.”

Although freedom of the press is guaranteed in our Constitution, it is not without limitations. We have laws on liber, defamation, and contempt among others, all of which are accepted limitations on press freedom. In the history of human expression, oral or written, the limitations have come about as a result of abuse and irresponsibility. And one of the most effective ways yet found to protect a profession from undue governmental interference is for its own members to require of themselves certain standards of behavior and practice usually embodied in a code of ethics. Now that practicing newspapermen in the Philippines are well-organized in the National Press Club, the Manila Suburban Press Club, and other compact groups, it will be quite possible for them to impose certain standards of practice among their members. In 1815, John Adams said of the public press, “Mankind cannot now be governed without it, nor at present, with it.” It would be tragic if this indictment could also be hurled at our press today. Indeed, I am certain that the legitimate Philippine press is both capable of guiding our Republic and indispensable to its governance.

There cannot be democracy without journalism. No modern government in a modern country has been able to exist long without a public press. This is as true in the dictatorships which use the press as a medium of propaganda, as in the democracies which need the press as a medium of fair and accurate information. We in the Philippines can therefore do nothing better than to accept in good faith the historic partnership between Government and Journalism.

But this partnership rests on the delicate balance between mutual cooperation and mutual independence. In a democracy, the bulk of the news of public interest emanates from governmental sources. Government news is the principal stock in trade of Journalism. At the same time, a democratic government must have a day-to-day link with the people, a means by which it can inform the people of governmental policies and accomplishments. Thus the mutuality of interest between Government and press is clear-cut.

There is however, as I have said, a necessity for mutual independence between the Government and the press. The Government exercises that necessary independence by avoiding the premature publication of government news, premature in the sense that publicity may bring failure to a government project or give undue advantages to certain parties in regard to a government plan. So it is that the Government must maintain a degree of secrecy, however temporary, if it is to avoid the collapse or failure of important projects or the misuse of confidential information.

But matching this independence, the press needs independence of its own to be critical of Government acts and affairs whenever necessary. For the public press is expected not only to disseminate fair, accurate, and full information, but also to lead in the formation of public opinion, either favorable or unfavorable, regarding Government intentions, plans, and acts. Provided always that such criticism is primarily intended to inform or to lead in the crystallization of public opinion—not to serve pressure groups or assassinate individual character—the press has a perfect right, and should exercise the fullest freedom, in critically appraising and evaluating public affairs. The mutuality of interest between Democracy and Journalism needs to be supplemented by a mutuality of independence.

We who are in the Government and you who are in Journalism must, however, find a broader common loyalty in the fact that we are only temporary trustees—mere incidents—in our respective roles in the healthy development of democracy. The practices and processes we develop in Government and Journalism will be the guiding precedents to our successors and to coming generations. In trying to contribute our utmost to the healthy development of democracy in our country, we cannot afford to be opportunistic; we must always remember the temporary character of our respective roles; we must always bear in mind that we are all working together for a greater Philippine Republic and a happier future for all our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Address delivered by President Magsaysay before the Manila Suburban Press Club at the Manila Press Club Building, December 27, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (1) , 57-60.