Commencement Address of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Adamson University

[Delivered on March 24, 1956]

AS you know, I have attended many commencement exercises and have addressed many successful graduates. On each of these occasions I have wished that it were possible to turn back the clock,—to share the youth and vigor of those listening to me, to share their eagerness to meet the challenge of life. On this occasion, that feeling is even stronger. In fact I must confess that it is almost a feeling of envy.

There is very definite and specific reason for seeing in you a particularly stimulating and exciting promise. It is commonplace to say that the future belongs to youth. In this case, however, it happens to be a special kind of future. And you, I feel, are a special kind of youth. Your educational background has carried particularly heavy emphasis upon science and technology. Your minds have been trained to the disciplines and the limitless horizons of the laboratory. And I feel strongly that it is in these workshops of the sciences that there will be found the key not only to the economic but also to the social and political problems of our nation, of Asia, and of the world.

Here at home, we have been experiencing the painful process of change, change from economic and political dependence to independence, change from an almost primitive agrarian economy to the kind of balanced economy we need in a modern, democratic society. How your scientific and technical equipment fits into this phase of our national existence is easy to see. However, there is going on about us an even greater change. There is growing evidence that the world itself is on the threshold of a great technical revolution, a scientific breakthrough which probably will change the economic, social, and political relations of all mankind.

I refer of course, to the fact that we are privileged to see the dawn of the Atomic Age. For some years now we have lived in the shadow of the Atom as a symbol of fear. This terrible new discovery of science harnessed to weapons of destruction has posed the threat that another World War might well see the end of civilization, if not the end of man himself.

A great turning point in this situation came about through the initiative of the United States. When President Eisenhower launched his Atoms-for-Peace program he gave new meaning and new direction to the terrible power of atomic energy. Without delaying or neglecting the development of atomic weapons, which give the free world a margin of safety against aggression, atomic research turned toward the task of serving humanity in its material needs. The entire world was invited to share with America the precious secrets of the atom, provided that this information were used to benefit man instead of destroying him. The world today faces a contest between the two forces of the atom: one, a thing of evil and destruction; the other, a great boon which may finally liberate the human race from material want.

What is the position of our nation in this great contest? I am happy to report to you that our position is exceptionally good. Last week marked an event which was somewhat overshadowed by some of the more pressing problems of our daily life. But it was an event which may well be recorded as the opening of a great new chapter in the history of our race. It was the welcome news brought to me by Secretary Dulles that the Philippines had been chosen as the site for the Asian nuclear research center.

There was great competition among our Asian neighbors for this center, but after a careful weighing of all factors the decision finally was made in our favor. We will furnish the site for this venture, and the United States plans to spend some $20,000,000 for the establishment of the most modern atomic research facilities in all Asia. Once established, it will be a cooperative Asian venture. Not only our own scientists but those of our neighboring nations will use this great center for the training and research that could bring about within years the tremendous development of Asian resources and the solution of Asian problems that might otherwise take centuries. Here in the Philippines will be gathered and working some of the greatest scientific minds in the world, all dedicated to the task of bringing about unlimited abundance for the benefit of man.

This tremendous forward step in our progress toward mastery of nuclear science does not find us wholly unprepared. Some time ago we received as a gift from the United States a splendid library of atomic data, occupying more than 250 feet of shelf space. This library brings within our reach the fruits of the billions of dollars of research completed in the great atomic plants of the United States. More recently, we entered into a pact with the United States which shortly will bring to our shores the first atomic reactor in all of Asia. Thus equipped, we shall find ourselves not only able to undertake study and research but actual production of some of the atomic tools which promise to open the way to a better life.

You who feel at home in scientific laboratories need no prompting from me to see and appreciate the exciting promise of our nation undertaking the great adventure of the atom. But it is difficult for the non-scientific mind to grasp the magnitude of the opportunities that lie ahead.

Nuclear physics already has reached the stage of practical usefulness in medicine, for example. Our facilities will be capable of producing the isotopes so useful in tracing the cause of disease. We shall be able to produce some of the radio-active elements which are successfully curing such dread ills as cancer.

In agriculture, the usefulness of nuclear science is no less spectacular. The cause and cure of mysterious diseases which destroy crops are being regularly revealed by atomic research. The selection and application of fertilizer is becoming an exact science. The preservation of food without refrigeration, of particular importance in the tropics, has been achieved by radiation.

Industrial applications of the atom are too numerous for me to mention here, but we do know the importance of power to industrialization. You will have some idea of the potential of atomic energy if you realize that a one-inch cube of uranium fuel delivers as much power as more than a million liters of gasoline, or more than a million kilos of high grade coal.

These, as I have said, are just a few of the illustrations which the average man can grasp and appreciate. These are some of the applications which may make it possible for us to skip the long and difficult process of modernization in catching up more quickly with the technology of the atom. For this reason alone we have reason enough to feel the excitement of great expectations.

But we must not lose sight of the greater drama taking place on a world stage−the contest between destructive war and peaceful abundance. On the side of war and destruction are such forces as greed, lust for power, ignorance, and misunderstanding. On the side of humanity are now arrayed such forces as the Atoms-for-Peace program, the Asian nuclear center, and all the other elements of social, political, and economic cooperation with which the free world hopes to demonstrate that mankind can liberate itself from violence and the law of the jungle. Reduced to its simplest terms, it is a struggle between the destructive and the constructive.

Our place is on the constructive side, and as we gain in strength so does our side become stronger. As we contribute to pushing back the frontiers of material scarcity, war becomes more remote. In short, we are a living part of the free world, and as such we grow or perish, even as world freedom grows or perishes. By the same token, what hurts the cause of freedom, hurts us as well. Fear, distrust, ignorance, and misunderstanding, these are weapons of the enemy. We resist them and reject them if we and the rest of the free world are to enjoy the blessings of the atomic age.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s commencement address at the Adamson University, Saturday afternoon, March 24, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(4) , 1904-1907.