Fourth of July Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Columbian Association

[Released on July 4, 1955]

MY FRIENDS:

I welcome this opportunity to come before this distinguished club and speak at this time.

These are not just the empty words of a politician.

I welcome this opportunity because this club, the Philippine-Columbian, has always been renowned as a gathering place for those who believe in the principles of liberty and justice that typify our nation.

Thus I believe that this is a most fitting place—among the nationalists of this association—and certainly a most fitting time—the ninth anniversary of our glorious independence—for me to review a few basic principles for which I stand.

When I was campaigning for the sacred office of President of the Philippines, I made myself clear on the most vital issue affecting our independence.

I promised our people that I would take all possible steps to preserve our independence and to insure our national security, both from within and from without.

I defined not only our objectives, but how we were going to attain them.

In the matter of preserving our national security from outside threats, we recognized, in the light of the plans and objectives of the aggressive imperialism which then threatened and still threatens us, that there was no safety in standing alone and holding aloof.

We recognized the impossibility, in this world of modern arms, of organizing and providing for our own defense with the limited resources at our command.

We have, therefore, sought and secured the safety of alliance with more powerful nations.

Specifically, we have entered into close alliance with the most powerful nation on the face of the earth—the United States.

We have become part of the Southeast Asia Pact, better known as the Manila Treaty.

We have done these things for the sake of no other country except our own country and for the sake of no other people except the Filipino people.

For this—the Philippines first—has always been and always will be the guiding principle of my administration.

We have served and will serve no other interest except our own national self-interest.

We have entered into these alliances to strengthen our own defense, secure our own independence, preserve our own freedoms.

We now find our own defenses augmented by the free world’s collective strength and by the actual presence here of Americas great fighting power.

I have also adhered to my promise of protecting our freedom from internal attack.

You will remember I broke with the Liberal administration because it just wanted me to fight and kill Huks. I felt that this gave only half the answer to this problem, and I wanted to do more.

I wanted to give our discontented a new life, to correct the abuses from which so many of them had suffered to give them confidence in the honesty of our free and democratic institutions. I wanted to welcome those who were truly repentant and show them the meaning of our independence, the ninth anniversary of which we are celebrating today.

I believe that considerable progress has been made in that direction in the one-and-a-half years since I was given your mandate.

The leader of the Huk movement himself, Luis Taruc, has surrendered to the government.

The administration’s policy of benevolence continues to attract surrenderees from the Huk ranks.

At the same time, the reforms we have instituted, the confidence that we have restored in the government’s sense of justice, have prevented those with grievances from becoming Huks, or from turning to the Huks. They turn to us now, confident that they will get justice and redress of grievances.

An examination of Communist propaganda will bring out the fact that its greatest enemy in this country today is this administration.

Thus have we strengthened our independence against threats and attacks both from without and from within, since I was elected to office.

We have done this—to repeat—by always serving foremost the interest of our country and people, by always thinking of the Philippines first. We have also gained added prestige and honor for our independence in this way.

When we sent a delegation to Bandung, to the Asia-African conference there, it was freely forecast by some that we would merely be looked upon as puppets of the United States.

I never shared that fear. We proved at Bandung how wrong were the prophets of puppetry.

Under the able leadership of our chief delegate, Ambassador Carlos P. Romulo, we made a deep impression upon our fellow Asians and upon the African nations at Bandung. Instead of finding ourselves labelled as puppets, we found ourselves as one of the leading advocates of the high principles of dignity for mankind in which all Filipinos believe.

It was not our delegation which had to retreat at Bandung. It was the representative of Communist China who was obliged to retreat. He found out that the desire for freedom and the hatred of Communism had inspired more nations to resistance than he had imagined.

Let me say here and now that we cannot flirt with Communism if we want our independence to remain real and secure.

When I say that, I am saying it because I am thinking of the Philippines first.

I am amused by those who try to put forward this slogan as some kind of new concept. To me, there certainly is nothing new in the idea. I do not know, and I could not practice, any policy but Philippines first. I cannot see how any Filipino who loves his fellow countrymen and the land of his birth can ever think in any terms other than Philippines first.

Only on this basis can we shape and build the kind of Philippines that you, here in this room, and the millions who have agreed with the principles I set forth during the campaign, want for yourselves and your children.

Our people want a Philippines strong and stable internally and able to preserve its hard-won independence against external threats, in firm alliance with our great and good friend, the United States of America.

I am determined to see to it that our people continue to get what they want.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Fourth of July Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay before the Philippine-Columbian Association. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (7), 3425-3428.