Jaycee Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines

[Delivered at the St. Luis Auditorium, Baguio City, May 3, 1956]

I SALUTE the young men—the young leaders of the Philippines . . . . young men with the optimism, the spirit and will, that helped rebuild our nation after a devastating war; young men with foresight, wisdom, and ability that helped launch a new nation among the free nations of the world; young men with understanding, the capacity for growth, and the determination to build an even greater Philippines and help build a better world.

It is amazing that the truly outstanding record of the young men of the Philippine Junior Chamber of Commerce has been written in little more than eight years. In that short space of time, you have taken the Filipino instinct of brotherhood and neighborly helpfulness, added an organizational concept born in the United States, adopted it to our Asian culture, and built it into a nation-wide organization that has contributed materially to the welfare, wellbeing, and prestige of our people and our country.

The roster of the Philippine Jaycee activities is an impressive one. It includes such a wide range of endeavors as blood banks and scholarships, boxing tournament and art exhibits, trade missions and playgrounds, disaster relief and safety campaigns.

I know from first-hand experience of the Jaycee campaigns to get out the vote and to insure that we have clean and honest elections. I know also of the Jaycee cooperation with other civic organizations and the government in programs designed to benefit our people. I understand that through your annual “Voice of Democracy” contests, you are even developing orators who may offer our politicians competition.

Your interests and enthusiasm have reached beyond the limits of our islands too. Filipinos have been the driving force in the expansion of the Jaycee movement in Asia. You have among you past and present officers of Jaycee Asia and of the world Junior Chamber International.

While others viewed despair, cynicism, and futility the struggling efforts of Free Vietnam to resist the yoke of Communism, you volunteered friendship, understanding, and tangible aid. The results of your “Operation Brotherhood,” have written a new chapter in the great annals of democracy in action. It was largely in tribute to “Operation Brotherhood,” I understand, that a Filipino was named the outstanding Jaycee of the world. I am sure he will be the first to admit that this award is shared by all of you.

Taken individually, some of your endeavors may seem somewhat insignificant, but when taken all together, the impact you have made upon our country and upon all Asia is undeniable. You have taken the tools at hand and organized efforts to improve your communities, to promote civic consciousness and community pride, and to foster good-neighborliness and self-development.

But the most significant contribution of all, I think, is that you, Jaycees, never rest on your record of past achievements. The success of the past, you take as inspiration to do even bigger and better things for our country. Your “Operation Neighborhood” and your plans for joining our rural development effort are but two examples of this spirit.

I salute you, young men, and the Philippines salutes you.

But I did not come here just to praise you for your achievements. I hope that it has already occurred to most of you that one of the reasons I am so interested in the Jaycees is because your spirit and your programs so closely parallel my own hopes and plans for our country.

Asia and the Philippines look to her young men. It is in them that we place our hopes for the future. Many of you already hold responsible positions in business, government, and community life. Your daily activities as Jaycees and as citizens establish the standards and provide the example for your communities.

Regardless of race, political belief, or religious creed, you have demonstrated your willingness and determination to do all you can to improve the well-being of your communities and to promote harmony and mutual understanding. You have agreed on the priority of erecting a free, progressive nation in a free, progressive world.

I submit that such agreement should be the standard for all the Philippines. Regardless of differences in politics or religion we can all be united in working to advance our communities and our nation. If we work together for this common goal, we cannot help but achieve mutual understanding in other things, and with understanding comes harmony and progress.

This is implementation of what I call “positive nationalism.” A few weeks ago I defined “positive nationalism” as a nationalism “which takes the best of our qualities, our virtues, our institutions, regardless of how we acquired them, and develops from them a culture which truly reflects the national goals.”

Implementation of this positive Filipino nationalism requires daily efforts to encourage and promote the very best of our qualities; to demonstrate neighborliness rather than hatred and antagonism; to use our native intelligence to dispel the fogs of emotionalism and lay the dust of misinformation; to exert only our constructive and beneficial influences upon the problems of our society. These efforts can be brought to bear upon every segment of our national life—business and economics, music and the arts, education, farming, our social life in general.

This is not just moralizing. It is practical common sense. Misunderstanding, bickering, hatred—all these impede our national development and progress, foment unrest, retard the promotion of the general welfare. The rest of the world is full of examples of how these noxious influences breed ideas and institutions that are the exact opposite of the democratic freedom which we cherish and must be vigilant to protect.

The positive and affirmative approach to life is common to all peoples and all faiths of the free world—to Christians, Moslems, and Buddhists alike. Only one world ideology is based upon hate: that is Communism.

We must be alert to ways of promoting understanding. We must control destructive emotionalism, we must seek the facts and then apply our cherished principles of justice—our government of laws, not of men. We must be good neighbors, not just here at home, but with the rest of the world. We must especially understand our neighbors in Asia and help them to understand us.

We have the benefit of a strong and courageous people, of a land rich in natural resources, of widespread education and literacy, of a culture rich in fundamental qualities so necessary to promote understanding, and we have the benefit of steadfast friends in the community of nations. Let’s take this wealth and invest it in the future—a future where our horizon is all the world, and where only our own shortsightedness can limit us. Let’s put the breath of life into positive nationalism.

Once again I salute you, young men, and I urge you to return to your home communities and to enlist your vigor and your militancy in a crusade to teach, promote, and demonstrate positive nationalism.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Jaycee Speech of President Magsaysay. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(5) , 2498-2500.