Recorded Radio Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the late President Quezon’s 77th Birthday Anniversary

[Broadcasted over DZFM together with those of past Philippine Presidents, August 18, 1955]

MY COUNTRYMEN:

WE commemorate today the seventy-seventh birthday of Manuel Luis Quezon, one of the Founding Fathers of our Republic. On this occasion we can render no greater honor to his memory than to express sincere appreciation for the great heritage of freedom that he left us and to resolve to abide by the patriotic examples which adorned his life.

Serving the country during all his active adult life and being the leader of his people for 22 years, he left a long inventory of patriotic deeds. But I should like to point out just three of his accomplishments any one of which would entitle him to the highest regard and respect of his people.

One of the marks of his dynamic leadership was the shaping and direction of a sane Filipino nationalism. An outstanding advocate of Filipinism, he yet made possible the development of a Filipino culture which assimilated the best in the cultures of Asia, Europe, and America. It is on the broadness of the resulting culture that the independence, to which he contributed his energies and his life, is founded firmly and enduringly.

Another heritage of the people from this far visioned leader is friendship with all the world but especially with the United States. It is perhaps interesting and pertinent to recall in this connection what possibly were his last thoughts on Philippine-American relations before he died.

While he was in Corregidor during the last war, he broached the idea of saving our country from enemy invasion and occupation by getting the United States and Japan to agree to its neutralization and eventual evacuation. President Roosevelt replied to the effect that, whether the Filipinos continued to fight or not, the United States, would liberate the Filipino people “regardless of its cost.”

Upon receiving this reply, President Quezon, as he recorded in his autobiography, made this pledge: “I swore to myself and to the God of my ancestors that, as long as I live, I would stand by America regardless of the consequences to my people and myself.”

It is also among President Quezon’s achievements as a national leader that our people today are steeped in democracy. His entire leadership was directed toward the education of the people in living under a government of their own making. He is truly the father of Philippine democracy.

On this solemn occasion of commemoration and remembrance, let us pledge ourselves anew to the ideas which he taught us and for which he died. He died less than two years before the final realization of the independence to which he had devoted his whole life. But the Philippine Republic was his highest goal. Making it the success that he dreamed is the best way by which we can keep faith with this beloved leader.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s recorded radio speech on the late President Quezon’s 77th Birthday Anniversary, August 18, 1955, broadcast over DZFM together with those of past Philippine Presidents, August 18, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (8) , 3990-3991.