Recorded Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On urging all voters to vote on Election Day

[Originally delivered at the Malacañang Study Room and rebroadcast over radio stations, November 6, 1955]

GOOD EVENING, MY COUNTRYMEN:

I WOULD like to talk to you at this time not so much as your President, but rather as a fellow-citizen having a common concern for the welfare of our nation and our people.

It is my hope that on Tuesday every qualified voter will go to the polls and exercise the precious right of free and independent Filipinos to select those who are to serve in our government. I know that some of you already have made your choice, but there may be more who have been confused by the conflicting claims of a typical election campaign. For all of us, it might be useful at this time to review the whole subject of the coming election.

First, let us recall this same season two years ago, when the great majority of you decided that you wanted a new administration and you voted overwhelmingly for the Nacionalista candidates, including myself. Why did you vote as you did? I understand and deeply appreciate your decision as a gesture of faith and confidence. But there was another reason, and this is a good time to remember it: a good time to remember that your landslide vote of two years ago was intended to overthrow the impotent, corrupt, wasteful, and despotic administration of the Liberal Party!

For six years the Liberals held the reins of our government. What was their record? Some of them were enormously enriched, but the nation was brought to the brink of bankruptcy. Confidence in our democratic institutions was almost destroyed. The majority of our people, particularly the seventy-five per cent who work on our farmlands to support the nation, were neglected and forgotten.

During the past couple of months this same Liberal Party has asked you to return some of its members to power. Why? What evidence have they shown of reform, of any change in their cynical and self-serving mentality? On the contrary, their present campaign proves that they are still motivated by their old lust for power merely for the sake of power. They have shown the same old lack of principle, the same kind of sordid opportunism that seeks and welcomes votes regardless of the source.

I do not say that there are no good men and women in the Liberal ranks. I do say, however, that those men and women are still chained to a discredited and rejected political machine which is completely unresponsive to the national interest.

The Liberal Party has gone to you in the current campaign and asked for your vote. What reasons have they given? What constructive program have they advanced? We find only a few main themes running through their campaign propaganda. One is the charge of dictatorship, which even the Liberals privately agree is so baseless and foolish that it requires no analysis or reply. An amusing twist to this charge is that its loudest exponent is one who in 1949 was robbed of his election as senator by the same Liberal Party, which he now holds up as the last hope of democracy in this country. Another Liberal Party line is the negative plea that our democracy needs a strong opposition to fiscalize the Administration, and the amazing claim that only they—the present Liberal candidates—can perform this function.

I agree that a strong opposition is desirable and that alert fiscalizers are essential. However, I challenge the Liberal claim that these elements are lacking in our government, and that they alone can provide them. It is an insult to the incumbent members of Congress, who come from both parties. It is an insult to our press, radio, and civic organizations. In fact, it is an insult to the intelligence of the Filipino electorate. All of these individuals and groups have been consistent and effective fiscalizers. To say that any one man or group of men is exclusively qualified by mentality or patriotism for this purpose bespeaks an arrogance too brazen for serious consideration

In their frantic search for issues, Liberal Party spokesmen have even been shameless enough to charge this administration with subservience” and “mendicancy”. Do they think we have forgotten the Liberal Party president who had to crawl to an American ambassador’s residence one morning to apologize for a stupid and malicious attack he himself had ordered his office of information to issue? Do they think we have forgotten the Liberal administration which had to beg America for funds to pay our teachers and our armed forces when their plundered treasury was empty? Do they think we have forgotten that they had to beg for a team of American experts to tell them how to save our economy from complete collapse? And when these experts, the Bell Mission, wisely advised them in 1950 to seek revision of the Philippine Trade Act, did the Liberals move promptly? It was the present administration that sought and secured such revision within less than eighteen months of taking office.

Only two years ago you gave the Nacionalista administration a national task and responsibility. It was clear from your mandate that you expected us to pursue a program of social and economic development that would give us a sound base for the expansion so vital to the well-being of all our people and to the growth of the republic. You expected us to make provision for the national security and for the maintenance of internal stability. You agreed that it was desirable for us to broaden our contact and strengthen our influence with our Asian neighbors. But above all you gave priority to the task of bringing the great mass of our rural population up to the modern standards of living which are their right in a democracy, and without which national progress is impossible.

Honest and sober examination of the record of the past two years will show that we have worked hard at the job of carrying out your mandate in every one of the areas mentioned. Such examination of the record will also reveal that very considerable gains have been made. In some areas, our accomplishment has been more substantial than in others, but in no instance have we taken a backward step.

It should not be necessary to remind you of the condition in which the Liberal administration left our nation in 1953. There was disillusionment and fear, despair and misery, in every corner of our land. It takes no expert analyst to see and feel the difference in the national atmosphere as of today. In fact I am sure that even the opposition candidates, in the course of their current campaign, must have been benefited by some of the improvements that have taken place. Compared with my campaign experience in 1953, they found thousands of places where they could have a safe drink of water, places which could boast no such luxury under the Liberals. They also enjoyed thousands of kilometers of new roads over which they could reach their barrio targets in comfortable cars. In 1953 I had to walk to many of those barrios through swamps and over miserable trails.

This administration seeks no praise for what has been accomplished. That after all, is what we were elected for. We are simply carrying out our jobs as public servants. At the same time, we need make no apologies for what still remains to be done. We are not only carrying out our own tasks with conscientious vigor but we are also making good progress cleaning up the mess left by our Liberal predecessors.

As I have said I do not deny the existence of able and patriotic citizens among the Liberals. I feel that there are many who could contribute much in terms of service to the country. But before they can expect that their services will be accepted, they must first recognize the obligation of imposing upon their party adequate standards of political morality and public service.

For the present, therefore, I must ask that you give this administration the support it requires to fulfill its program by voting into office all of our Nacionalista candidates. This is all the more important because we are a working administration rather than one devoted to self-perpetuation by political means. In the two years that lie ahead there is a tremendous amount of constructive work to be done if we are to justify your faith and confidence. There are many natural obstacles to be overcome in achieving our goals. For this task we need in our government not the expert obstructive politician but the cooperative and willing worker.

In urging you to vote Nacionalista in the coming election, I might point out one of the facts of political life. The Nacionalista Party at this time carries the responsibility for the administration. If it hopes to remain in power, it must carry out to your satisfaction the constructive program of economic and social development to which it has been committed. The opposition party, too, will seek your favor in 1957. Their means of achieving it lies in obstructing and wrecking the administration program, thereby discrediting the Nacionalista Party. It is up to you, therefore. whether the next two years are to be spent usefully and constructively in work for the common welfare, or whether the next two years are to be wasted in unproductive political struggle which benefits only a few of those who engage in it.

These are the thoughts I want to leave with you tonight. You will be doing a great service to yourself and your community and to your nation if you ponder upon them carefully. We Filipinos have the reputation of being swayed easily by emotion and sentiment. I believe, however, that we are also capable of being practical when the problem is big enough to call for serious consideration. I feel that our problem today is certainly big enough.

The demands of our growing population and of maintaining and advancing our nation’s position in a fast moving world call for the best that is in us. Our political life must be directed to these imperative needs. Brilliant oratory and parliamentary polish are luxuries which must become secondary to hard work and a broad and dedicated social outlook. Such is the administration I intend to give you during my term in office. What I ask of you is that you give me a supporting team which shares my outlook and is willing to win your approval with work rather than words. What I ask is that you think carefully, pray for the guidance of God’s wisdom, then go out and vote.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s recorded speech urging all voters to vote on Election Day, originally delivered at the Malacañang Study Room and rebroadcast over radio stations Sunday evening, November 6, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(11) , 5577-5581.