Rizal Day Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Lions Clubs

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, June 19, 1956]

LION CHAIRMAN MARIANING DEL ROSARIO, DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE MANILA BAY AREA LIONS CLUBS, MY FRIENDS:

PERMIT me to thank the officers and members of the Bay Area Lions Clubs for this privilege of addressing you on this day. You are to be commended for stressing with this celebration the significance of the anniversary of the birthday of Jose Rizal.

Indeed, it is time perhaps that our people should give to the day of his birth the same attention and importance that we give to the day of his death, for there are many things about Rizal that we can learn by reflection on his life which we might miss in reflecting on the tragedy and the glory of his death.

The recent generations of our people have had many occasions in which to die for our country. When those times have come, it has been the heroism of Rizal in the face of death that inspired them in battle or in the face of the executioner.

Today, however, you will perhaps agree with me that we are mainly concerned with living for our country. We are concerned with giving life, a decent life, to the millions of our people. We are concerned with giving life and strength to our national freedom and individual liberties. We are concerned with giving life to our Constitution and to the laws that our own free representatives have enacted for our welfare.

In implementing this concern the question that we ask about Rizal is not so much “how did he die?” as “how did he live?” And this day is a good day in which to seek the answer.

How did Rizal live? Perhaps we should first ask—What did he live for? Rizal lived for his country. How did he live for his country? He lived for it first by understanding the problems of the Philippines of his day. He faced the realities which the forces of his country had created around him. He singled out the enemies of his country’s freedom. And then he chose the most effective weapons with which to conquer them. He learned how to wield these weapons. And finally he used them effectively and decisively to defeat the enemy and bring freedom to his people.

What do we not find in Rizal’s life? We do not find him fighting the battles of Lapu-Lapu with 16th century swords or haranguing his countrymen with the rough, rustic eloquence of Dagohoy. We find him fighting the enemies of his time with the weapons of his time, with the polished satire of the19th century, seeking thereby not only to awaken the spirit of his own countrymen but also to stir up the sympathy of the most cultured centers of Europe towards the cause of his country’s freedom. Such was the realism of Rizal. Such was the constructive bent of his patriotism. Such was the positive spirit of his nationalism.

Indeed, in every period of a country’s history, it is true nationalism that gives its people that necessary energy with which to conquer the problems of their times. It is the realistic, constructive, and the positive nationalism of Rizal which, by facing present problems with present solutions, will propel us in the right direction towards the security, the prosperity, and the happiness of our people.

What are our problems today? They are to permit the enjoyment of the fruits of our freedom by as many of our countrymen as possible, to harness our resources and gather economic strength with which to support that freedom, and to prepare ourselves to defend that freedom against the forces that threaten to destroy it.

We can inspire ourselves to solve these problems by recalling the principles of our dead heroes. But we cannot actually solve them by using obsolete weapons, recalling old hatreds and resurrecting buried enemies. We can, like Rizal, learn from the past without reviving the problems of the past and without shadow boxing with the spirit of the vanquished foe.

It would be wrong, for instance to approach our coming relations with Japan by recalling our hatred of the Japanese militarist even though it was barely ten years ago that we suffered under his yoke. Let us recall that Rizal himself had a high respect for the intrinsic humaneness of the Japanese people.

As with the ten year old hatreds, so must we deal with the older ones. Let us nourish in our hearts a love for our country that looks forward. Let us nurture a love that builds and will not destroy the very things that support our freedom. Rizal said “the glory of saving a country is not for him who has contributed to its ruin . . . . Hate never produces anything but monsters; and crime, nothing but criminals . . . . Love alone realizes successful works; virtue alone can save . . . . Redemption presupposses virtue; sacrifice, love . . . .”

My friends, countless problems challenge our solution. They can be solved if we get together inspired with love for our country and for our countrymen and if we approach them with goodwill and without rancor or abuse.

A country can achieve lasting greatness only if that greatness is built on the sound constructive bases of virtue, sacrifice, and love. For countries, like persons, must also be judged by the moral code. Rizal said “If to make my country happy I should have to do evil, I would refuse to do it, because I am sure that what is built on sand must sooner or later fall to the ground.”

If we must build for the future, we must solve the present with the solutions of our time. If we must strengthen our freedom we must use the resources at hand. If we must defend that freedom, we must know who is its real enemy today and prepare to foil him with the weapons of today. If we want to help our country, we must be prepared to sacrifice ourselves. But to sacrifice ourselves we must be possessed of love—love for our God, our country, and our people.

If our devotion to Rizal is sincere and genuine, then we must remember, each and every one of us, that we owe it to ourselves and to our country to seek constantly to discipline ourselves and dedicate our efforts to our country. As Rafael Palma has said, we have a right to believe that there is in each one of us a possible Rizal; and that what he has done, we too could do within our reach and capabilities, if we would only apply to our tasks the same determination, the same resolute action, the same sense of duty that Rizal applied to the most heroic acts of his life.

Let, then, this commemoration of Rizal’s 95th birthday inspire in each of us a firm determination to dedicate ourselves anew with a chastened spirit and renewed vigor to this our beloved country which Rizal, blessing her with his blood, has bequeathed to us, for us to love, to dignify, and to serve.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Rizal Day Speech of President Magsaysay before the Lions Clubs. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(6) , 3012-3013.