Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On George Washington’s Birthday

[Delivered at Clark Field, February 22, 1954]

I AM happy to be among so many good friends tonight—personal friends and friends of the Filipino people. I am pleased also to join you in celebrating the birthday of your great national leader and first President, George Washington. As a child at school, I learned of his life at the same time that I studied the lives of our own great heroes, and I was impressed even then by the qualities they had in common. In this way I first came to realize that man’s achievement was not a matter of color or race, but of principles and ideals.

Among the ideals common to Washington and Rizal, for example, perhaps the strongest was their great devotion to the principle of freedom—the freedom of individuals and of nations. Significantly, that continues to be the strongest bond between our people to this day.

Your people and mine came to know each other because of the Filipino struggle for freedom. Their relationship during the next half century was based on our preparation for the challenge of freedom. You are here today because we have combined our resources, with those of others who share our ideals, in common defense against the greatest threat to freedom in modern history—the international Communist conspiracy.

Except for those who have disappeared behind the curtain of Red imperialism, most of Asia by now has won political freedom. It remains for us to match it with economic freedom, with development of our resources so that our people can enjoy a modern standard of living and resist the encroachments of Red domination.

Your presence here, guarding us from external attack, gives us the freedom to concentrate on such domestic economic and social development. It is an excellent illustration of how mutual security can be achieved by the free world.

Recently there has been discussion of this administration’s policies. Such discussion is healthy and wholesome in a democracy. But there has come out of that discussion an effort to express our policies in slogans. From the past administration we know that you cannot govern—you cannot achieve progress—by slogans. We must not try to fit the many and changing needs of the national welfare into the straitjacket of a slogan.

One danger in expressing through a slogan is that it is so easy to distort a phrase. Already, the slogan of “Asia for the Asians” is being trumpeted over Radio Peiping and by Communist propaganda channels elsewhere as a cry of hostility by our people towards the American people. This is a lie. I see nothing incompatible between friendship and sympathy for our Asian neighbors and the continuation of our especially warm relations with the United States. There is no conflict of principles, ideals or methods between the two concepts.

Slogans aside, our people have clearly stated in the last election what policy they wish to pursue.

After all, in a democracy it is the people who dictate policy, and during the recent campaign I told the people what I stood for as a candidate.

I said I would reach out to free Asian nations as a friendly neighbor, sharing experience and seeking mutual benefits through closer cooperation. I said we would expand our economic horizon, inviting and fostering greater foreign trade, inviting and welcoming greater foreign investment to help speed the development of our economy toward self-reliance.

Our people were told that, under my administration, we would stand with all free nations in a common front against aggressive Red imperialism—each contributing what it could to the common defense.

You will recall that relations between the Philippines and America were a campaign issue. I pledged that we would strengthen existing ties of friendship between the two nations, and that we would cooperate even more vigorously in fostering common ideals.

Our people voted approval to these policies and pledges when they elected me. To the best of my ability, these are the policies I shall carry out.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Magsaysay at Clark Field on Washington’s birthday, February 22, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(2) , 562-563.