Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Veterans Memorial Hospital

[Delivered in Diliman, Quezon City, November 20, 1955]

THIS occasion brings to a close a week-long celebration of a rare relationship between the people of two nations. It has been our custom to devote a day each year to the celebration of more than fifty years of friendship between Filipinos and Americans. This year, Philippine-American Day was extended for an entire week so that this ceremony might serve as a fitting climax.

The gift being turned over to the Philippine Government today is a magnificent one. It is probably the finest and most modern hospital of its kind in this part of the world. Just completed at a cost of P18 million, it is a gift of the American people to Filipino veterans, an assurance that their health and rehabilitation will enjoy the best care that medical science can offer.

In this event we have a concrete demonstration of the warm and generous friendship that characterizes the Philippine-American relationship. To each of us, veteran or not, it carries a very special message, a hopeful and encouraging message in terms of the future of humanity. It gives us reason to believe that, in this troubled world, human goodness still outweighs evil.

To me this day has a very special and personal significance. It was my privilege and good fortune to play a part in the very beginnings of this splendid memorial. I recall vividly the feeling of inadequacy and uncertainty with which I undertook a mission, with Congressman Cinco and Father Haggerty, at the behest of President Roxas, to Washington in 1948. I felt very deeply that the mission was a necessary one, that our veterans needed and deserved far more assistance than their own government was able to afford. And I felt that the only place to look for that assistance was in America.

It was clear to me, however, that I hand no special qualifications for the task I had undertaken—except a thorough understanding of the problems and needs of the veterans and a strong determination to get something done about them. I realized that the name of Magsaysay was relatively unknown in Washington and that the Government of the United States at the time was faced by the many problems and the heavy burdens of restoring a war-stricken world. But personal experience with Americans sustained me in the conviction that somewhere in Washington I would find sympathetic ears for our story and sympathetic hearts to respond to the needs of the Filipino heroes who had fought so gallantly at the side of their American comrades.

In Washington I found that I had not been wrong in my appraisal of the situation. An entire world wrecked by war was clamoring for America’s attention and America’s aid. The face of a new enemy, world communism, was already recognized and it was desperately urgent for America to act quickly if millions of free men were not to slip behind the Iron Curtain. But I found also that my hopes were justified. I found in the American Congress friends of the Philippines who responded quickly and effectively once the need of our veterans became known. Their enthusiasm and their efforts made possible the passage of the Rogers Bill which has meant so much to our veterans and their dependents and which is responsible for the splendid hospital we are dedicating here today.

As I have said, the significance of this event has meaning for each of us. What it means to the veteran is clear not only from the point of view of these new medical facilities made available for his care, but also from the fact that American friendship has brought the Filipino veterans since the end of the war more than P1,000,000,000 in cash payments, payments which continue to flow into our country quietly and without benefit of publicity. The benefits of this steady flow of income into the economy of our nation are felt by every Filipino man, woman, and child.

There is another significant aspect of this occasion which must not escape notice. Perhaps better than anything else it emphasizes the wholesome nature of the Philippine-American relationship over the past half century. This great scientific institution is being turned over today to the Philippine Government. It will be administered and staffed entirely by Filipinos. Our own doctors and surgeons will utilize these facilities. Our own skilled technicians will maintain all necessary functions. That we as a people are in a position to do this is in sharp contrast with the experience of our Asian neighbors. It is not only a credit to our people and a source of great national pride but a tribute to the far-sighted and enlightened stewardship of America during the period of her sovereignty here.

These are only a few of the thoughts which occur to the thoughtful observer on this occasion, but they are sufficient to explain why we feel as we do about Philippine-American friendship. Out of the years of our relationship there has come the realization that our people share the same ideals of freedom and justice, that we subscribe in common to the concept of a world in which the individual and his rights are superior to the state, a democratic world in which peace and human dignity rather than lust for power are paramount. It was in defense of these common principles and ideals that Americans and Filipinos fought side by side in the last war. And out of our experience since that war has come the realization that there are even closer bonds, closer in the sense that they go beyond the mere sharing of ideas. Such bonds can exist between casual acquaintances, but it is only between true and loyal friends that we find the bonds of loyalty, the bonds of quick and willing response of each to the other’s need.

The Filipino who is today’s veteran fought at the side of Americans not because he was ordered to do so but because he deeply believed in the ideals which America was then fighting to preserve, and because he had faith in America as a trustworthy ally. He and his younger brother who might be tomorrow’s veteran, feel even more strongly that their cause is just and that their judgment is sound. Since they have known the horrors of war, they would spare no effort in seeking peace, but having grown up in a democracy and having known its blessings, they will not hesitate, if the need arises once more, to defend it with their lives. Whether for peace or, war they will continue to look toward America as a friend and ally worthy of their trust.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the inauguration of the Veterans Memorial Hospital, Sunday afternoon, November 20, 1955, Diliman, Q. C. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(11) , 5583-5586.