Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the laying of the cornerstone of the National Press Club Building

[Released on April 4, 1954]

OFFICERS OF THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, MY FRIENDS OF THE PRESS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I CANNOT think of a more pleasant and satisfying task than the one I have just been called upon to perform. The cornerstone we have just laid represents another concrete step towards the erection on this site of a building that will be a monument to the vitality and vigor of our press, a symbol of its basic unity, and the center of its activities and efforts that will serve to increase that vitality and strengthen its unity.

Laying a cornerstone, however, is just the beginning of a difficult task that will require the most and the best that is in you. You will face many trying problems and many tedious chores. I assure you that at every turn, you will meet with the assistance, understanding, and sympathy of this administration, beginning with myself. But the larger burden of seeing this project through will be yours. The patience and unflagging enthusiasm which alone can sustain it to completion will have to come from you.

The most important thing is that you must be united. I understand you have just held your election of officers, and that it was a spirited and lively affair. That is as it should be, whenever free men gather together to choose freely and honestly from their own ranks those with whom to entrust authority and responsibility. It should also be, however, that after the last word of debate has been uttered and the last vote counted, the decision should be respected and all should close ranks. This is the duty that clearly confronts each and everyone of you now—to work with one another, support one another, help one another towards the realization of this cherished project.

All of you know that it was the past administration—of course with the whole-hearted cooperation of what was then the minority—that made possible the grant of this property on which to construct your building. Under this new administration, you may depend on the same—if not greater measure of support and cooperation. This continuity shows that the welfare and advancement of the press, the enhancement of its prestige, and the promotion of the well-being of its members, are the concern, not of the impermanent administrations, but of the government, of the people whom the government represents. It is to the people that the press owes the assistance it has obtained and will continue to receive on this project, and it is to them only that it has to pay its debt in the only currency that its creditors will accept—faithful and honest reporting. To no one else should the press feel beholden or indebted.

I wish to reiterate, for my part and on the behalf of this administration, that we expect the press to continue doing its duty—to report the facts honestly, fearlessly, and accurately, never sparing evil and ever encouraging what is good and just. This—no more and no less—is what all of us have a right to expect from our press, and this I know we will get from it.

There is much work ahead. With patience and determination, with enthusiasm and unity, you can and you will carry through. I hope next year’s convention will be held at the National Press Building that will have arisen here. One privilege I should like to reserve, God willing, is that of being with you when you do inaugurate that building. I look forward to sharing with you the felicity of that day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Ramon Magsaysay’s speech at the laying of the cornerstone of the National Press Club Bldg., April 4, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(4) , 1533-1534.