Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the induction ceremonies of District 301, Lions International

[Delivered at Manila Hotel, November 3, 1956]

GOVERNOR GENE EUSEBIO, OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF DISTRICT 301, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN;

IT is always a privilege to address the Lions of the Philippines. There is in this organization a true spirit of service. And our community has repeatedly profited every time that spirit has been put into action.

Tonight, I welcome the opportunity of addressing you once more, and I am happy over the choice of the occasion that has brought us together again. You have just inducted new officers to lead you over the coming year in your program of public service and community improvement. I congratulate them for their election. I congratulate you for the wisdom of your selection.

This event will, of course, stimulate a variety of emotions among the officers, members, and guests present here. I hope that out of this assortment of feelings we shall find at least one unanimous emotion—that of gratitude. I thirds we should all be thankful to God for the bare fact that this induction and the broader things that it represents—the freedom of association, the freedom of choice, the right to private initiative and action—that all this is possible and is ours to enjoy today.

We take all this for granted. Let us be grateful that we can enjoy the luxury of taking it for granted. There are other peoples and nations that may not do so, either because their liberty is so limited or because they have no liberty at all.

The right of private association has made possible in this country the growth of citizen organizations, such as yours, which have strengthened the fabric of our democracy. There are two basic conditions for this growth—freedom and peace.

Today, some people enjoy the fundamental freedom but not the blessings of peace. Others “enjoy” the forced peace of tyranny but not the benefits of freedom. It is not untimely for us to remind ourselves that we enjoy both freedom and peace. It is not out of place to recall that we have had to work hard, to fight and to shed blood to keep our freedom and our peace, that not more than five years ago the local forces of an international revolution came very close to destroying these attributes of our independence.

You who in your private and community endeavors must always look for the climate of freedom and of peace will best appreciate the efforts of your fellow countrymen towards the defense and preservation of these attributes. As far as that power and the capacities for defense rest in our hands we shall continue to guard our liberties and the national tranquility that we now enjoy. But there is a point beyond which a small nation like ours and, I might add, even a big power must stop depending exclusively on its own capacities and begin to look for international cooperation and goodwill and for the mercy of an Almighty God to prevent the disturbance of the tranquility within its borders.

For us, then, it is timely to be grateful that our actions have brought us only freedom and peace while others have lost or are losing their freedom or peace. The obvious lesson is that we should persist in our alertness; that we should continue within the limits of our capacities to work, through the established international organs, for world understanding and cooperation; and that we should continue to have faith in the mercy and wisdom of God.

That, I believe, is the course that is dictated for us by the times. It is the course which will enable you to continue with the splendid programs of Lionism and our people to proceed in their march towards progress, happiness, and security.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay at the induction ceremonies of District 301, Lions International, Saturday evening, November 3, 1956, at the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (15) , 6482-6483.