Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of his acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Humanities, Honoris Causa by the Far Eastern University

[Delivered at Far Eastern University, March 20, 1954]

PRESIDENT EVANGELISTA, MEMBERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION AND FACULTY OF THE FEU, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, MEMBERS OF THE GRADUATING CLASSES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM grateful to the authorities, faculty, and student body of this university for the honors conferred upon me. Your citation is most generous, and I feel that you have anticipated much of what has yet to be done and to be proven. In any event, you have set goals, difficult but challenging, to which I may aspire and by which I may chart my course, and I want you to be assured that I will move resolutely towards them, to vindicate the honors and faith reposed in me by this institution of learning.

Your citation says that I believe that “the welfare of the people is the primordial concern of all governments.” This statement I will not dispute, and it is precisely this concern for the welfare of the people that has underlaid and inspired the first five-year economic development program of this administration that I will expound before you today.

You may recall that, in my state-of-the-nation message to Congress about two months ago, I said we needed ”a coordinated plan, theoretically sound and practically feasible, to increase the national production and provide opportunities for more jobs and higher incomes for our people, particularly in the rural areas.” Since then, we have had time to look more critically into the economic position of the country, evaluate its problems, and at the same time assess the potentialities of the general economy that may be exploited to solve those problems. After taking these things into account, we have prepared a general program of action which we are now ready to execute.

Our first problem is jobs.

In 1953, our labor force was estimated at 8.1 million people. Of this number, 1.2 million were entirely out of jobs, while three million were only partially employed. Because of this high rate of unemployment, together with the low productivity of our labor force, the per capita income of the Filipino—P346 a year—is one of the lowest in the world. While I do not mean to challenge the accuracy of our unemployment and income statistics, it is entirely possible that the actual conditions are even worse than the figures portray.

This grave unemployment problem is a primary target of our economic development program.

We shall launch a two-pronged attack on this target, by undertaking immediate and extensive measures that will, first, improve agricultural production and second, stimulate industrial enterprises which will be primarily dependent on available local materials.

In agriculture, it is our plan to provide under direct government auspices certain public service projects, such as irrigation and electrification, in order to expand agricultural production; to increase the supply and use of fertilizer, of modern agricultural implements, and high-yielding varieties of seeds in order to augment the yield of land under cultivation; to construct farm-to-market roads in order to provide outlets for the farmer’s produce; to develop and expand farmers cooperatives and cottage industries in order to create work opportunities for the unemployed and the under-employed rural population; and to open lands to the landless.

The installation of more irrigation pumps and gravity irrigation systems will make possible the raising of secondary crops and will increase the yield in irrigated areas. Our estimate is that by 1955, 520-thousand hectares of land will have been under irrigation; our goal is to increase that area to 640,000 hectares by 1959.

Our program also calls for flood control projects along the Agno River and the Pampanga river, whose periodic overflow has caused untold destruction in crops and property. Similarly, the Marikina River will be harnessed and developed into a multi-purpose project that will provide water supply, power, and irrigation while at the same time it will control the flood waters during the rainy season.

Every effort will be made to help our farmers raise more crops and earn more income. We shall lay out a well-organized network of agricultural extension service, to teach our rural population improved farming methods that will enable them to draw the most out of the land. Facilities for credit and for cooperative effort will be expanded, not only to provide them with their immediate needs but to induce the growth of secondary occupations and the development of cottage industries that will keep them occupied during the off-season.

In relation to cottage industries, one of the projects that has attracted my immediate attention has been the exploitation of our coal resources, of which we have an abundant reserve. The production of coal will provide the fuel to feed steam turbines that we propose to install in areas where hydro-electric plants may not be feasible or economical. I am certain that the availability of power at low cost will stimulate cottage industries and provide more jobs for our people. At the same time, refrigeration units could set up to preserve fish, fruits, and other perishable products in some of our farming centers. Furthermore, our countrymen in the barrios could avail themselves of electrical facilities which are becoming necessities, not luxuries, in this modern age—such as lighting, for more pleasant and enjoyable living, and radios, to keep themselves informed. In brief, the exploitation of our coal and water power resources will bring about the rapid development of the rural areas through electrification.

It is essential to this agricultural program that we reform our land tenure system, to make it practical and equitable. Our tenants must be assured a fair share of their labors. Beyond this, provision will be made to enable our landless to acquire land of their own on settlement projects, and efforts will be exerted to purchase big landed estates for distribution to their occupants on realistically liberal terms.

These are the means by which we propose to open up work opportunities in our rural areas and raise the income of our farmers, that they may live more happily and decently.

Our program’s second line of attack is to encourage and develop more processing industries that will utilize our rich local resources and produce substitutes for items that we currently import, thus encouraging the development of such resources.

Under the stimulus of tax exemptions and exchange controls, we hope to encourage the establishment of more processing industries that will utilize local raw materials in large proportion. It is also anticipated the local industry now dependent on foreign raw materials sources will eventually be supplied locally. We have in mind such industries as the textile and knitting industry, which has induced development of ramie, jute, and kenaf production. The paper and pulp industry also could use local materials.

If these industries should, in the long run, process local raw materials, they not only will increase national employment and income but will also conserve our dollar reserves. Ultimately, these scarce dollar resources could then be utilized to import capital goods vital to the furtherance of economic development.

Our principal task, as this program gathers momentum, will be to further induce the production of consumer goods, the demand for which will rise with increasing employment and income. We must be prepared to meet this demand in order to minimize inflationary tendencies, which would pull down, rather than raise, the living standards of our people. Thus, we will provide every incentive and encouragement for the development of more food-processing, textile, shoe and leather manufacturing, and building-material industries.

A project that promises profitable exploitation under this program is alcohol production. At present, our importation of gasoline amounts yearly to P75 million. I understand that a certain proportion of alcohol can be blended with gasoline, without impairing in any way its quality or potency.

We have here a stimulus for alcohol production from local molasses and other materials. This will provide us with a happy solution to the problem of disposing of our excess sugar production, especially with the imposition under the Bell Act of gradually increasing tariff duties on sugar exported to the United States. Furthermore, this industry will result in tremendous savings in dollars for our economy and will open additional employment opportunities for our people.

These are the highlights of our five-year economic development program, and now we come to the questions that they raise. The first is: how many jobs will the program provide? Second: how much will it cost, and where will we get the money? Third: how can it be implemented efficiently?

It is our calculation that the first year of this program will provide additional employment to about 260,000 people. We expect this number to increase the next year to 360,000 new jobs, which will be the average figure for every year thereafter. Since our labor force increases only by about 150,000 each year, you can see that the new job opportunities generated by the program will be more than enough to take care of the annual increase in the labor supply. At the same time, we will be able to absorb a sizeable portion of the unemployed and the under-employed among our people.

I wish I could say that our program will abolish unemployment entirely. Nevertheless, I feel that if we do succeed in opening 200,000 more jobs each year than there will be new jobs-seekers, we shall have accomplished much.

The cost of this program has been estimated at an average of P800-million annually for the five-year period over which it is spread. We hope to obtain 56 per cent of this amount from private sources, and the rest from public funds. I shall confine myself just now to a break-down of the estimated outlay for the initial year.

To start off this program, a total first-year investment of nearly P631 million is contemplated. This amount will be made up of aggregate private investments amounting to P336 million and public investments of P295 million.

The public investment outlay of P295 million will consist of expenditures for permanent improvements and for major projects to be undertaken by government enterprises. A total of P172 million will be spent in gravity irrigation, pump irrigation, main traffic routes and highways, artesian wells, and other permanent public improvements. We plan to raise this money from congressional appropriations and special funds, foreign-aid grants, and public borrowing.

The rest of the government outlay will represent investments by government corporations in cement plants, coal development, fertilizer plants, steel plants, and power development projects. Altogether, these investments will total P123 million. Of this amount, P11 million will be financed by their income or earnings, and P112 million from bank loans and by public borrowing.

On the other hand, the financing of the aggregate private investments earmarked for the first year, estimated at P336 million, is expected to come from private savings and hoards, the floatation of private corporate securities, credit accommodations from the government and loans from domestic banks. As our program unfolds with increased peace, we expect private savings to participate in it in ever-growing amounts, provided it has been encouraged by investment incentives and a socio-economic climate favorable to economic growth.

Already, we have taken steps to bolster private participation in the economic development of this country. I have recommended to Congress that a bond issue of about P600 million be floated within the next five years, to enable us to finance, through borrowing from our own people, high-priority productive projects and permanent improvement to be carefully studied and recommended by the National Economic Council. In effect, we are offering every citizen an opportunity to take a direct part in his country’s economic growth and have a stake in its future.

This is far from enough, however. It is also necessary that we devise and adopt better methods and new measures towards attracting private savings into our financial institutions and eventually channeling them into productive enterprises for the development of our country. To make this policy effective, the agencies and institutions that mobilize domestic capital should be improved and expanded. Thus, I have given directions for the strengthening of the Postal Savings Bank and the establishment of branch banks that will serve the remote communities of the country. If necessary, we will set up a development bank that could assist effectively in launching both private and public development projects and carrying them through to successful operation.

As a complementary move under this policy, I have asked the National Economic Council to study the best means of reducing the flow of individual savings into real estate, jewelry, and other speculative undertakings. We must divert the use of such savings into productive and development enterprises.

We will have to conserve our foreign exchange and use it wisely and to the best advantage. We must prevent its wanton dissipation in luxuries and non-essential commodities. To this end, I have directed that exchange controls on such commodities be tightened. On the other hand, we must make our foreign exchange serve the purposes of internal development. This means we will have to maintain consistent and well-defined rules and regulations in the implementation of exchange controls, to make available to existing and new industries the necessary dollars for the importation of essential machinery and raw materials. This will also give reassurance to private business in the smooth flow of capital earnings and in reducing delays in the processing and cost of remittances abroad.

Foreign exchange controls should never be discriminatory, nor should they be allowed to work undue hardships on existing and new development projects. Controls are justified only if they achieve the reverse, which is to bolster the participation of private enterprise in the development of the economy.

It is our purpose, finally, to create a climate attractive and conducive to private capital, in order to enlist in our development the hidden resources of our own citizens and the constructive assistance of our friends abroad. I said many times during the campaign that upon a change of administration, businessmen will be able to do business in this country honestly, efficiently, and without harassment in the form of bribe and extortion demands. This pledge I mean to carry out, and I will not tolerate anyone in the public service who deters, frightens, or discourages investment because of inefficiency or illegal impositions. I wish to re-assure private enterprise that it is the policy of this administration to give every encouragement and incentive to private investment, upon which it will largely depend for the realization of its economic objectives.

It is true that, under our program, the government plans to finance new enterprises into which private capital may be reluctant to venture until profitable results have been demonstrated through their actual operation. The government will engage in these enterprises, however, only in the spirit of blazing a trial and showing the way. It will readily turn them over to private hands as soon as they are operating profitably and our businessmen express the desire to take over and carry on their operation and development.

There is one concrete assistance we are determined to render to private investors which has long been overdue. I have directed the National Economic Council to make definite feasibility studies of specific industrial development projects for the benefit of prospective investors. They will survey, draw up plans, gather the necessary statistics, and prepare economic studies on possible areas of investment for prospective investors—in other words, prepare the ground for them. I am confident that this accommodation will yield substantial dividends in the form of investor-interest and actual investments.

This, ladies and gentlemen, is our five-year economic development program. It is essentially one of basic development intended to provide a fairly modest and conservative start during the first year, but accelerating its pace as it gains momentum. It does not promise spectacular results, but it does show the way and it does hold out realistic prospects of growth, improvement, and progress for our people.

No one in the administration, least of all I, will claim that it is the last word in economic programs. In fact, it is intended to be a continuing program, in the sense that it will be revised and kept up-to-date each year. As each year ends, it will be evaluated and readjusted for the succeeding years on the basis of past performance, changing conditions, and prospects of further advance. We shall then add another year’s planning to it, so that we shall always be working on the basis of five-year program.

The reasons for these features are simple. We shall be so situated that throughout the future we shall always be thinking and looking five years ahead, not just to the next five years, as if life were to end after that period. In effect, we shall always be looking indefinitely into the future. As to our intention of re-examining the program at the end of each year, I have said time and again that only the dead do not change their mind. We should not be afraid to modify, add subtract, amend, revise, or even reverse our course when the logic of changing times and circumstances clearly calls for these alternatives.

I do not believe that I have to impress upon you the demands that this program will make upon our people, or the value of your stakes in its effective implementation. I have not presented an idyllic dream that will come to reality upon the incantation of a few magic words. If anything, it is a mandate for work, unselfish and unremitting work, sometimes killing work, for all our people, especially for you who have been blessed with the education and the opportunity to acquire the technical skills and proficiency that vest you with the duty to lead.

On the other hand, your stake in the outcome of this effort is no less than the vindication of all the love and labor that were poured into your education, and the fulfillment of your highest aspirations. As it has always been in the past, so much of the future will depend on your own selves. I assure you there will be sincere, courageous, and purposeful leadership and guidance. The rest, however, must come from you. You must admit that this is a fair challenge.

I thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Magsaysay on the occasion of his acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Humanities, Honoris Causa by the Far Eastern University, Saturday afternoon, March 20, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(3) , 1000-1007.