DEAR DELEGATES AND FRIENDS:

IT is my pleasant task to greet you as you begin this Labor-Management Congress. The nation itself watches hopefully as you gather here from all parts of the Philippines to seek agreement on the means of securing an enduring industrial peace for our people.

This event, it may be said, is already successful in the sense that it has brought together in a single hall the leading representatives of labor and management in the spirit of friendly consultation over common problems. This is industrial democracy in action. This was the hope and expectation which inspired the proclamation convening this first congress of Labor and Management under the Industrial Peace Act.

But while the government itself, through the Department of Labor, has initiated this step, the responsibility for its success belongs entirely to you who represent management and labor. The government can only provide leadership and guidance in the true democratic tradition and maintain a public policy favorable to industrial peace. In a democracy, the government cannot impose industrial peace. This must come out of the joint voluntary efforts of employers and workers themselves.

It should be clear, therefore, that your acceptance of this responsibility is basic to the success of this Congress and to the achievement of the overall objective of establishing ever rising levels of labor-management cooperation for the national benefit. When you decide to accept this responsibility, if follows you will want to examine all the problems open-mindedly and frankly and with a minimum of reservations.

Your own agenda properly classifies these problems under seven headings, ranging from labor standards to the practice of collective bargaining or negotiation. Thus, you have a reasonably comprehensive framework in which to explore likely solutions to these problems in a manner equally acceptable to both labor and management. The conditions to the attainment of industrial peace may be fulfilled only through mutual acceptance. Any other approach to the problem is inadequate.

We know from every-day experience that cooperation cannot be imposed from the outside, that it must find its own stimulus and grow from within. This is a basic fact to keep in mind when we consider the problem of labor-management relations. As the Industrial Peace Act itself states, sound labor-management relations in a democratic society must ”rest on an essentially voluntary basis.”

As a matter of fact, in the broad sphere of public affairs, this administration has always sought to release the full energies of our people by inspiring them to self-achievement on the basis of self-help. This is especially true in the government’s rural development programs. For we recognize that the well-springs of progress are ultimately to be found in the responsive hearts of the people. Such springs respond to friendly persuasion, good leadership, and democratic incentives, but never to dictation.

The agenda of the Congress includes items about manpower utilization, organization, productivity, collective bargaining, and mediation or conciliation. All these subjects offer good material for joint examination by the labor and management delegates. All of them are inter-related and together comprise a broad and vital sector of public concern.

In considering each of these phases of labor-management relations, you will do well to keep in mind the fact that labor-management relations are not static, but dynamic. They present problems that may be effectively approached only through the acceptance of the need for continuing adjustments as a result of changing conditions. In a developing industrial society such as ours, labor and management will find the will and the means to adjust so long as each keeps growing in the acceptance of responsibility.

To a large extent, how much good faith each side possesses will determine the degree in which you will succeed here. I am sure you will pursue your individual and collective tasks with eagerness, diligence, and sympathy. I also feel sure you will bring to this Congress an open mind ready to take into account the public good and the long-range interests of the country in any question.

You have here a rare opportunity, as individuals and as a group, to contribute very materially to national development, which is our common primary goal. I know you will exploit that opportunity in the fullest measure.

I wish you all a most fruitful three-day convention.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the Labor-Management Congress, Thursday morning, May 26, 1955, at the University of the East Auditorium-Gymnasium . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (6) , 2846-2847.