Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On Independence Day

[Delivered at Luneta, July 4, 1956]

MY FRIENDS:

TEN years ago today, by the grace of God, we realized a dream for which Filipinos had fought and died for hundred of years. On that day was born the Republic of the Philippines, a sovereign nation of free and independent Filipinos. The road we traveled to reach that goal was long and hard. On that road our fathers and their fathers before them fought and died. During the past half century the end of that hard road came in sight. The marks of our struggle changed from blood and steel to persuasion and principle. Our final victory was won with reason rather than violence.

At the turn of the century, we shook off the grip of one foreign country only to come under the sovereignty of another. Fortunately, the new sovereign was a nation which held and still holds the freedom and dignity of man among its most cherished traditions. Within the framework of this tradition we developed our case for self-determination and independence. Our case prospered. And on July 4, 1946, in an atmosphere of mutual respect and warm friendship, the stars and stripes of America were lowered; and the flag of our Republic proclaimed to the world that we stood at last as a free and sovereign people in the community of nations.

Now, after ten years, let us look back over the road we have traveled. Let us take stock of ourselves. What have we done with that Independence for which we waited so long? Let us look clearly and honestly at the record.

I can tell you how I feel about it. I can tell you that I am proud of my race, that I am proud of my generation, that I am proud of the nation we created in so short a time and in the face of such tremendous odds.

There is no need for me to recall the details of our beginning. Even the younger among us have vivid memories of of the destructive war which still echoed in our ears as our nation was born. That disaster wrecked our plans and our very means of livelihood, destroyed our homes, and left us with only a crushing burden of corruption and immorality-inevitable by-products of war. I recall these painful memories because only against such background can we truly appreciate the feat of nation-building which we have accomplished.

There are those among us who cry out against our social and economic situation, who predict disaster, and who clamor for quick remedies. Let them not blind us to the facts. Let them not minimize the fact that our production levels today are above pre-war levels, as are the living standards of our people. Let them not exploit the discontent of those who are still poor, those whom we have not yet reached with our efforts to improve living conditions. Let them not obscure such advances in social justice as our labor legislation and our tenancy laws, our rural credit and cooperative institutions. By obscuring and decrying they but make our task the harder and postpone its completion. Let them shout and work for more, but let them not deny the accomplishment.

There are some among us who wring their hands over our political system and urge us to experiment with other forms. I am one of those who feel at times that we exaggerate the importance of politics. But let us not ignore the fact that in a period of great world tension and crisis, when other and older nations were gravely endangered and damaged, our system survived its crisis, demonstrating the superiority and stability of our form of democracy in the face of armed attack and sabotage by the Communist conspiracy.

Habit is strong. So long and passionate was our fight for independence and sovereignty that some among us have not been able to adjust themselves to reality and they continue to beat the dead horse. Ignoring the real problems of the present, they now seek to give fresh vigor to an old lament—that our independence is not real or complete. The test of our independence is in whether or not the initiative for guiding our destiny rests within our own powers, in whether or not the acceptance or rejection of a relationship with another nation is ours to decide, subject only to the national interest. As your Chief Executive, I say to you: This initiative we possess and exercise: we will never relinquish it.

Every relationship in which we are today engaged has been and continues to be carefully weighed against one major standard: Does it in the final total contribute positively to the national interest?

What comprises the national interest? Security, first of all. Without security, sovereignty is controlled by, and at the mercy of, the nearest aggressor, making it no sovereignty at all. Next comes the material well-being of our people and our progress in maintaining and expanding that well-being. Those are the tangible, the physical elements of national interest. But no less important, certainly, are those aspects of the national interest which cannot be measured in pesos or in fire-power, such elements as our racial and national code of ethics, morality, and justice; our principles and ideals; our reputation and prestige as a member of the free world community. Determined, for instance, to honor our commitments and conduct ourselves nationally in a manner that does credit to our national dignity.

Tested by these criteria, our Republic has good reason for pride, satisfaction, and confidence. But this is no excuse for relaxing our vigilance or our effort. Our accomplishment was good, but it could have been better. Many old problems remain; new problems arise daily. Our success should serve only to give us confidence and incentive for, greater effort.

As we review our past and look to our future, we are happy to welcome to our festivities Vice-President Richard Nixon of the United States of America. Vice-President Nixon is here to represent during this celebration the country with which we have cooperated so much in the past and with which we will continue to cooperate in the future for the cause of peace and freedom. Our partnership in this cause, based on mutual respect and understanding, is naturally viewed with disfavor by those who do not wish to see peace and freedom secure in this part of the world. It is for this very reason that this partnership must continue. But it is also for this reason that we must so maintain it and so adjust our relations to our mutual requirements that our partnership becomes a model of collective action for liberty rather than a source of doubt among the uncommitted countries or of substance for the propaganda of the enemies of liberty. I am certain that this second visit of Vice-President Nixon, whose own personal interest in Philippine-American understanding is widely known, will contribute immeasurably towards that end.

And now, fellow countrymen, what of our future?

On several occasions in recent months I have urged our people toward greater expression of what I have called positive nationalism . Just what do I mean by positive nationalism? Actually, I could just as accurately say true nationalism. For example, I see no real patriotic or constructive contribution from those who resurrect buried enemies or revive dead issues, from those who sneer at the worth or validity of our national institutions or culture, from those who try to imprison us behind a wall of suspicion, distrust, and hatred of the outside world, from those who would have us follow a policy of cynical expediency. Honest and fearless criticism should be welcomed as a healthy manifestation of democracy, but we should insist that it be presented soberly, based upon evidence, and accompanied by a constructive alternative.

Positive or true nationalism is that which places the national good above personal interest, bias, or prejudices. It seeks, discloses, and cultivates what is good in the community and the nation, knowing that the stronger growth of what is good will choke out the weeds of what is bad. The true nationalist does not ignore or conceal national shortcomings, but works hard to correct them; he does not advertise them to feed his own vanity.

These are some of the qualities of the true or positive nationalist. You will agree that they coincide with the traditional virtues of our race. I would like to see the day when only those who practice them faithfully are permitted the honor of being called nationalists.

The world in which we enter the second decade of the history of our republic is still a troubled world. Our course continues to be perilous. We may yet lose everything we hold dear should we become careless or relax our effort. But of this I feel sure: If freedom is destined to survive at all upon this earth, I have the fullest faith and confidence that we Filipinos have the wisdom and energy which, with Divine grace and guidance, will keep us securely on our course.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay on Independence Day. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(7) , 3551-3554.