EXCELLENCIES, MY FRIENDS:

I AM happy to welcome you to the first Southeast Asia-Western Pacific regional meeting of the International Medical Women’s Association.

I salute the women doctors, surgeons, physicians, and general practitioners of the world, and the International Medical Women’s Association, for having made this conference possible. The inception and organization of the association is itself a milestone in medical history; it is a tacit recognition of the equal partnership of women with men in the profession of medicine, an eloquent evidence of the tremendous progress that has been achieved in the march towards health, self-help, happiness, tolerance, and enlightenment.

I greet Dr. Ada Chree Reid, past president of the International Medical Women’s Association, and Dr. Elise L’Esperance, founder of the famous Strang Clinics for Cancer Detection in the United States—certainly two of the most distinguished women medical practitioners in the world today.

It is significant that the first Southeast Asia-Western Pacific regional meeting of the International Medical Women’s Association should be held here, with the Philippine Medical Women’s Association as host organization. This honor is a recognition of the ability of our medical women’s association in particular and of the women doctors in Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific area in general. We are grateful for it.

I understand that the principal subject of your discussions will be maternal and child health. In view of the revitalized health program that the Government has launched for our people, especially for those in the rural areas, I can not think of a subject more vital and more timely. For after all, the development of our country—and, I might add, of this part of the world—depends in a large measure on the health of its citizens. It is common knowledge that the nation’s health is conditioned by the health of its mothers and children. It is therefore gratifying to note that the subject of maternal and child health will be taken up during your important conference.

What you will discuss here will profoundly affect the health, not only of Filipinos and the peoples of Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific area, but of all mankind. I earnestly wish your conference success. And may I add the wish that all of you will enjoy the hospitality of our country and people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech before the First Southeast Asia-Western Pacific Regional Meeting of the International Medical Women’s Association, delivered Saturday night, January 28, 1956, at the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(2) , 607.