Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the 10th anniversary observance of the Philippine Government Employees Association

[Delivered at the Session Hall of the Philippine Senate, December 9, 1955]

MY FELLOW WORKERS:

I appreciate the opportunity you have given me to be with you this afternoon. We are fellow worker and fellow servants of the people. It is only by working together in understanding and harmony that we can serve our country faithfully and efficiently.

We are all links of the same chain. Just as a chain is only as strong as its weakest link, so is the Government only as efficient in the service of the country as its most inefficient employee. In my inaugural address two years ago, I stated that I and the men and women who would work with me belonged to the people. I made that pledge on behalf of all of us, and I thank you for helping me to honor it with honesty and dignity. I now ask you once more, however high or humble your position may be, to continue giving your utmost to the service of the Government so that we may truly keep faith with our people.

You should, if possible, give even more of yourselves to the service of the people because, in a practical way, you are more indispensable to the Government than many of us. Those who are elected to public office or are appointed on political considerations come and go, depending on the pleasure of the people and the result of the elections. But you who constitute the vast army of public servants known as the civil service personnel have a permanent tenure. It is you who, for practical purposes, give continuity and stability to Government business. You are the grass-roots basis of the success or failure of our Government.

I am gratified to note on this occasion that, since the war, there have been effected substantial improvements in the pay and retirement privileges of Government servants. Even now, the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission is seriously studying additional ways of further improving the earnings and the security of Government workers. We hope, that, within our financial means, we shall eventually be able to effect at least the Commission’s most important recommendations.

I am deeply impressed and delighted by your practice of selecting outstanding public servants to honor with your annual awards. By honoring those men and women in the public service who have been outstanding examples of honesty, efficiency, dedication, and loyalty, you help create a state of mind among public servants that is wholesome and beneficial to our Government and to our country. Such a sentiment among Government workers themselves, supplemented by public opinion and the deterrent influence of our penal laws, is our surest means to good Government.

I thank you for your kind invitation and hospitable welcome, for your counting me among yourselves as a fellow public servant, and for giving me the opportunity to have this heart-to-heart talk with you on our common and mutual problems. Although it is a little early, may I take this happy occasion to wish you a merry Christmas aid a prosperous New Year.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the 10th anniversary observance of the Philippine Government Employees Association at the Session Hall of the Philippine Senate on December 9, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(12) , 6106-6107.