Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On launching the nationwide celebration of Medicine Week

[Released on September 15, 1956]

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

FOR the first time in the history of our country, we are dedicating a week to the medical profession. I have proclaimed the period from September 15 to 21 as Medicine Week, to make our people conscious of their health and of what medical science can do for them today. Our hospitals which suffered during the last war have already been rehabilitated, and many new and modern institutions have been added. In the rural areas, we now have health units extending medical service to the thousands who never before enjoyed the blessings of decent medical care. We cannot let this day pass without expressing our gratitude to the medical profession for the constantly improving health of the nation and the fact that our mortality rate is perhaps the lowest in this part of the world.

With public attention focused on our health and medical science, I hope to get a week’s respite from politics. You may have noted that there is no need to proclaim “Politics Weeks”. Every week, it seems, is Politics Week in our country. We are politically super-conscious, apparently an over compensation for the long colonial status we had. With the election still one year and two months away, there already is talk about candidates and political strategies. If only the time and energy spent by our people in barber shops and coffee shops on political discussions were channeled into gardening, poultry, or handicraft, our country certainly would gain more by it. We have too little time for nation building, and we spend too much for political campaigns. With the realization our independence, our problem has shifted from politics to economics. We should therefore adjust ourselves to the change and concentrate on the development of our strength and well-beings as a nation, instead of dissipating our energies on political competition which too frequently weakens us by sowing confusion and fear.

It is gratifying to learn from your active President, Dr. Manalo, that today the Philippine Medical Association is starting its nation-wide “Free Medical Assistance For Indigents.” In your society the Administration finds a strong ally in the implementation of our rural health program. It is obvious, but worthwhile repeating, that rural health is essential to rural economic development. A healthy and vigorous populace is indispensable, if our backward agriculture is to catch up with modern means of making the most of our rich resources. I am wishing you more power in your inspired movement to bring to the poor people the present-day skill and facilities of the medical profession. May other organizations follow the “community service” battle cry of your society. Treating the poor with the same enthusiasm as you treat the rich, is a concrete example of what I call missionary zeal. This is the type of zeal which our country badly needs today but seldom finds. What we have in abundance is mercenary zeal.

However, I predict that in giving concrete expression to the Hippocratic oath, you will reap suitable reward. The efforts of our administration are geared to the economic development of our rural areas to reduce the number of poor and increase the number of a prosperous middle class. I was inspired to greater efforts when I learned that the tobacco farmers of the North are no longer paying their doctors’ bills in terms of eggs and bananas. They now pay in cash. Our administration is working to extend that prosperity to the whole length and breadth of our country. But it can’t be done overnight. Give us the time and your cooperation.

As masters of the great science of medicine, you represent one of our major assets. Yours should be an outstanding role in the pageant of nationalism, in which the Filipino of today is engaged. You stand out as examples of how quickly and readily the Filipino can master the skills and adapt to his needs the knowledge and experience of other lands and other people. It is my feeling that you are now ready to make positive contribution to our national spirit. We have now well-trained professors, clinicians, and researchers who can write books that are expressive of our medical problems. We have plenty of materials on diseases that are top killers in our country such as, tuberculosis. malaria, amoebic dysentery, snail fever, beriberi, and others. These diseases should be given emphasis in our medical schools. We have diseases that are peculiar to us because of our race and geography, as “bangungot”, H–fever, amok, and others, on which our doctors can write well. The wisdom of our eminent doctors—as Singian, Guerrero, Quintos, Miciano, Potenciano, and others, should have been preserved in books for the medical students of today. It seems to me that we are more than ready to make our own contribution to the literature and practice of world medicine—a distinctly Filipino contribution, which not only will facilitate the development of Philippine medicine, but also focus upon us, as a creative force, the attention of the medical world.

I wish, too, that our doctors would explore more vigorously our local medicinal products. With your support, our local drug laboratories could be inspired to embark on researches utilizing local medicinal plants. There are plants in our midst which even the laymen know for their medicinal values—as alagao for bronchitis, dita for malaria, banaba for diabitis, and talapunay for anxiety states. The pharmacologists know more. Let us start benefiting by these natural blessings ourselves, at the same time perhaps helping our neighbor nations similarly endowed, but not yet in a technical position to make use of this resource.

My thoughts for you today are inspired not solely by my desire to conserve our dollars and increase employment, but more by the desire to see the assertion of positive nationalism in the medical profession. Our student days as a nation are over. We have reason to be proud of our record as students, and we are sufficiently intelligent to realize that in the sciences the need for continued study never ends, but we must recognize the obligation of our maturity. Our duty to ourselves and to our race is that we employ what we acquire as students as creative contributors—distinctly Filipino contributors—to mankind’s expanding horizons of knowledge.

This, my dear Doctors, is my message to you today. Devote some serious thought to it and let us work together for its realization.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay on launching the nationwide celebration of Medicine Week. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(12) , 5469-5471.