Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Ambuklao Hydroelectric Development Sub-Station

[Delivered in Balintawak, January 19, 1957]

MY FRIENDS:

IT is my pleasure this afternoon to dedicate to the service of the Filipino people the Ambuklao Hydroelectric Development, the first of a series of power projects proposed to be constructed by the National Power Corporation to harness the entire power potential of the Agno River in Luzon. The original planning for Ambuklao called for the restricted sale of its output to the Manila area, Baguio and the mines, and other large power consumers. This was designed to relieve the critical power situation in these areas at the time of the planning, and to minimize the capital investment required. As the construction of Ambuklao progressed, however, the power shortage in Manila and environs was alleviated with the installation of an additional thermal unit by the Manila Electric Company; so, in line with the Administration’s policy to promote rural development, I have instructed the National Power Corporation to review and revise the allocation of Ambuklao power in the light of such policy. I am happy to announce that this reallocation has been made and that we have recently authorized a P10 million bond issue to finance the construction of additional transmission lines to make Ambuklao power available to areas in Central Luzon not otherwise considered under the original plan. These transmission lines will form the nucleus of a rural electrification network which the Administration is committed to expand as expeditiously as can be economically justified.

The equipment, materials, and supplies for these transmission lines are now being procured, and construction will start at an early date. Certain areas in La Union and Pangasinan will receive service from Ambuklao before the end of this year, and towns in Tarlac, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Bataan, and Bulacan will be connected by next year.

We fully appreciate the role of electric power in our economic development. To this end, the Government has always considered the power program of the National Power Corporation of considerable import. It is our desire to develop the electric power industry of this country in cooperation with private interests, believing that such an arrangement would not prejudice the primary objective of making available cheap and dependable power to an increasing number of ultimate consumers.

We all know that the living standards of a people improve directly with the productive capacity or industrial development of the country, and that modern industrial development is directly dependent on electrical power. It is also recognized that the Philippines, compared with other more advanced countries, is woefully deficient in power capacity. Just before the war, the electric power generating capacity in the Philippines was 4.3 watts per capita, and energy availability was 13.6 kilowatt-hours per capita. Although as of the end of 1956 the generating capacity in the Philippines had increased over that of prewar by 310 percent, or 17.7 watts per capita, and the energy consumption is now 53.3 kilowatt-hours per capita, these figures fade into insignificance when compared with those of other countries. Their figures are 3,220 kilowatt-hours in the United States, 4,830 kilowatt-hours in Canada, 156 kilowatt-hours in Malaya, 625 kilowatt-hours in Japan, and 179 kilowatt-hours in Formosa. It is for this reason that the Government is giving every encouragement possible to the expansion of existing power facilities and the creation of new power sources, with the determined objective of making the maximum possible amount of power available at moderate cost. The completion of this Ambuklao Hydroelectric Plant on the Agno River, with a capacity of 75,000 kilowatts, and the start of construction of the 100,000-kilowatt Biñga hydroelectric project immediately downstream of Ambuklao, are forceful steps in that direction. I am very pleased to note that industrial development in the Manila area and vicinity is growing at a very fast rate and that the growth of power requirements has been at the rate of 10 to 11 per cent annually. At this rate of growth, even with the availability of Ambuklao power, there will continue to be need for additional generating capacity to cope with the growing industrial demand. This need will be felt even before the Biñga hydroelectric project is completed in the latter part of 1959. Thus, the rising demand for power makes the rapid development of our hydro resources very necessary, and to this goal the Administration is committed.

The role of cheap electricity in rapid industrialization is demonstrated vividly in the Maria Cristina area in Mindanao. There, where power can be generated in large blocks for a centavo or less per kilowatt-hour, it had been possible to establish industries, both private and governmental undertakings, such as the calcium carbide plant of Plant and the Nasco Steel Mill.

With respect to the distribution and retail sale of government-generated power, I feel that, to avoid economic waste and harmful duplication of facilities, existing distribution system, whether provincial, city, municipal, or private, should be employed cooperatively under controlled conditions for the retail of such government-generated power to the public. Power rates can and should be adequately controlled through the Public Service Commission, through evaluation surveys, and through close supervision of accounts, without direct competition by the Government with private utilities. I have once said, and I wish to reiterate here, that franchise, such as a franchise for sale and distribution of electric power, should be considered as solemn commitments of the Government. But I want to make just as clear that where these franchises are abused against the public welfare, where electric rates are unreasonably high, and where the public is mercilessly exploited, the Government should and will intervene, and if reduction of rates can be effected through means now available, it will take other measures to protect the people’s welfare. Complaints are being received from all over the country against high rates and inefficient service. In areas where power is being provided partly or wholly by the National Power Corporation, savings accruing to the utility franchise holder through purchase of government-generated power should be shared with the ultimate consumer.

While the construction of hydroelectric plants will serve expanding industry, we should not lose sight of the other need—that of making available to the common man in the rural areas the comforts and conveniences that go with modern living. For this reason, the National Power Corporation has reserved a sizable portion of Ambuklao capacity for Central Luzon, particularly in rural areas. Rural electrification, as I envision it, is not confined to household lighting of isolated hamlets. It should include provision of power for small cottage industries, cooperative ventures, irrigation, and water pumps. I believe that in time we can, as has been done in other countries, make rural electrification both efficient and economically sound.

Studies are now being made on how to promote rural electrification without financial embarrassment to the National Power Corporation, which has to pay interest and amortization charges on sums spent in its projects. I am very hopeful that a workable formula will soon be evolved which will be the basis of an appropriate implementing legislation for presentation to Congress.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). Speech of President Magsaysay at the inauguration of the Ambuklao Hydroelectric Development Sub-Station, Balintawak, Saturday afternoon, January 19, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(2) , 337-340.