Address of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Upon receiving the Degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa, from the University of the East

[Released on January 25, 1957]

I CONSIDER the honor just bestowed upon me by this institution one of the most cherished in my life. An academic conferment carries with it the full prestige of the awarding university. Regarding this award as a recognition of some merit in the work I have accomplished, I am firmly resolved to honor it in further meritorious performance. It is my hope to so continue in my endeavors as to be a worthy honorary alumnus of the University of the East I am deeply grateful to President Dalupan, to the members of the Academic Council and the Board of Trustees, and to the University as a whole.

This institution is in the midst of celebrating its Tenth Foundation Anniversary. May I therefore take the opportunity to congratulate all those who have contributed to its establishment and phenomenal growth. I understand that within a decade, it has reached the noteworthy position of being the university in our country with the second highest strictly collegiate enrollment. I am certain that, along with its growth in size, it has also grown in content.

That it has stimulated research is manifested in the publications of its leading scholars. That it has promoted scholarship is also evident in the performance of its alumni-Pioneering in educational philanthropy, the Alumni Association of this university has financed a study made by a government committee, organized at my direction, of the proper role of General Education in our schools and colleges. May I voice the hope that this university, my new Alma Mater, will continue to grow in stature and to honor its admirable pledge of eternal service to the youth, the country, and God.

I commend the university’s choice of a theme for its celebration—”The University and Today’s Problems.” The re-examination of the university’s relation with contemporary affairs has occupied the deepest thoughts and concern of serious scholars and thinkers from Cardinal Newman to Ignacio Villamor. Undoubtedly the greatest cultural instrument developed by man, the university can perform its principal functions only by squarely facing the problems of its own times.

During their long evolution from the Academy of Plato to the great institutions that they are today, universities have developed three broad and basic functions. They preserve the accumulated knowledge of man, teach that knowledge to the youth, and increase that knowledge through -study and research. Around these functions, the usual relation of the university and a country’s problems naturally revolves.

Of these functions, the preservation of the cultural heritage is perhaps the least complex, since much of it is recorded in permanent form in the libraries and museums. Teaching this heritage to the youth calls for greater effort and admits of more latitude. For out of a country’s young men and women the universities must train the good citizens, the technicians, the professionals, the thinkers, and the leaders. Many of those who are graduated by the universities are eventually the teachers who themselves compose the faculties of the schools and colleges. The country’s entire education is therefore shaped by the universities. And since the character of a people is determined by the character of their education, it can be said that the universities mould the nation.

While the university directly trains the youth, its scientists, writers, and scholars directly and indirectly help to elevate the national life. Their individual studies and researchers are essential to progress. Their pure research may result in a mathematical formula which in turn may lead to the discovery of atomic energy. Their applied research, either for the government or for private industry, may produce the cure for a dread disease or perfect a new weapon for the Armed Forces.

The writings and pronouncements of savants like Toynbee or Conant directly influence public opinion which in turn shapes the national life, including its public administration. In many instances, scholars themselves are mustered into government service as theoreticians, planners, or administrators. In our government, we have many university men in technical, advisory, and executive positions.

This relationship between the university and contemporary problems is immemorial. As early as 1224, the University of Naples was established by Emperor Frederick II expressly to train men for service in his administration. At about the same time medicine also became a university discipline in the University of Montpellier. Since then, the university’s functions and activities have expanded in all directions. But the beneficiaries in increasing measure have been and are still the youth, the government and, the country.

And in all its history, the university has been a more effective influence in education, public service, and general advancement if it enjoys academic freedom. Freedom of the mind, of which the university is the chief guardian, is the basic condition for human progress.

The traditional functions of the university will continue to be valid perhaps for all time. But on this memorable occasion marking the first decade of this university, I should like to suggest that it is high time for our universities to adjust their attitudes and functions to our country’s more basic contemporary needs. Instead of drawing their inspiration completely or mainly from the past and from accumulated knowledge, they should also address themselves to the problems of contemporary life and help discover their solutions. Specifically, I have in mind what perhaps is a natural but serious problem of a young, growing democracy like ours—the full recognition of democratic freedom on the other hand.

Perhaps I can make my point clear by comparing the civic picture of the American Republic during its formative years to the typical civic picture of contemporary life in our young democracy.

Reporting on his observations in the United States in 1830, the French Sociologist, Alexis Tocqueville, wrote as follows:

“These Americans are the most peculiar people in the world. You’ll not believe it when I tell you how they behave. In a local community in their country, a citizen may conceive of some need which is not being met. What does he do? He goes across the street and discusses it with his neighbor. Then what happens? A committee comes into eixistence and then the committee be gins functioning in behalf of that need. And, you won’t believe this but it is true. All of this is done without reference to any bureaucrat. All of this is done by the private citizens on their own initiative.”

In this simple fact of early American life lies, I think, the germ of the American nation’s greatness. That germ is the spirit of self-reliance, the virtue of doing what is needful, the understanding and use of freedom as the necessary atmosphere for wise initiative and civic responsibility.

What is the corresponding picture in our country? When a Filipino believes that some need is not being met, he most likely dashes an indignant letter to the newspapers or rushes up a platform to make a speech. It seldom occurs to him that, as a member of his community or a part of his nation, he might, like the early Americans, initiate or take part directly in the effort necessary to meet the need.

The use of the freedom of expression, orally or in writing even only for its own sake, is of course a legitimate activity of democratic citizens. But I venture to state that its use in this manner should only be the beginning and not the end, the early stage but not the final consummation of civic conscience and responsibility.

There are pleasant exceptions. The wonderful international assistance given to needy Vietnam under “Operation Brotherhood,” a laudable project initiated by the Jaycees of the Philippines and accorded world-wide praise, is one of them. If we could promote an “Operation Brotherhood” in every city, every town, and every barrio in our country, we should surely be on the way to national greatness and happiness.

I feel that, as a young democracy, we have reached the turning point where we have more or less completed the process of familiarizing ourselves with the rights of free citizens, and are therefore ready to enter upon the next and final stage, that of acquiring the sense of responsibility commensurate with our rights. In this new task, the early Americans and our own Jaycees can teach us a useful lesson. That lesson is the need and wisdom of exercising initiative, self-help, and constructive action. In the cultivation of these indispensable civic virtues, the schools and universities are the ideal means.

Up to now, in teaching civics and government, the schools and colleges, followed by other instructive agencies, have emphasized individual rights. The school children, the university students, the newspaper readers, the radio listeners, and the television viewers have been told over and over again that they possess individual rights guaranteed to them in no less than 21 paragraphs of our Constitution. This has been a logical beginning, to be sure, for our people are new to the ways of freedom. Having once been colonial subjects, their first training in democracy has logically been in the proper awareness of their essential rights as free citizens.

But once a people have learned their rights they face at first the new danger of displaying them for their own sake or exercising them to excess, thus converting liberty into license. To avoid disaster at this point, the people must also learn and practice the duty and responsibility that go with rights.

One of the most universally demanded rights is the right to equal opportunity. Equal opportunity is, of course, an indispensable condition of democracy. Without equal opportunity the world would never have seen an Abraham Lincoln, a Jose Rizal, or a Manuel Quezon. Without equal opportunity the poor boy or girl can never hope to improve his lot economically, socially, and intellectually. It would not be possible for every Filipino boy, as it is natural for every American boy, to believe that he can be president of his country.

The greatest means of equalizing opportunity happens to be the schools and colleges. Under the system of universal education now prevalent in all civilized countries, every pupil has the opportunity to obtain an education. In school, each child advances or remains behind according to his own merits. If the opportunity to enter school is supplemented by the grant of school and college scholarships for the poor but talented, educational opportunity is equalized up to the very highest level. Even so, the equality of opportunity is not and should not be the be-all and end-all of democracy.

So that the blessings of equal opportunity may benefit not only the individual but also his fellow men and the country, those who enjoy equal opportunity must also accept and practice equal responsibility. The citizens of a democracy are severally and jointly responsible for the welfare of their fellow citizens, of their communities, and of their nation. This is the spirit which, as revealed by De Tocqueville, built America to greatness.

The citizen enjoys the freedom of expression so that he may not only criticize but also praise, so that he may not only point to others the solution of public problems or the way to meet a public need but he may himself also feel responsible for the solution and the need. A democracy insures to its citizens a climate of freedom not for the sake of freedom itself, but so that they may develop initiative, self-reliance, self-help, and constructive action. Freedom is justified only by its proper use.

Freedom for its own sake alone is empty. Only when a people have given substance to their freedom may their democracy be considered to have reached full bloom. In the words of President Wilson, freedom is not a thing that can be given because it is a form of character and not a form of constitution. It is up to us to make for our independence more than a name; it is our talk to develop it to fullness and maturity.

With the new understanding and use of freedom, life in our country will improve in every respect Feeling equal responsibility for our ills, we shall individually and collectively strive to discover their cures. Instead of working at cross purposes, we shall help each other.

Thus, in the matter of employment for example, we shall all of us try to create jobs for ourselves and for others who need them. Instead of one sector of our economy castigating another sector for whatever shortcomings there may be in our agricultural and industrial development, in our trade and in our controls, we shall face these problems squarely together, not only in terms of our own interests but with a full understanding and respect of the interests of others and of the whole nation. Instead of debating and quarreling over the various difficulties that naturally confront a growing and advancing nation from time to time, we shall be guided by the spirit of equal responsibility and meet and solve them with understanding and cooperation.

This then is the message I should like to leave to our schools and universities: You must round out your teaching so as to balance freedom with selp-help, equal opportunity with equal responsibility. The concept of freedom includes the obligation to act; the doctrine of equal opportunity carries with it the corollary doctrine of equal responsibility. Such a balanced democratic teaching and training will give maturity and completeness to our democracy.

Our citizens have already acquired the proper awareness of their rights. They must now be aroused to an awareness of their responsibilities. The present Administration, in its comprehensive program of rural development, has already begun to inculcate among the masses the doctrine of self-help based on the concept of freedom and equal responsibility. The about 75 per cent of our population living in the rural areas are being awakened from the lethargy of ages in order to make use of their freedom in a practical way for the enrichment of their own. lives-through self-help and community cooperation.

But the schools, colleges, and universities must do their part. They must make the doctrine of equal responsibility a part of the education of the people as a whole, including the future teachers, professionals, businessmen, scientists thinkers, public officials, and leaders. University teachers, scholars, authors, and leaders must propagate it, for when our democracy has reached that stage of development in which our people instinctively couple duties with rights and responsibility with opportunity, we shall be certain that they have earned their happiness and our Republic has a rendezvous with greatness.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). Speech of President Magsaysay upon receiving the Degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa, from the University of the East, Friday afternoon, January 25, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (2) , 340-346.