Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Chamber of Industries

[Released on January 15, 1957]

INDUSTRIALISTS OF THE PHILIPPINES:

I AM very happy for this opportunity to discuss intimately with you some of the programs and policies of the government which are of particular interest to you.

Lately, there has been a good deal of discussion over the distribution of benefits in our economy. Importers are arrayed against export-producers, farmers against manufacturers, consumers against producers. In the same way that the false alternative between a rural and an industrial economy has been posed, false issues are raised pitting the interest of the export producer against that of the importer; the protection of the consumer against that of the producer; the welfare of the farmer against that of the manufacturer. These are false issues and false alternatives because all the elements of our economy are dependent on one another. And, as the saying goes, a chain is only as strong as its weakest link.

The farmer in the field is able to work his farm because the manufacturer and importer in the city keeps him supplied with the clothing, the tools, and the fertilizers which he needs. The manufacturer is able to carry on his business only because he is assured by the work of the farmer of the rice and vegetables which he needs to sustain him, of the export crop which earns the foreign exchange that buys machinery and other essential imports. We are all mutually dependent. No one is self-sufficient. And, therefore, the interest of one group must be the interest of every other. If there are problems which confront this country, all sectors of the nation must contribute their share to overcome those problems. Otherwise, all sectors will suffer.

Our present problem is to raise the standard of living of the general mass of our population, to create new sources of livelihood and provide productive employment for the large numbers of our people who are yearly reaching the age of employment, and to create an adequate domestic market. In attaining these objectives, the development of manufacturing is crucial and strategic.

It is inspiring to take note of our tremendous industrial progress over the years. As a measure of the growing strength and importance of the manufacturing sector of the economy, the volume of manufacturing in 1956 was fully 120 per cent higher compared to that of 1949. The contribution made by manufacturing to national income is accelerating at a fast rate. Income originating from manufacturing has gone up almost 75 per cent since 1949. More recently, the pace of industrialization has been stepped up. Between 1954 and 1955, the values added by manufacturing expanded by P120 million or 12.6 per cent.

In the tax-exempt sector alone, from a negligible number of 27 new firms organized in 1949, there has been a steady increase each year, until today we have about 580 new enterprises ranging from textile and drug firms to manufacturers of footwear, nails, and musical instruments. I am aware that a sizable portion of our manufacturing industries has been devoted largely to what is termed “packing industries”. I have not been too happy about this. I would like to see the establishment of a more basic industry that would use and exploit to the maximum the abundant raw materials found in our country. Hand in hand with these developments, we find that in the three short years of this administration, the total value of machinery imports has increased by more than 55 per cent, while imports of raw materials have reached the almost incredible figure of P1,700,000,000— (one billion, 700 million).

To the growth of local manufacturers is chiefly credited the encouraging downward trend noted in particular imports during the first nine months of 1956. Imports of textiles declined by P43 million compared to the first nine months of 1955. Construction materials and fixtures went down by P12 million. Local drug firms save the economy about P1 million in reduced value of imports during the same period. The heightened activity in the tobacco region and among our cigarette manufacturers brought about a P13 million decrease in imports of tobacco. Imports of coffee and cacao were lower by P2 million. While we imported P8.2 million worth of footwear in 1949, only P706 thousand was recorded by 1955.

All these manufacturing statistics translate themselves into the easily recognizable but little appreciated fact that the man on the street, from the shoes that he wears to the cigarette that he smokes, is consuming in greater and greater degree the products of his own countrymen.

But perhaps more than these simple statistics, what gives us hope for still more rapid progress in the years to come is the emergence of an active and dynamic group of Filipino industrialists who are eager, enthusiastic, and articulate in advocating increased investment in manufacturing and in leading the way towards the establishment of a growing number of industrial firms.

This group of industrialists, which is ably represented by this Chamber, promises to play a still larger role in the development of the nation’s economy in the years to come. It shall be the task of the government to offer every reasonable assistance and encouragement to this group in all its worthy projects.

I should like to discuss with you some of the measures by which the government proposes to meet the problems of more rapid expansion in the field of manufacturing.

First, how to increase the resources for investment in manufacturing. Second, how to budget these resources in order to give emphasis to those industries which will make the maximum contribution to our economic development and provide a broader base for more rapid growth in the future.

The two main bottlenecks in the establishment of new manufacturing enterprises are apparently the storage of foreign exchange resources and the lack of adequate financing facilities. One of our main problems at present is precisely the shortage of foreign exchange to meet all the requirements of different groups in the economy. There are many essential consumer needs which must be met. Other industries have their own requirements. Government projects which are vital to the nation need materials which we must purchase abroad. Past obligations of the country must be honored.

Despite this situation, I think we can say that manufacturing enterprises have received a fairly substantial share of the nation’s foreign exchange and, as far as was possible and reasonable, their capital and raw material requirements have been met.

The implementation of the reparations agreement with Japan opens up a promising new source of foreign exchange for the country. Private Filipino manufacturers will receive a substantial share in order to enable them to expand their capacities and establish new plants in those lines essential to rapid economic development. This is one windfall that our people should utilize to speed up our development processes. I have no delusions that the government can successfully operate the program without the continued support and assistance and suggestions of the business community, and especially of your group. The commercial loans which are available as a supplement to the reparations agreement, if used wisely, can provide added resources for industrial investments.

I understand, however, that in order for you to take advantage of these additional resources, you must have access to adequate financial facilities. Industrial projects require long-term capital which will be committed to fixed investments in plant and equipment. I am informed, furthermore, that one of the main difficulties of prospective investors in manufacturing enterprises in this country is the lack of facilities for mobilizing the type of capital which participates fully in the risks of the project. Very little capital is available which can be committed for an indefinite period of time and which will earn returns only when the project themselves begin to earn profits.

This type of capital, in other more highly developed countries, is usually raised in the stock market. But our own stock market is at present still inadequate for this purpose.

Loans with appropriate maturities will be increasingly available both from the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation and the Philippine National Bank for the medium and long term needs of agricultural and industrial undertakings.

I have directed these institutions to re-examine their policies and to suit their requirements to the financial needs of essential industries. The implementation of these measures will be undertaken immediately in order to meet the peso requirements of the annual reparations shipments.

Let us not, however, have any illusions. The small annual reparations payments, even the commercial loans we may be able to negotiate, will not mean the end of scarcity. Our foreign exchange resources will continue to be extremely limited relative to our needs. We must continue to be most sparing in their use. We must budget them even more carefully and use them in directions which will yield the nation the greatest returns.

There will continue to be a limit to the amount of credit which financial institutions can prudently supply. Together with our foreign exchange, our financial resources must be applied to those activities which will provide a broader base for more rapid economic growth in the future.

When resources must be allocated in this manner, it is impossible to avoid making judgments on the relative importance of different demands for those resources. In the past, these judgments were made separately by different government institutions. Last January, I issued a directive to the National Economic Council and the Central Bank to devise an integrated system of economic priorities to govern the extension of credit and allocation of dollars.

By September, these institutions had finished the system and we approved it last week at the Cabinet meeting. This formula of priorities is a useful tool developed to effect an orderly flow of resources into the most desirable forms of activity. It will make the allocation policies of the Central Bank with respect to foreign exchange, of different banks with respect to credit, and of other government institutions with respect to aids and subsidies, more objective and less subject to sudden revisions. An illustrative list of the investment projects which will receive high priority ratings will be made public and will provide you with a guide for your investment plans.

The formula, although complex in appearance, does no more than to give body to the relationship of each new project to all the national objectives that we have repeatedly announced. These objectives, namely, an increase in national income, an improvement in the balance of payments, and the more intensive utilization of domestic labor and materials, are woven into this formula and should eliminate to a great extent the possibility of error in the allocation of resources.

For many years while the nation builds up its capital facilities and steadily absorbs our population into employment streams, there is a great need for restraints in consumption. It would be both wise and generous on your part to use some of the windfalls that may come your way towards the enlargement of your physical plants and the strengthening of your capital structure, rather than on the obvious temptations that windfall incomes are so easily dissipated on. For its part, the government, in its management of the existing exchange resources of the country, as well as of windfall exchange receipts in prospect, such as reparations, will be guided by the same motives that I now express; namely, to divert ever-increasing amounts of expenditures into those items of a capital nature that shall establish the broad production base necessary to employ all our people.

There shall be no further extensions of government control to those fields of business where private capital has clearly demonstrated its willingness to invest and its ability to manage. However, I would like to exempt from this general rule those essential services like the railroad and the arrastre service, because I honestly believe that the general welfare would best be served if these devices remained in government control. I shall look with disfavor on all efforts to subject existing businesses to unfair competition from government. I shall fight any attempt to treat lightly or to revoke, unless for the gravest cause, the various privileges of business that the government has given and that play a vital role in the security of your investments.

A pledge of the government must have lasting and unwavering acceptance else it loses all value and should not be given at all.

Such matters as franchises, certificates of tax exemption, licenses to exploit mineral resources, rights to the use of public lands, privileges to foreign exchange, whenever these are not fraudulently secured or abused against the public welfare, are considered as solemn commitments of the government. Upon these commitments private enterprise plans and flourishes. If the government and business are to be partners and are to operate together successfully, there can be no room for insincerity. For insincerity makes planning impossible.

I have discussed with you a few of the measures which the government has formulated in order to accelerate industrial investment. In all of them your response is vital and decisive. The government has plans and ambitions, but it has no illusions. The government can only provide the favorable climate for investments. It can only offer ready facilities to prospective investors. But in a free enterprise economy such as ours, you must provide the initiative. We realize that the success or failure of our programs will in the last analysis depend on your vision, on your sincerity, on the skill and the competence with which you engage in strategic investment projects. If you, the industrialists of the country, are truly men of enterprise and are sincere, aggressive, forward-looking, then we have no fear of failure. The government will fail only if private enterprise in the country fails to measure up to the nation’s potential and to the economic needs of all its people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). Speech of President Magsaysay before the Philippine Chamber of Industries, January 15, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (2) , 332-337.