Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the launching of the First National Foreign Trade Convention

[Delivered at the Philippine Chamber of Commerce Building, March 11, 1956]

MY FRIENDS:

I AM glad to join the chambers of commerce and trade organizations in launching the First National Foreign Trade Convention and in observing Philippine Trade Week. This event should help to focus the attention of our people on the important place of foreign trade in our national economy.

The most pressing economic problems confronting us today are linked with our foreign trade. The increase of both our export and import potential is an absolute prerequisite of our progressive and accelerated economic development.

We have been too long dependent upon the export of a few traditional products consigned to a limited market abroad. As a result our economic progress has been greatly conditioned by changes in world trade terms and patterns which are not entirely within our control. In many respects we have not been the masters of our own economic destiny in the past.

The remedy is clear:

(1) We must diversify production to be less dependent on world demand and less vulnerable to world price fluctuations for a limited number of export commodities.

(2) We must attain a greater degree of economic self-sufficiency by promoting domestic industries using local raw materials, thereby minimizing our import needs.

(3) We must greatly expand the markets for our exports abroad.

First, let us discuss the problem of production for export and the expansion of markets abroad. Let me say at the outset that the unfortunate truth with respect to some of our traditional export industries is that the elastic markets and easy profits of the bygone colonial era is a thing of the past. The claim that increased production and, therefore increased prosperity, would result from alleged incentives involving devaluation or other schemes for diluting the currency is illusory to say the least. For many of these traditional crops the problem is not one of increasing production but of saturated markets. We are simply confronted with an inelastic demand for many of these exports—a condition which we must face realistically.

The government recognizes the importance of expanding and strengthening our export trade for these traditional products in the light of narrowing markets and deteriorating terms of trade. It will be sympathetic in doing what it can to meet the challenge of changed economic conditions. But the producers themselves must soberly appraise this situation and take a long and realistic look to the future planning now the course which will assure both themselves and the country a sustained and stable growth.

However, with respect to most of our crops and commodities, particularly those derived from our forestry and mineral resources, including certain agricultural output, there is no artificial limit on our export potential. Here we are limited only by our own ingenuity and drive in producing more exports and selling them abroad for good profit.

In the past we have neglected to work actively and aggressively for foreign markets. We have tended to let our products move on their own momentum in the old channels of trade to supply normal demands. Systematic and active promotion efforts are required in the aggressive competitive conditions of today.

Our aim should be, not only to increase the volume of our old export products, but also to develop new lines that we can sell to new as well as old world markets. This means salemanship of the highest order requiring the experience, the vision, and the resourcefulness of our producers and exporters. We must utilize the best modern technology can devise in improving our products so that they may excel in world markets. We must also improve the pattern of our exports, which now consists largely of raw materials categories, by producing more manufactured or semi-fabricated products. The government will do its parts in this effort, but results must come mainly from your endeavors as individual manufacturers and traders.

I urge you to launch with this first National Foreign Trade Convention a new era of Philippine foreign trade characterized by a vigorous and systematic drive for new exports markets.

Let us now turn the problem of our imports. We cannot hope to diversify our production and industrialize our economy without providing an increased amount of foreign exchange with which to purchase essential producers goods from abroad for our economic development. In brief, to achieve our goal of greater self-sufficiency for home consumption and to minimize our present dependence on imports, we must purchase abroad the machinery, equipment, and materials which will permit us to activate new industries. In this process our foreign exchange system is of vital importance.

As our industrialization efforts become successful in the next few years and as our economy develops sufficiently to supply the home markets, we will become less and less dependent on this type of control as an artificial method of achieving our goals. But at the present time the judicious and controlled use of our foreign exchange is essential in order to give us access abroad to producers goods for major economic development projects. Only when a natural balance of imports and exports is reached can we abandon our present system, perhaps coming to rely then on tariff measures for controls still needed.

Therefore, I should like to reaffirm my policy on this matter in these terms: We will strengthen our machinery for foreign exchange control and tighten the policies and priorities governing import licenses in order that we can marshal our foreign exchange earnings and allocate them to the maximum advantage of the total economy. As in the case of planning the expenditures of our peso through a fiscal budget, we must begin to allocate our foreign exchange according to a definite foreign exchange budget. We will take steps to close the loopholes and arrest the leakages which permit dissipation of scarce foreign exchange for non-essential consumer imports, or which permit the illegal accumulation of foreign exchange abroad. Our foreign exchange control will be employed to protect domestic markets for domestic producers and to make available the maximum amount of our scarce foreign exchange to provide the tools of economic development.

The measures and policies I have discussed are all concerned with bringing about an increased number of productive undertakings. Once those undertakings are established, however, there continues to be the problem of stimulating and protecting their growth. Each different category of producer will have different experiences and different problems. Some will find competitive conditions already in their favor; others will perhaps require some protection, at least in the early stages of their development.

Even though the primary objective of our tariffs is to derive government revenue, many of our producers will find these tariffs of considerable protective benefit. However, we must not think of high tariff walls as an easy and flexible means of affording protection to producers. To do so would ignore the interests of consumers. While it is desirable to encourage domestic production, this must be kept in proper balance with the desirability of maintaining reasonable price and quality to which the consumer is entitled.

In a free enterprise economy, as I have commented in other statements, the role of government is to point the direction of economic progress, to provide services which will facilitate economic growth, and to create the environment in which private business can confidently move for forward under its own momentum. As a concrete manifestation of the intent of this Administration to help business strengthen its production for export and find new market outlets, I have recently submitted to the Congress a Reorganization Plan for the establishment of a new Bureau of Foreign Trade in the Department of Commerce and Industry.

The principal function of this new Bureau is to give dynamic leadership to the promotion and stimulation of our foreign trade. Its main efforts will be directed to fostering the diversification of export products and the aggressive searching out of new markets. By working for the standardization and improvement of our export products, we should be able to improve their competitive position in the world markets.

In conclusion, I wish to invite your sustained interest and participation in the solution of the difficult problems which face us, as we try to bring our international trade into a natural and more healthy balance. I am convinced that our current policies are fundamentally sound and that we are on the road which will bring prosperity for all. But conditions do not remain static and, therefore, we must be flexible and ready to keep pace with them. And so, do not hesitate at any time to give me the benefit of your counsel. I will await with interest the deliberations and recommendations emanating from your convention.

Whatever policies we adopt for the future, I will insist that the interests of all elements of the community are given just and fair consideration. The principle that guides us is the greatest good for the greatest number. The criteria we impose seek to assure that essential economic development will take place as rapidly as possible with both the sacrifices demanded and the benefits bestowed justly and equitably distributed.

The times and the demands upon us call for a high measure of national discipline and dedication. This being a democracy, these qualities must be self-imposed. I have faith in the capacity of our people to follow this path, and I ask you, gentlemen who represent a key element of our expanding economy, to help by setting the pace and the example.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech at the launching of the First National Foreign Trade Convention, at the Philippine Chamber of Commerce Building, Sunday afternoon, March 11, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(3) , 1250-1253.