MY FRIENDS:

MRS. MAGSAYSAY and I are very happy to be here tonight—among friends. Our hosts, Admiral and Mrs. Goodwin, have given us a most pleasant, enjoyable evening, and I wish to thank them for it.

This is only one of the things, of course, for which I wish to express my appreciation to Admiral Goodwin. Admiral Goodwin assumed this command soon after I myself took office, and looking back on his first year in this country, all I can say is that I would be very happy and proud if I have done as well in my job during the past year as Admiral Goodwin has done in his.

Through his friendly ways, his sincerity, and his thoughtfulness, Admiral Goodwin has proven himself a true ambassador of goodwill for his country. In this, I am sure he will gladly share credit with his gracious lady, who has generously given of her time, energies, and services to many of our outstanding civic and charitable projects.

Admiral Goodwin also has maintained the most harmonious and mutually beneficial relations with our own armed forces. He has not hesitated to give a helping hand whenever it was requested, and I know that our navy in particular has benefited from his counsel and experience.

But above all, our people are grateful to Admiral Goodwin for the firm hand and quality of leadership that he has shown in exercising his command. To our people, he is a picture of calm confidence and quiet strength, no doubt reflecting the massive power that he represents. Since we depend so heavily on that power for our defense against outside attack, we are grateful for Admiral Goodwin’s reassuring presence among us in a position of high responsibility, especially now in these days of tension and danger.

May I now ask you, my friends, to join me in a toast to the continued health of our most charming hosts, Admiral and Mrs. Goodwin . . .

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Speech of President Magsaysay after Sangley Dinner given by Admiral Goodwin in His Honor. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(2) , 681.