Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Business Writers Association of the Philippines, giving of awards

[Delivered at the Riviera, May 4, 1954]

Mr. CALLEJA, GENTLEMEN OF THE PRESS, DISTINGUISHED LEADERS OF THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I WISH to express my appreciation at having been given this opportunity to offer a brief review of the business policies of my administration and to trace the steps which we have taken to implement those policies.

First of all, let me repeat my assurance that business will get a fair deal under my administration. No one will be forced out of business through unilateral action on the part of the government. On the contrary, legitimate business will be given all the protection it deserves and all the encouragement it needs.

Some confused pessimist have been saying that business conditions have deteriorated, and that they will continue to get worse instead of better.

These are counsels of fear.

Necessarily, the achievement of our goals will take some time. It will mean a lot of hard work and patience. But we have set into motion a number of long-range projects which I am sure will alleviate the temporary difficulties under which business labors today.

If there has been a business slowdown, we may attribute this partly to the great world-wide shift from a war-time to a peacetime economy, to the consequences of which the Philippines has not been exempt.

More significantly, the present business slowdown has been the consequence of our lack of economic planning in the past, the result of our failure to adjust to a program of austerity soon enough and quickly enough.

The first thing that my administration has sought to do, therefore, has been to correct this costly error.

To begin with, we have mapped out a new economic program. This program will involve the expenditure of around four billion pesos within a period of five years, or at the rate of P800 million a year.

More than half of this cost will be borne by private enterprise; the rest will be shouldered by the government. To help the government defray its share of expenses, a bill is now pending in Congress which seeks to float P800 million in bonds.

We want to make sure, however, that this program will be properly carried out and that the allotted funds will be effectively used. To this end, therefore, we have revitalized the National Economic Council, which has been invested with broad powers in the implementation of the national economic program.

One important function of the council is the establishment of a priority system in the enterprises to be developed and expanded. This system has to be set up owing to the fact that our resources are limited, and we must distribute them in such manner that the maximum benefits can be obtained. This means the priority in the allocation of exchange will be given to the more essential business enterprises, and that the distribution of public works, such as the construction of roads, wharves, railroads, and electric plants, will jibe with and complement the system of priorities for economic development.

I am sure this assurance will make all of you happy, since one of the most persistent complaints of businessmen is the unavoidable delay and confusion in the release of funds and the consequent loss of time in starting industrial operations. The priority system will correct all that.

Hand in hand with this program, we are reorganizing our tax collection machinery. We need money not only for the operation of our government but also for financing our development projects. Lax collection methods in the past have caused the loss of a tremendous amount of revenue which otherwise could have been utilized for the improvement of existing services to taxpayers, or the creation of new ones.

In this connection, I wish to assure you that at present the government has no intention of raising the present tax rates. On the contrary, the government intends to encourage business by lessening the burden of taxation on those who feel that they cannot operate freely owing to high taxes and high production costs.

Moreover, we hope to provide further encouragement to business enterprises by exempting from the payment of taxes all new and necessary industries.

To the hard-pressed industries needing financial assistance from the government in the form of tax exemptions or direct financial aid, I wish to give assurance that their needs will be studied thoroughly and that help will be extended to them in accordance with the government’s capacity to meet their needs.

We are not going to allow old industries to die because of neglect on our part and thus needlessly throw more people out of work. On the other hand, we cannot allow new industries to languish because of our failure to sense their most urgent needs.

This brings me to the subject of controls. The imposition of controls has been cited as the principal deterrent not only to the inflow of new capital into local industries but also to the entry of foreign capital here.

These controls were never intended to be permanent.

They have been instituted as a palliative, as a stop-gap measure designed to check the drain on our foreign exchange reserves and thus stabilize our international reserve position. We have to do this not only to put our economy in a stable position but also to make possible the smooth implementation of our development program.

I am happy our businessmen have shared this broad view of controls. Ultimately, controls are designed to protect our newly established industries by restricting the inflow of imports.

Prospective foreign investors, on the other hand, fear controls under the impression that they might not be able to remit their profits or transfer their capital. This fear is unfounded. Present regulations permit both the remittance of profits and the transfer of capital, subject only to the condition that such will not jeopardize the national economy.

I am sure that those foreign investors who are interested in investing in the long-term future of the country, and who are not concerned merely with making a “quick killing,” will find these conditions sufficiently flexible to permit large-scale business operations.

As I said, the imposition of controls is a strictly temporary measure. It will be lifted just as soon as our international exchange position is made stable.

In our all-out effort to establish a sound economy, I have stressed strongly the rural aspect. This is because of my belief that the barrio is the fundamental starting point of any program which seeks to revitalize the economy and raise the living standards of the people. Better living standards mean an increase in the purchasing power, and an increase in purchasing power will mean better participation in the fruits of the land among the rural inhabitants who compose 75 per cent of our population.

As long as the bulk of our population remains below the optimum standards of living, there is no hope that we can create a strong middle class which forms the strongest bulwark of every democratic state. And such a middle class ultimately constitutes the firmest support for business in a free enterprise system.

I have no wish to be over-confident, nor do I wish to minimize the known hazards that lie along our course. But I believe that the long-term prospect which faces us is a happy one.

To achieve our goals, however, will involve all our energy and patience, all our capacity for sustained applications, and all the faith and goodwill that we can summon. The task in our time, as I see it, is to lay the foundations of our future on a secure and solid a basis as we can make it.

I trust that we have begun to do so.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Magsaysay on the occasion of the Business Writers Association of the Philippines, giving of awards, at the Riviera, Tuesday evening, May 4, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(5) , 1958-1961.