Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Launching the 1956 Red Cross Fund Campaign

[Released on February 14, 1956]

MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

I HAVE noted with pride and satisfaction the significant contribution which the Philippine National Red Cross makes to the task of nation-building in which we are all engaged.

The Red Cross is dedicated to the mitigation of suffering in all its forms. Whenever a calamity strikes, the Red Cross is there to give its helping hand. And after it has ministered to the needs of the distressed, we feel strong again to carry on our tasks.

Today, we declare open the annual fund campaign of this humane organization, so that it may have the means with which to fulfill its many obligations to our people.

The Red Cross is the instrumentality through which we all can give some help to our fellowmen who need it most. Through the Red Cross we can lighten the load of a typhoon sufferer, brighten the hours of a soldier in a hospital, or help tide over a patient through a crisis when life itself may hang in the balance. In helping these needy countrymen of ours, we make our own lives more meaningful. I trust that the Filipino people will rally behind the banners of the Red Cross.

I call upon all citizens and residents of this country, regardless of nationality or creed, to support this year’s Red Cross fund campaign. I ask them to give generously of their means, their time, and their efforts in furtherance of the aims and objectives of the Red Cross. Finally, I urge all national, provincial, city, and municipal officials and school authorities to extend every support and cooperation to this campaign, and to take active leadership towards its success in their respective communities.

I now declare open the 1956 Red Cross Fund Campaign.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay launching the 1956 Red Cross Fund Campaign. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(2) , 608-609.