Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Medical Convention

[Delivered at the FEU Auditorium, April, 1956]

PERMIT me, first of all, to join the medical profession today in extending a warm welcome to our distinguished guests from abroad who have come as delegates to the Third Conference of the Asian Confederation of Medical Associations. You have done us great honor in choosing Manila as the site of your convention and I hope that during your stay here you will have enough time, after your official business, to go around and see our country and know our people. I know I voice the sentiments of all Filipinos when I assure you that you will find a warm hospitality wherever you go.

For three consecutive years you have invited me to address your Annual Convention and for three consecutive times I have honored your invitation. The stress of my daily task gives me the urge to see the doctors—thus I am with you today. In your presence I gather added strength and renewed vigor to continue serving our country.

I have been criticized for flying too much, for going to the rural areas too often, and for receiving hundreds of callers every day. I was informed by the old officials in Malacañang that no President had done this before. It is my firm belief that for a doctor to be successful, he must visit his patient, get a good history, and perform a thorough physical examination. Then, he must visit him as often as necessary for follow-up—to see that his orders are faithfully carried out, to note new developments and see if he is responding well to the treatment. This is exactly what I am doing. I do not want to treat my patient by remote control from the swivel chair of my office. I feel uneasy in a swivel chair.

The illness of our country is Economic Anemia. It is brought about by insufficient production of blood and parasitic infestation. The blood count, however, is not alarmingly low. There is no immediate danger of coma. I strongly believe that she will live and get well with your cooperation.

The treatment we are instituting is threefold. (1) measures to increase blood production; (2) parasites that suck the blood; and (3) supportive blood transfusion.

To increase production we are building irrigation systems, improving agricultural methods and opening up virgin lands. We still have plenty of rich lands which can provide for everyone. I will certainly be very happy if we will be self-sufficient at least in rice-our staple food. One of the main problems in the opening of new settlements which concerns your profession, is the eradication of malaria. If you can only eradicate this disease as you have successfully eradicated cholera and smallpox, you will be doing a great service to our country. I can see the conversion of our virgin lands into productive farms, run and owned by happy and prosperous Filipino farmers. We need your help now, just as the help of the doctors were needed in the eradication of yellow fever for the successful completion of Panama Canal.

We have increased the dose of medicine for the eradication of the parasites of graft and corruption, dollar and gold smuggling, tax evasion, excessive importation of luxury items, and unnecessary travel abroad. We have limited the grant of dollars allocation for medical treatment abroad to meritorious cases. Only those cases which can not be treated locally for want of facilities and skill, and those which have been sufficiently treated by local specialists without improvement are allowed to go abroad. We no longer give dollar allocation for mere physical check-up abroad. That can be done here. Experience has shown that they return with flashy Cadillacs after the check-up. We have a sufficient number of specialists in our country today. When the plan of making Manila as an Atomic Research Center is realized, there will be less reason to go abroad for medical treatment. It is already time that we should teach our patients to spend their money in our country so that you may benefit from them. I enjoin you to cooperate in conserving our dollars by recommending only meritorious cases for medical treatment abroad.

It is my firm belief that our country still needs supportive blood transfusion. She is not yet sufficiently strong and still complains of dizziness at times. When the blood production is already sufficient, then we can stop the transfusion. We are fortunate to have a donor whose blood type is compatible with ours. We have a friend whose way of life is compatible with ours. At times we note allergic reactions but this can be remedied by diplomatic parley. This is a thousand times better than getting a donor with incompatible blood. The best way of course, is to make our patient strong by increasing blood production so that we would not need the transfusion any more.

Ladies and gentlemen, I have given to you my diagnosis and prognosis of the illness of our country. I have narrated to you our mode of treatment. With your cooperation we can make her strong. We cannot afford to let her die. We have only one country to love and cherish—the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech at the Medical Convention, FEU Auditorium. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(4) , 1907-1909.