Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Boy Scouts of the Philippines National Court of Honor

[Released on May 14, 1956]

FELLOW SCOUTS:

THERE have been various occasions in the past when I had the pleasure to attend some forms of Scouting activity and I consider them among the most memorable in my life. Tonight I was a witness to yet another Scouting activity: Your National Court of Honor. It might be that my promotion from Tenderfoot Scout of Honor to Eagle Scout was too rapid that I can barely grasp the full significance of many of your ceremonies, notably this Court of Honor of yours. It was as solemn as anyone could wish it to be and as pregnant of meaning as anyone would care to read into it. But more than anything else, I deem it as another example of the way a vigorous and far-reaching movement, imbued with high deals and aspirations, is able to fire the imagination of the most diverse kinds of people and to make them devote their time, effort, and even substance just so the youth of the country can live the Scouting way of life.

I cannot imagine that the medals presented today are of any great intrinsic worth. But I see that you prize them very highly. On past occasions, I have seen many of you wearing them and you wore them with pride and satisfaction. In some homes that I have visited, the men of the house hesitated not a moment to show me things they prized most and oftentimes they were awards given to them by our Organization.

Knowing how you prize them, I think I also know why you have learned to appreciate and treasure them. But the personal satisfaction that you derive in doing a good deed for the youth of the country overshadows all else. That is why, despite the distances that you have had to travel to reach Manila, the other important work that you might have had to forego, you had to come and attend our annual Council Meeting.

But I do not think I still have to boost Scouting to you. Many of you have spent the best part of your years in Scouting. Instead, let me make a few suggestions so that we may all see that the good that Scouting can do will permeate and guide accordingly a greater segment of our population.

There is yet so much to be done here in the Philippines for children and the youth: first, by method of prevention; and second, by adequate treatment of those who have fallen afoul of the law. In both these spheres, Scouting can play a big part. There is no need for me to point out what Scouting itself does for youth in the way of prevention of delinquency, by providing healthful interests and recreation, building character, etc., but in any given community only a fraction of boys are served in this way.

Can you who are in Scouting do something for the others?

You can certainly do something about the other boys who do not yet belong to the Scouting Organization. By reason of your association with Scouting you all can take a leading part in all civic activities which further the good of the youth.

For example, is there any kind of coordinating council in your town in which are presented the various youth organizations and on which sit civic-minded individuals? There is need for such a council which would study local needs and problems, suggest remedies, rouse public opinion, and make plans for a better deal for the children in the locality. For it is true that in most of our communities, although the Boy Scouts and other organizations are already at work, there is little understanding of the overall problem and seldom any coordinated plan for the whole youth population, nor is there much knowledge even of just what is happening to children in trouble. If there is none yet in your locality, maybe you should initiate such a council so that your community can be roused to a sense of responsibility in the matter. You can be such a power for good in your communities; so I appeal to you not to be satisfied to restrict your leadership to Scouting alone, but to widen your horizons.

I also wish you would seek out and apply Scouting principles and methods to help in the promotion of a very great need of our time. You know that our Republic is comparatively young. It will be only ten years old next Fourth of July. To this generation and those immediately succeeding, belongs the delicate task of shaping it as a united and strong nation.

So that Scouting may maintain a vital role in the life of our people, I urge that other phases of Scouting be stressed or developed, as the case may be, which will help crystalize in our youth the spirit of positive Filipino nationalism which is very necessary for our survival as an independent nation. In such a case, Scouting will find many valuable allies in many of our age-old institutions and in our civic organizations, and excepting for our schools, Scouting stands to become the most effective agency by which we can evolve such a spirit of dynamic nationalism.

As your honorary President, I am proud of the work you are doing. No other group is contributing more effectively and substantially to nation-building today than the 25,000 Scouters all over the country who are giving so generously of their substance, effort, and time to the Scouting Cause. And so I join President Vargas, Commissioner Hernandez, and the rest of you in congratulating and commending those who received their awards tonight and the many others whose recognition is yet to come for their patriotic work in helping to build for our country a militant and capable citizenry.

May your theme for this annual meeting—“New Horizons for Filipino boys”—open new horizons of service to the Fatherland for us all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay at the Boy Scouts of the Philippines National Court of Honor. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(5) , 2501-2503.