Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the B.W.A.P. Annual Awards

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, February 7, 1957]

MY FRIENDS:

I AM happy once again to greet the Business Writers Association of the Philippines and the outstanding members of our business community whom you have chosen to honor on this annual occasion. To the honorees I wish to express my congratulations for having won awards in a highly competitive field, and my thanks for the significant contribution to our economic development which they have made in qualifying for such distinction. In this connection my thanks go also to the Business Writers Association for providing this additional incentive to economic growth.

Last year I appeared before you and reported on the economic problems confronting our nation as well as on the plans and measures which your Government was applying toward their solution. At that time I pointed out that the Administration was maintaining an economic policy consistent with its original program which I enunciated upon my taking office. You were assured, however, that this consistency did not preclude continuing revision and adjustment to meet the changing circumstances, both domestic and global. My remarks then also included in broad terms the objectives of our policy and the means by which we hoped to achieve them.

Last week in a message on the state of the nation to a joint session of our Congress I reported on the effect of these policies in terms of progress toward national economic goals. Since this message was given widest currency and was the subject of considerable editorial comment, I shall not take the time now to repeat any of its details.

You will recall, however, two significant aspects of the message: One was that it dealth with facts and figures carefully compiled from the records of the Government and other agencies—records open to public scrutiny, and not subject to doubt as to their substantial accuracy. The second significant point was that these facts and figures without exception indicated solid and substantial progress in all major areas of our economic life. In some cases our gains exceeded our expectations. In others, we fell somewhat short of our hopes. In all instances, however, it was manifest that we were headed in the right direction—that our goals and policies were basically sound. On the other hand it was duly pointed out to the Congress—and it bears repetition here tonight—that we still have a long way to go, that we must be ready to cope with unpredictable external influences, and that, in short, there is no justification for complacency or relaxation of effort.

This brings us to a problem which you, the business writers, can do much to solve, or at least minimize. This is an election year, and until next November the game of politics I am afraid, will play a dominant role in our national life. Realistically, we must resign ourselves to this situation, however much we regret it. But this does not mean that we should not do everything possible to minimize its harmful effect. I have in mind particularly the well known fact that campaign oratory has been known to be somewhat careless in matters of truth and accuracy. For example, it is gratifying to know that most comments on the state-of-the-nation message noted with approval the fact that it was sober and factual, and based upon the public record. Those who differed with this opinion for political reasons, however, seemed to be most resentful that the statistics did not coincide with the gloomy picture they had been so eager to impress upon the public mind.

I do not expect this Administration to be spared from criticism in this election campaign. I do not even expect such criticisms will necessarily be supported by reasonable evidence. However, it is a matter of concern to every one of us that in the excitement of the political contest care be taken that there be no real injury to the national interest, to the morale of our people, to their institutions.

On this point I ask your cooperation and service to the community. By sober and objective reporting you can maintain the balance of accuracy between the situation as it really exists and the picture that is painted for us in the political arena. This does not mean that you will yourselves refrain from criticism when you feel it is honestly justified. I ask only that you serve your reading public by providing a balanced diet of fact and opinion, each clearly identified as such, together with pertinent background.

Let me illustrate with one of our major economic problems—unemployment. In the first place it is unrealistic to use the expression “solve the unemployment problem” because unemployment is a part of the total economic problem. The number of jobs which government itself can provide is extremely limited. What government can do, is doing, and must continue to do, is foster and stimulate the increased private economic enterprise which will absorb our manpower resources. We must also avoid the use of loose and misleading generalities. For some time we tolerated such expressions as “millions of unemployed.” Recently, a scientific and painstaking employment survey revealed that our unemployed and unemployables down to such an age categories as ten years numbered a little over one million. When it is further remembered that population growth steadily augments the size of our labor force, even prevention of increased unemployment means that considerable new jobs have been created.

For another example of loose talk and loose thinking, you might examine the subject of rising prices. It must be borne in mind that we do not exist in an economic vacuum. Being still dependent for so many of our needs on imports, it is obviously impossible for us to escape the price fluctuations of the countries which supply us. You are all aware that prices have been steadily rising throughout the world. In fact, in some instances it can be shown that some of our commodity prices have been kept below the rate of increase in the exporting country. From these illustrations you will see how important it is, in considering any given topic, that we have all the available facts.

There is another point I would like to dwell on this evening. In the past some of my critics have charged me with being impetuous and impulsive. It seems strange, therefore, that I must now be the one to urge caution, the one to insist that we “make haste slowly.” In charting our economic course there are two approaches: one is to devise and try out new and experimental economic theories; the other is to draw upon the costly experience of others, carefully choosing what seems best adapted to our needs. This Administration has chosen the latter course. We consider it our responsibility to exercise the greatest possible caution where an error of judgment might mean the most widespread privation and misery, and even the end of our existence as an independent nation.

At the risk of being charged with the crime of having read a book, I should like to quote from a recent study entitled An International Economy , written by Gunnar Myrdal. Mr. Myrdal formerly was minister of commerce in Sweden. Today he is executive secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. He is recognized everywhere as an economist of international stature. This is what Mr. Myrdal has to say, and I quote:

“In most underdeveloped countries, improvement of productivity in agriculture is an essential precondition for industrialization. The expansion of employment, absorbing those previously unemployed or underemployed, and the relatively higher wages paid to industrial workers—one of the essential results to be gained by industrialization and, in fact, a necessary inducement for workers to move out of agriculture—will cause a rise in total demand; since absolute incomes will remain low, this will mainly express itself in a higher demand for food. At the same time, this development process will also involve somewhat rising income demands in agriculture and, in particular, a higher level of food consumption. With the tight foreign exchange situation in which these countries ordinarily find themselves, if they are pushing on with industrial development, the only way of avoiding inflation is a substantial increase in total agricultural production, allowing an increasing proportion of it to be supplied to the non-agricultural population. In addition, if there is not an expanding market among the agricultural population, created by the purchasing power they acquire by their greater sales of agricultural produce to the towns, industry will not have the growing market it needs to go on expanding.”

Continuing, Mr. Myrdal says:

“In Italy and in Southern Europe generally, low productivity in agriculture is a main limiting factor to all attempts to push ahead with industrialization. In Latin America several countries have been hampered in their economic development because it has been too confined to the growth of a few modern cities and some islands of industry, leaving agriculture, and thus the main part of the economy, in decay and backwardness. This had undoubtedly been one of the main causes of the constant pressure of iternal inflation and also of the foreign exchange difficulties.

“A third important reason for giving agriculture a high priority in the development plans of every underdeveloped country is that only thereby can be integration process be given that solid start at the ‘grass roots’ which is required if it is to take the form of a steady, peaceful, but rapidly accelerating social growth. A large literature, devoted to this problem of community development . . is already beginning to appear.”

For the benefit of those who look west of the Philippines for guidance, I might also quote Mr. Nehru, who says:

“Industrial expansion without agricultural reorganization will leave the bulk of the people in a state of poverty. . . . In other words, we can plan against mass poverty only if we set out to create the conditions of a rapidly expanding and efficient economy both in agriculture and industry.”

The foregoing thoughts were written in 1956. As early as 1953, and consistently since, I have expressed these ideas as my economic philosophy and as the economic policy of this Administration. I have no reason to doubt their validity at this time.

You all know by now that in these policies I see agriculture and industry and commerce as complements of a balanced economy. You all know, likewise, that in these policies I see private enterprise and initiative as the major motive force.

In the development of a free economy, government can set the stage. Government can prepare the way and create the climate. Government can stimulate and encourage, out only private enterprise has the flexibility and vigor carry out the massive effort required for real growth.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). President Magsaysay’s speech at the B.W.A.P. Annual Awards, Thursday evening, February 7, 1957, at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (3) , 603-606.