Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the 11th Anniversary of General Douglas MacArthur’s Leyte landing

[Delivered on October 20, 1955]

ELEVEN years ago, we greeted this day with great rejoicing. The spirit of jubilation quickly spread throughout the land and was echoed by all of our people. For on that day and at this very place, we were witnesses to the event for which we had waited for what seemed a lifetime—the landing in the Philippines of the American forces of liberation.

That event meant the end of the long night of the enemy occupation, of three years of suffering, oppression, and humiliation. It marked a turning point in our history.

But October 20, 1945, should be remembered not for its historic significance alone. Aside from being a day of deliverance, that date marked the vindication of our faith in America. I believe, therefore, that we should yearly commemorate the 20th of October also as a reaffirmation of the unique and lasting friendship that binds our country and the United States of America. That friendship has endured and will endure because it is founded on common ideals, on sacrifices shared equally, in unity in the face of dangers fought and conquered by joint effort.

This is what the historic landing on Leyte should remind us of Friendship of this kind is priceless and should be cherished. There is no substitute for it. Perhaps this is the reason why even the bitterest critic of our policy of friendship with America can offer no alternative for it.

But should we maintain this friendship now and in the days to come? I say emphatically that we should.

Liberation and the end of the last great war did not mean that the world was once more free to resume its interrupted march towards peace, progress, and security. Hardly had the embers of that great conflagration died down when the same totalitarian forces that brought it about began sowing the seeds of new conflicts and dissensions.

Shortly thereafter, the world was again to be divided into two opposing camps, one dedicated to the cause of peace and freedom and the other committed to the policy of aggression and eventual world domination. While the former was engaged in repairing the ravages of war and in bringing order and hope out of confusion and despair, the latter was busy taking advantage of these conditions for its own selfish ends. World communism lost no time in exploiting the uncertainties and the instability of the early postwar years to further its own sinister aims. Through subversion and outright aggression, the Communists were able to obstruct the free world’s efforts to reconstruct. Relentlessly the Communists enlarged their ever expanding domain at the expense of world peace and security.

We in the Philippines were not spared. The Huk movement in our country is directed and led by Communists. Communism was able to subvert the minds of some of our countrymen into opposing and obstructing, through deceit, guile, and violence, our efforts to bring about a freer and fuller life for our people. We were fortunate in defeating the Huks and in thwarting Communist designs on our integrity and survival as a free nation.

But other countries have not been as fortunate. Since the end of the last war, communism has made substantial gains, territorially and otherwise, in practically all parts of the world. The Communist empire was steadily expanded through infiltration, subversion, and outright aggression. Today, the borders of that empire extend to within a few hundred nautical miles from our shores.

In the face of this threat to our national existence, our Government has taken the most logical and practical step to safeguard our security. That step was to strengthen our ties with the United States of America, ties which had been tested in the past, in times of wellbeing and of adversity.

Some have suggested that we might find greater security if we avoid outside commitments and undertake our own defense within our own means. This course is obviously unrealistic. As a young republic burdened with the heavy tasks of nation-building, we lack the means to ensure our security by our own unaided efforts.

Others have suggested that we may find safety in neutrality. But on examination, we find this course equally untenable. Even disregarding our principles and convictions and looking at the problem in the light of national survival alone, our judgment should dictate otherwise. Militarily, our country is a strategic prize which no belligerent could ignore. Economically, our natural resources are a temptation which a would-be aggressor could not disregard. Our limited defense capacity is an open invitation to aggression.

Besides, neutrality is expensive. The neutral state, to preserve its independence, must be prepared to defend it against both sides. This policy entails an obligation to maintain an extremely costly defense establishment and to keep a very large number of able-bodied citizens constantly under arms.

In today’s world, there is no safety in isolation even for great powers, and much less for small nations like ours. Practical realism, therefore, as well as moral conviction, makes defensive alliances with friendly countries of the free world a compelling necessity in our own national interest. This is the course your Government has followed to assure our survival as a free and sovereign people.

This is the reason why we have a mutual defense treaty with the United States. Under this treaty the United States is committed to “act immediately” and has assured us that its forces “would automatically react,” in case the Philippines is attacked. This pledge is contained in written commitments solemnly made and is inherent in the existence of United States military bases in our country.

To further insure our security, we have entered into a regional pact with other countries in our area in common defense of our security. Under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty is pooled together the collective strength of eight countries, including the United States.

In addition, in the United Nations and through international conferences like the recent Afro-Asian Conference at Bandung, we have done our best to contribute towards the strengthening of the desire and the will of free nations to undertake a collective defense of freedom.

Thus, we have sought to protect our people by every possible means, including security arrangements—bilateral, regional, and international.

The Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty has been criticized because it allegedly does not have provision for instant and effective collective action in case of armed attack which the North Atlantic Treaty is supposed to contain. It is not generally realized, however, that the North Atlantic Treaty itself does not provide for “automatic action.”

The United States’ interpretation of that Pact when it was under discussion in the United States Congress was that each Party would be free to “exercise honest and genuine judgment in determining what action is necessary for the restoration of peace when another Party has been attacked.” In other words, the effectiveness of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty—or any treaty for that matter—should be judged not only from its language but also from its underlying spirit. Insofar as the Philippines is concerned, that effectiveness should also be viewed in the light of the renewed United States pledge of immediate and automatic action, under our Mutual Defense Pact with that country, in case the Philippines is attacked.

If there is any difference at all between the two treaties, that difference is one of form and not of substance. The signers of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty have amply demonstrated that they are imbued with the same will, unity, and sincerity of purpose as those which have actuated the signatories of the North Atlantic Pact.

There is urgent need at this time to maintain at full strength that unity of purpose and that determination to act jointly in the common defense. The most serious danger to the cause of freedom today is the temptation among the free nations to relax, to lower their guard, in the mistaken belief that international communism may be induced to abandon its objectives of world domination. This is wishful thinking of the most dangerous sort.

The Communist conspiracy to rule the world cannot be wished away. The free world is learning this all over again the hard way. Despite the so-called “Spirit of Geneva,” Communist intrigues have caused new tensions in various parts of the world. The only sure defense for the free nations is to maintain their strength, to remain firmly united, and to keep faith with one another.

This is also the lesson of the Leyte landing which we commemorate today.

Some would cast doubt on the sincerity of America. They would have our people believe that the United States cannot be relied upon to fulfill its defense pledge to assist and protect our country. The Leyte landing, and the liberation that followed, refute all such charges with fidelity.

But faith and sincerity as between our two countries are meaningless unless they are mutually felt and mutually expressed. We, too, are called upon to reaffirm our determination to keep faith.

Indeed, there can be no better or more appropriate way for us to commemorate the Leyte landing than to renew our pledge to keep faith with our friends and with the ideals of freedom, dignity, and peace for which we—as friends and allies—worked and fought together.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech on the 11th anniversary of Gen. Douglas MacArthur’s Leyte landing, delivered Thursday morning, October 20, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(10) , 5048-5051.