Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the Bureau of Public Works

[Read by Executive Secretary Fred Ruiz Castro at the Winter Garden, Manila Hotel, November 12, 1955]

MY FRIENDS:

IT is a pleasure to celebrate with you the golden anniversary of the Bureau of Public Works. Gathered here are the people who have been instrumental in the progress, through public works, that we see around us and who will further be instrumental in implementing to a marked degree the economic program of this Administration designed for the upliftment of our people’s standards of living. I therefore am happy to greet you on this, your golden jubilee, you who will translate into reality our aims and aspirations for an economically stable Philippines.

On this occasion let me review briefly the splendid work you have done during the last fifty years. We have roads throughout the country that serve as the arteries for our trade and commerce. Irrigation system have been constructed in order to increase the production of our staple crops. Based upon the conservation, development, and utilization of our land and water resources, irrigation projects have been undertaken commensurate with the funds made available for the purpose from time to time. Water supply systems and artesian wells, satisfying the requirements of health, public safety, and welfare, have been installed. River control and drainage activities so far undertaken are tangible achievements to show the attention that your organization has given to the lives and properties that are provided protection against the ravages of floods.

The accomplishments on port facilities are worthy of the organization behind such activities. We do not also fail to recognize the improvement in the people’s living standards occasioned by the mechanical and electrical installations effected by your organization. Electric power plants, pumping plants, air-conditioning systems, telephone systems, and the like, are structures which will always remain a credit to such an outfit as the Bureau of Public Works.

These accomplishments and achievements of the Bureau for the last half century have actually contributed in an appreciable measure toward our national economy by way of affording employment to a sizable number of people, support and patronage to the local contracting industry as well as such industries engaged in the development and manufacture of local materials of construction, and improvement of the living conditions of the masses. Let us admit, however, that there still remains more to be done, if we are to maintain the present levels of living, and still much more to be done if we are to reach higher standards. Looking far ahead and realizing the immensity of our needs, we know these accomplishments are modest indeed, but they certainly indicate that we are on a steady march forward.

At this point, my friends, I must not forget to convey to you my heartfelt appreciation for the splendid cooperation you have extended to this new Administration. It is a matter of record that during the first two years of this Administration, out of a total of 9,012 projects on various types of public works authorized and initiated, 3,413 projects were completed and 5,599 projects were launched underway. This accomplishment represents almost three times as much as that of the last two years of the past Administration. For irrigation alone, 147 national and communal gravity irrigation systems were completed and 42 projects are under construction, with an aggregate irrigable area of 157,000 hectares. For water supply systems, including spring development, there are 662 projects initiated with 221 completed and 441 underway, serving a total of about 520,000 people in different communities of the country. A total of 4,312 artesian well projects were initiated, out of which, 2,354 were actually completed and 1,958 are underway, including the construction of the now famous Liberty Wells. On port facilities, including national and municipal ports, 138 out of 347 projects were completed. A total of 3,336 building projects were programmed, excluding pre-fabricated school buildings, and 475 projects were completed; adding to these 1,068 pre-fabricated school buildings completed, there is a total of 1,543 buildings of all types completed. Accomplishment on mechanical and electrical installations consisting of power plants, electrical installations, air-conditioning systems, etc., covers the completion of 35 out of 40 projects. This, my friends, is a satisfactory record of action, which is enough incentive and starter for an accelerated pace of development.

This Administration is determined to ameliorate the plight of the greater bulk of our population by causing the benefits of social and civilized living to reach the barrios. We have to give them artesian wells, barrio schools, barrio roads, and the like. After all, the supply of our foods comes from the barrios; the bulk of agricultural labor, and oftentimes industrial labor, comes from the barrios; the bulk of our manpower is drawn from the barrios. In one word, the very root of our democracy is the barrio. If the welfare and condition of our barrio folks have long been neglected, certainly this Administration is determined to improve their lot. While such works that will be installed in the barrios as wells, schools, and roads may not be revenue-producing, these projects, when integrated with long-range projects that are revenue-producing, conceived to conform with a master plan for over-all benefits, will redound to an improved national economy. The effects of such a program, essentially for public works, will mean that there will be more jobs to ease our huge unemployment problem. Trades and establishments will hum with activity for even the normal needs of the program execution. Existing enterprises will be enlivened and new industries will spring up, especially for the development of local materials and resources. Engineering architectural and contracting firms, as well as commodity dealers and manufacturing plants, in support of the volume of public works activities, will be stimulated.

I call on you, the specialists on public works, to consider this as a new challenge to service and duty, after having reached the fiftieth anniversary of your organization. We are aware that henceforth, your goals are higher and therefore the attendant problems will be more complex and difficult. The record of your achievements for the last fifty years is a convincing testimonial that the Bureau of Public Works will reach its goals.

In closing, I wish to reiterate my congratulations to you all on this, your Golden Anniversary, and may you have more fruitful anniversaries in the years to come.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the Bureau of Public Works, read for the President by Executive Secretary Fred Ruiz Castro at the Winter Garden, Manila Hotel, Saturday afternoon, November 12, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(11) , 5581-5583.