Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the turn-over of farm implements to the Philippine Government under “Operation Philippines”

[Delivered at Pier 13, March 28, 1954]

I AM most happy to accept, in behalf of the Filipino people and government, this valuable, useful, timely gift given to us by the American people through the initiative and organizational efforts of the California and the Nevada Lions and our own Philippine Lions. Measured in terms of material value and usefulness, this donation will bring back to productive life thousands of hectares of idle land and will increase the yield of many more farms which today are growing only a fraction of what they should because of the lack of the necessary implements. This shipment, furthermore, could not have arrived at a better time, for you know that this administration has set among its foremost goals the improvement of our rural areas and the enhancement of the living standards of our farmers. The clothing, the equipment, the implements, and the monetary gift that have just been turned over to our government for distribution to our farming population will give us a big push towards the fulfillment of these objectives.

Over and above these material factors, this donation acquires even deeper and more far-reaching significance and timeliness from the spirit that has made it possible. The Filipinos need not be told how much unselfish toil, generosity, and enthusiasm on the part of the American people went into the realization of this project. The total amount of equipment and materials that were finally collected speaks for itself.

Furthermore, while “Operation Philippines” enjoyed the blessings and support of the Philippine and the American governments, it was by and large a popular, grass-roots project. It was carried on and brought to success by the free initiative of the American people, acting not under the compulsion of a government directive but under the tender impulse of their feelings of affection for the Filipinos. It was a spontaneous demonstration of one people’s solicitude and regard for another.

In other words, “Operation Philippines” is a cooperative project that could have been possible only between two peoples bound together by genuine ties of mutual respect and affection. I am glad that this ceremony demonstrates this fact anew to both our American friends and our own people at this time, because there are indications of a systematic campaign to undermine the relations between our peoples, to whip up antagonism between us.

I do not refer to the honest and sober discussions of our relationships with the United States which have been carried on lately by responsible elements and organs of opinion on both sides. The free and dispassionate discussion of issues, aimed at arriving at the truth and not at instigating rancor and bitterness, is a vital part of democracy. It is another thing altogether, however, to resort to deliberate falsehood and invention in an attempt to stir ill-will between our two peoples. This can be described only as sabotage, inspired—for all we know—by those who have adopted the strategy of trying to divide the free world to serve their own evil ends.

I have a particular case in mind. A few days ago, there appeared in the local press a news story, purpoting to come from Washington, which dealt with alleged American plans to barter revision of the trade act for favorable action on the bases question. The story immediately attracted suspicion because of its vague references and lack of source, despite the fact that it bore a Washington date-line. It was for this reason, by the way, that Malacañang declined to make any comment on the story after it had appeared despite numerous requests, because the veracity of the report was very much open to question.

Investigation by the manager of the bureau which put out the dispatch had revealed that the original transmission from Washington neither stated nor implied the offensive part of the report. It was a sheer and absolute fabrication by somebody in the agency’s Manila office, and its complete falsity has been exposed by an explicit denial in Washington.

I do not know how to explain this incident, except to offer the obvious fact that a deliberate attempt was made, either through grave irresponsibility or methodical design, to drive a wedge between the Philippines and the United States. What makes it more reprehensible is the fact that our own press, which I know to be generally fair and responsible and which reflects our own people’s genuine sense of friendship for the American people, was also made an innocent victim. I assume it vigorously condemns this assault upon its good faith.

This is the kind of propaganda which, while damaging in its own way, fortunately is overwhelmed by the massive reality of Philippine-American friendship as exemplified by such undertakings as “Operation Philippines.” It is timely, as I said, that this turn-over re-affirms this relationship anew. Our two governments will soon sit face to face in negotiations to resolve some important and vital issues. Already, as I have pointed out, a campaign has begun to shroud these talks with an air of hostility, to create mistrust and ill-feeling between our respective representatives. While I wish to alert our people to this malicious campaign, I know and I am confident that it will fail.

The good-will, the friendship, the affection existing between our two peoples, built up over the years through war and peace and through various strains and stresses and freshly re-enforced by this donation, will shape the environment in which these negotiations will be held. We will meet and discuss those issues as friends, respecting and trusting each other to find a common, just, and satisfactory point of agreement. Behind us will be a background of more than 50 years of warm comradeship, and ahead of us will be our determination to keep firm our partnership with each other against the new slavery that threatens the ideals and way of life we share in common. Permit me to recall at this point that a similar campaign to set us apart from the United States was waged in this country not so long ago, and that our people overwhelmingly repudiated it. The mandate given to us was to preserve and enhance our friendship.

I ask you, Mr. President, to convey to the people of the United States—and particularly to the Lions of California and Nevada—the gratitude and appreciation of the Filipino people and government for their kind generosity. For my own part, I am especially touched by their whole-hearted response to an appeal which I had the privilege of personally addressing to them two years ago. I wish also to commend the Philippine Lions for following through so well with their end of the project. I pledge to all of you that this administration will carry through just as well.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay’s speech at the turn-over of farm implements to the Philippine Government under “Operation Philippines” at Pier 13, Sunday, March 28, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(3) , 1012-1014.