Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of his acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa , by the National University

[Delivered on March 21, 1954]

PRESIDENT JHOCSON, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY AND GRADUATING CLASS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

PLEASE be assured of my deep and sincere appreciation of the honor you have conferred upon me. To me, it means much more than an academic honor. It means the esteem and confidence of a highly respected group of my countrymen, of the outstanding group of men and women who comprise the faculty and the student body of this great university. But the real significance of this occasion has even greater importance in a less personal sense.

Throughout the world there are universities which confer degrees, and there are many ways in which those degrees may be won. But there is something special about the winning of such honors when the individual who wins them follows the path which I have followed, the path from humblest beginnings to the highest office within the gift of my countrymen. There is something special about this way of winning academic honors and I hope you will remember it always. It could only happen in a democracy!

Last year there were strong hints in certain quarters that my scholastic achievement was not very great. I am ready to confess that I was never outstanding in oratory. But it seems that I was sufficiently eloquent in what I said at that time to convince the majority of our electorate that they should and could have a better government. Now I only hope that I can be convincing enough to rally all of our citizens in a great effort to build a better and stronger nation.

Yesterday, I described to a similar audience the economic program which this administration intends to follow in developing our human and material resources. I hope you will find an opportunity to study this program carefully. It is the product of some of our best minds, and it is based upon our finest national traditions of social justice. It is designed to give muscle and strength to the growth of our young nation.

Today, I would like to talk to you about another aspect of our growth. The economic program deals with the physical development of our nation. What I have to say now deals with the development of our national character.

Recently, this administration issued a statement of foreign policy, a statement which reflected the thinking of all elements of the government, and which has the concurrence of all partisan groups. In this foreign policy, it is stated that we stand for the development of a “healthy nationalism” as one of the defenses against aggressive communism. I have been asked to define what is meant by “healthy nationalism.”

In my mind, nations are very much like individuals, and the world is simply a large community in which nations live and work as neighbors. What I consider “healthy nationalism”, therefore, is to achieve as a nation the kind of character we admire and try to achieve as individuals; to maintain the standards of national behavior which our traditions call for in a good neighbor.

Let us consider our nation in that light. Let us take the date of our independence as the date we came of age. Before that, in our national childhood and youth, we were exposed to many influences, good and bad. We grew up in the care of foster parents. Sometimes the treatment we received was harsh; at other times it was affectionate and kind. Sometimes it was too stern and we rebelled; at other times it was too indulgent and we became spoiled.

The methods of our foster parents were not always the wisest, and there was always the gap of our different ancestry, the memory of which remained strong in our blood and our hearts. But with sincere effort on both sides, there came better mutual understanding and satisfaction. It was a test of our racial instinct to accept the best that our foster parents had to offer and to reject what was unsuited to our racial tradition. I believe that we came out very well in that test, even if we cannot claim complete success. Like any individual in the same circumstances, we acquired many of the virtues our national foster parents tried to pass on to us, but we also absorbed some of their faults.

From Spain we took and adapted for our use the great moral and spiritual force of Christianity. But we also were too much impressed with the importance of prestige and position, too ready to acquire attitudes of distate for labor or commerce.

America added to our native love of freedom a political philosophy that proclaimed the right of individuals and nations to freedom and self-determination, that called for tolerance and equality of opportunity for all men. Education, we were told, must not be for the privileged few, but must become available to all who wished to better themselves. America’s doctrine of the individual’s duty to the community found a sympathetic response in the ancient traditions of our race. Self-reliance, fair play, pride in our national heritage and our national heroes—these were all part of American teachings and did much to equip us for national maturity. But here again we did not escape some of the unwholesome influences of the relationship.

To many of us forget the courageous pioneers who built America, and took as models the unscrupulous promoters condemned by Americans themselves. Too many of us never got past Hollywood. Too many ignored the responsibility of maturity and continued to lean on paternal protection and generosity.

But these are all faults which are not uncommon to youth. If the basic individual is sound, they disappear with age and experience. Likewise, if the nation is sound, it becomes the good citizen and the good neighbor of the world.

To know what we want to be as a nation, we need only ask ourselves what we want to be as individuals.

We want health, strength, and skill to be a good provider and to enjoy the benefits of modern living. We want to express and broaden our cultural heritage, to develop and take pride in our racial talents. We want to live this life with Divine help and guidance, and we recognize the moral and spiritual obligations that merit such blessings.

To live this national life, to make the most of our talents and our virtues, we need security in our home and we must forge mutually beneficial relationships with friendly nations. We need sources of skills and materials we lack, and markets in which to exchange the fruits of our productive enterprise for what we desire from others. We need the leisure, the means, and the stimulation to broaden our cultural horizons.

In normal times, the needs are the rights of free men and free nations, but today we must win them and protect them by the quality of our citizenship in the world community and by the firm application to our everyday living of the principles and morality we claim as our own.

For the common security we need, we contribute what we can afford. Our force in Korea, our participation in the United Nations, working for freedom and against subversion or aggression, are examples.

No man, except one satisfied with a bare existence, can live alone. No nation desiring a rising standard of living for its people is economically independent. Skills, finances and markets—only with these can a nation’s own wealth be turned into a better life for its people. Where they are lacking, they must be sought by friendly cooperation.

In other words, the kind of “healthy nationalism” we want is that mature spirit of self-confidence which takes freedom as a right not to be challenged, a right to be part of the free world, not to withdraw from it.

As individuals and as a nation, we have faith in the democratic process and in government by law. For this reason, we believe that the law-abiding community of nations holds the key to world peace and security. And it is only in such atmosphere that true nationalism for small as well as large nations can survive against the attacks of those who claim that force, lies, and subversion are legitimate instruments of policy.

This conflict between law and violence makes the obligations of world citizenship today a grave responsibility. It calls for farsighted wisdom, for sound judgment; it calls for dignity and restraint, for a mature faith in our ability to protect our interests. In such national behavior lies the strength of free world unity and the survival of nationalism itself.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay on the occasion of his acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa , by the National University, Sunday afternoon, March 21, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(3) , 1007-1010.