Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the commemoration ceremony of the Leyte landing

[Released on October 20, 1956]

MY FRIENDS:

I WOULD like to recapture for you today the suspense, the anxious waiting, the seemingly endless days of expectancy and anticipation as we stood in our homes, out in the jungles, in our hideouts, or out on patrol in our towns and barrios during World War II, all of us hoping against hope that the American Forces of Liberation would come at last to end for our people the long night of enemy occupation. To do this, however, is beyond my powers of description.

It is difficult indeed to recapture those days of September and October of 1944. We had gone through physical and spiritual torments for more than three years. We were undaunted, but we were also nearing the end of our rope. Those last days of October when hope grew fainter every day—they seem so dim and distant now. The sufferings and hardships we stoutly bore, all the sacrifices we had undergone, all the terrible ordeal of zonas , Fort Santiago, torture, executions—they are today but a memory reminding us of the valor and vitality of our nation, a nation that refused to be enslaved. The scars of those days we proudly bear as symbols of undying loyalty to a cause to which our people had been dedicated from Mactan to Tirad Pass to Bataan, the cause of freedom.

But we can and do remember, as we gather today, the unrestrained rejoicing and jubilation when the news reached us through our hidden radios that General Douglas MacArthur and his troops had landed here on Red Beach. That is engraved in our minds, and it will be unforgettable as long as we live. America had returned, proving that her word was her bond. Poorly prepared for the first surprise attack and lacking nearby facilities where they might rally and recover initiative, America’s armed forces were rolled back to the very mainland. And in those days before the jet bomber and flying boxcars the road back was long and difficult. To sustain us during that long bloody struggle, we had only our own determination to resist enslavement and America’s promise to return.

During the last dark days prior to the landing here on Red Beach, there was doubt in many a heart that America would redeem its promise to come back. Enemy propagandists worked hard to discredit that promise. We heard the whispered voices of those who sought to kill the faith of our fighting men by poisoning them with the insinuation that the Americans were interested only in liberating those of Europe but not the peoples of Asia, who cannot claim with them a common racial origin.

But America returned, and another chapter in Philippine−American relations was written, contrary to the dire prophecies of the enemy. The Leyte landing marked the unbroken continuity in the history of two peoples destined to set a new pattern of East−West cooperation in the evolution of humanity towards its goal of brotherhood and peace. History tells us now what we did not know then: That within the American military councils a question debated was whether to by-pass the Philippines for military expediency or honor the moral commitment to return. The moral position won out. And America returned triumphantly, not only because it had the might and the power and the will to redeem its promise, but also because—and this must not be forgotten and it must be underscored—because the Filipino guerrillas for three years continued fighting the enemy in a nationwide resistance movement that for resourcefulness, courage, heroism, and devotion to the cause of freedom will rank as among the foremost in the history of World War II, and also because we had a civilian population that refused to be discouraged, intimidated, or terrorized, and which, in spite of all the false promises of the enemy, did not bend its knee to the invader.

May I, at this juncture, pay tribute to our Commonwealth Government-in-Exile, under the leadership of those two great statemen, Manuel L. Quezon and Sergio Osmeña. Their inspiration and guidance during those dark days were invaluable to us because with their determination and patriotism they kept the spark of freedom aflame in our hearts. Too little credit has been given them for their share in our liberation. It is meet and proper that today we should honor them also as we commemorate this historic occasion.

President Quezon did not live to see the defeat of the enemy, but we know how, sick and bedridden in Washington, Florida, or Saranac, he ceaselessly fought for us that we might see the glory of our liberation. President Osmeña landed here with the American Forces, undergoing all the hardships that the troops underwent, and it was his courage and statesmanship that helped to steer us through those difficult and turbulent initial days of reestablishing our civil government. It is our great privilege that Don Sergio should grace this occasion today with his presence. All honor to these two great leaders who have earned the eternal gratitude of our people.

Twelve years have lapsed since that historic landing. Again, true to its promise, America proclaimed our independence on July 4, 1946. There were doubts, too, that such an act of relinquishing its sovereignty over our country would ever take place. But it did take place, and we achieved our freedom under the aegis of the United States. But, as we took our first steps as an independent nation, a new danger arose—the danger of Communism. We realized the threat that it was (and still is) to our newly won freedom, and we fought it with all we had. Again our people rose as one man, to uphold the values that it had learned to cherish, in the democratic way of life. The fight continues in many insidious forms, and we should ever be on the alert and never allow the weakening of our defenses against infiltration or subversion, which we know continue despite temporary changes in tactics, which only tend to deceive and mislead.

We have made our choice. We believe in an Almighty that has endowed us with a soul, and we reject the materialistic interpretation of the human individual as merely a creature and servant of an all-powerful state. We have taken our stand for democracy and have aligned ourselves with the free world and the United States as our friends and allies, in whose promises we know we can trust. We will continue to insist with firmness and dignity on our rights of sovereignty, confident that the American people will support us in asserting such sacred rights, since they themselves know by experience that eternal vigilance is not only the price, but the armor of liberty.

On this day, therefore, of liberation, we rededicate ourselves to the democratic ideals, which we share with all freedom-loving peoples, and at the same time pledge ourselves to continue fighting to maintain inviolate our sovereign rights as a free people. Only by insisting on proper respect for our independence and passion for freedom can we do honor to that way of life which we have chosen in preference to an ideology that spurns human dignity and ignores God.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay at the commemoration ceremony of the Leyte landing. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(14) , 6131-6133.