Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the graduates of the Philippine Military Academy

[Delivered in Baguio, March 15, 1954]

Mr. SUPERINTENDENT, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, MEMBERS OF THE GRADUATING CLASS:

THOSE who have been conferred their commissions today have just passed an exacting course in leadership. Their physical, mental, and moral qualifications to assume command have been tested and found adequate. As we congratulate them, we also pray that the qualities which have sustained them through the rigorous regime of this academy will develop and mature under the sharper challenges of the field, especially of combat. I have every confidence that the training they have received here from the able and competent faculty of this academy will not fail them in the more difficult tests ahead.

For many years now, the Philippine Military Academy has been the principal source of professional officer material for our army. From this institution have come the men who occupy today some of the highest and most important commands and positions in our military establishment. Year after year in the future, commencement exercises such as this one will continue to augment and replenish the supply of professionally-trained officers for our army.

The nature and quality of an organization are determined to a large extent by the type and manner of men who lead it. To know what kind of an army we have, we must find out what manner of men are the officers who command it.

What kind of training do they receive here at this academy? What is its orientation? What are the traditions that influence and mould the character, the outlook, the perspective of the men who prepare here for military leadership?

The curriculum of this institution is largely concerned, of course, with the art and science of soldiery. Students are trained in the basic skills of their profession, and are imbued with those habits and qualities of character which are so essential to a successful soldier’s career. These are courage, loyalty, discipline, and sound judgment.

This is not to say, however, that the education they receive is one-sided, exaggerating the specialized skills of soldiery at the expense and sacrifice of a well-rounded education. I feel that this academy can justly take pride in the achievement that it turns out not merely competent soldiers, but educated men.

More important, however, than the substance and contents of the training that our future officers obtain here is its basic orientation. What are the various aspects of this orientation? While this academy trains its students for a soldier’s career, it also teaches them to accept and recognize the superiority of civilian over military authority in our system of government. While it drills them in the Manual of War, it takes even greater pains and effort to indoctrinate them in principles and substance of our Constitution. It affirms the rule of law and justifies the use of arms and force only when it is sanctioned by law.

In brief, the orientation of their education and training is democratic. Similarly, the traditions that have clustered around this institution and our military organization have reflected only the democratic spirit of our way of life. I do not know of any instance in the history of our military when men in uniform plotted or attempted to overthrow civilian authority. One will search our history-books vainly for a tradition of military usurpation of authority.

The sum of all these facts, my friends, is that our officers—and through them our soldiers—are trained and indoctrinated according to the fundamental democratic concept of the supremacy of civilian authority. They are Filipinos first, soldiers second, owing loyalty first to the Constitution and only secondly to the Manual of War. They are raised and steeped in the ethics of a democratic citizen’s army, not in the arrogant traditions of an all-powerful elite corps.

In these premises, I find it difficult to understand the provocation and justification of some attempts to whip up fear and mistrust of the armed forces. I regret that in some instances they have been maligned and smeared unjustly, and situations have been exaggerated to undermine the people’s faith in them. I deeply resent the insinuations that they are plotting at every turn to seize the government and deliver it to some vague and indefinite mastermind or junta.

I do not believe the people have forgotten how our armed forces have performed in the last two elections. They remember how desperately the civilian authorities at the time tried to use the armed forces to subvert their will and make a mockery of the democratic process of the ballot. The people know—and I certainly know from personal experience—how the armed forces resisted, resisted heroically, in order to uphold and preserve that democratic way of life which, their critics of today allege, is in danger of extinction at their own hands. I cannot follow the logic whereby an organization which had staunchly refused to be an instrument for the perpetuation of a virtual coup d’ etat through the subversion of the electoral process should now be watched for signs of plotting the very thing it had spurned.

Since the change of administration, I have enlisted the services and assistance of both resigned and active officers of the armed forces in civilian functions. I do not know of any valid objections that could be raised against the employment of resigned or retired officers in civilian offices, unless we have reached the point where military service is now considered to have branded a man with a stigma, worse than a prison record, that disqualifies him from honest work and the opportunity to serve his country in a civilian capacity.

As to the few active officers whom I have designated to undertake civilian functions on detached service, I have time and again explain the reasons for this situation. In some cases, I have needed men of my absolute confidence to undertake delicate missions of investigation and cleaning up, and in these tasks I have chosen officers who have worked with me in the Department of National Defense as often as I have picked civilians who have earned my complete trust in other fields of activity. In other cases, specialized skills and technical know-how were required for quick and efficient results, and again I have drawn on army officers whom I knew possessed the necessary qualifications. In still other instances, the new administration came upon offices so deeply entrenched in dishonesty and corruption that only the most ruthless, uncompromising military kind of discipline could redeem them from the mire and restore them to gainful usefulness to our people.

Finally, regarding the assignment of the army’s engineer teams to urgent construction projects in the provinces, I wish to say that I had promised our people during the campaign immediate relief and services upon a change of administration, and I mean to keep these promises by using the instruments readily at hand until the civilian agencies normally responsible for such functions have roused themselves out of the lethargy and stupor of the past. I want the army to pace them and challenge their pride, to infect them with its own zeal and efficiency.

But these arrangements, I wish to reiterate anew, are temporary in nature, brought on by the peculiar and incredibly chaotic conditions which the new administration encountered upon its assumption of office. In due time, I intend to withdraw many of these officers and armed forces units out of their temporary duties and back to their normal pursuits, although I will never hesitate in the future to keep soliciting the services of particular individual officers and men in the armed forces where particular situations may clearly demand their employment in other capacities for the sake of the country.

It is this temporary expedient which I had in mind when I said a while back that situations were being exaggerated to undermine public faith and confidence in our armed forces. From the assignment of a few officers in civilian positions, the fantastic suspicion has been broached that the army was taking over key offices in preparation for a coup d’ etat . Being plotted, I wonder, by whom, and for whose benefit? Certainly not for the benefit of the duly elected, duly constituted President of the Republic, for that does not make any sense, and certainly not for the benefit of the highest officers of our army, for I know them to be completely loyal and patriotic Filipinos.

I feel compelled to urge more restraint, more sobriety, and greater understanding in our attitudes towards the armed forces. I am not trying to discourage honest and legitimate criticism of our military establishment. This I invite, for it is only under the spur of legitimate criticism that an organization is goaded to keep itself constantly primed for self-improvement and reform. Nor am I asking our people to relax their vigilance over the possibilities of abuse and excesses by our armed forces, for I fully subscribe to the precept that eternal vigilance is the price of liberty. But let us not mistake wild and fantastic suspicions for vigilance, or smear tactics for honest criticism.

Our armed forces will continue to play an increasingly important role in our national life. We have yet to exterminate the last vestiges of Communist dissidence in our land. There is much construction and development work that awaits eager and efficient hands and machines.

To be able to meet these challenges to the best of their ability, the armed forces need encouragement, not unfair and destructive criticism; support, not hostility. I know that they are no less eager than the rest of our people to nurse to full flower the promise of a free and prosperous life that they have helped bring to our threshold through their steadfast loyalty to democratic ways and principles both on the fields of combat and in the polling-booths of peace.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay’s speech delivered before the graduates of the Philippine Military Academy in Baguio, Monday morning, March 15, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(3) , 996-999.