Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Manila Lions Club

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, August 27, 1955]

I AM happy to be with you tonight.

You have conferred a new honor on Governor Carlos Rivilla, an eminent Filipino who is also a distinguished world citizen.

This is indeed a mark of your Club. It combines a healthy nationalism with sound internationalism. In today’s world, where free nations are interdependent, where they can live and prosper only by jointly defending their freedom and jointly promoting their common welfare, this attitude should be fostered.

I am glad to be here for another reason. This Club is dedicated to constructive work for the betterment of human life in the community, in the nation, and in the world as a whole. You perform humanitarian service without discrimination and regardless of race, nationality, and political belief. You place the common good above every other consideration. To be with you is to be reminded that in the midst of tensions and conflicts, between nations and within nations, a great deal of quiet, unselfish, constructive work is going on.

Here in our own country, the good work of organizations like your own is being pursued without let-up, regardless of the political distractions experienced from time to time even in the best of working democracies. I take comfort in the fact that all over our country, devoted individuals and groups, in and out of the Government, are tirelessly helping our people to achieve that better life which they desire and to which they are entitled.

In our barrios and towns, the work of community development is going on without let-up, thanks to the devotion of so many of our people. Most of them are unknown. They are working for the common good without hope or desire for recognition or reward.

These thoughts should give all of us courage and hope on this, the eve of the political observance of our National Heroes Day. I have been in almost every corner of our country. I know our people. And I can say truly that the sacrifice of our heroes has not been in vain; that the teachings of Rizal, Bonifacio, Mabini, and other national heroes have taken root; that we have today many unsung heroes working quietly to make this land a better place to live in for ourselves and for our children.

To be with you this evening is also to be reminded that we are living in a world that is getting smaller day by day. It is to realize anew that in this atomic age no free nation can live and prosper in isolation. Safety and well-being lie in peaceful cooperation with other free nations, not in selfish unconcern for the welfare of others or in foolish disregard of the dangers of isolation in a hostile world

You are part of a great international organization. I am reminded of this fact as I stand before you. And I am reminded also that, like your local Lions unit, our country is not alone in meeting its problems, but can rely on generous, unselfish assistance from friends and allies who in turn enjoy our friendship and cooperation.

We believe in, and we zealously practice self-help. And because we do help ourselves to the limit of our capacity, we can accept in good faith and with good conscience the assistance of our allies and friends in the free world.

We in the Philippines are part of a great association of free nations. Our security and our prosperity lie in maintaining our close ties with the free world, not in the path of isolationism which someone would have us follow.

This is the thought that I should like to leave with you this evening. We are facing problems of national security, problems of national welfare, problems of national survival. We owe it to our national heroes, to ourselves, to our prosperity, to do everything humanly possible—by our own efforts and jointly with other free nations—to attack these problems with courage, with national self-confidence, and with determination.

Let us live up to the standards of our national heroes whose memories we honor tomorrow. For them there was no compromise with freedom. They did not wait to see which side would win. They stood for freedom and fought for freedom—and died for freedom. Let it never be said that they were the last Filipino heroes.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech before the Manila Lions Club, Saturday night, August 27, 1955, at the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (9) , 4498-4499.