Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Ft. McKinley trainees graduation ceremonies

[Delivered on December 19, 1955]

I am happy and proud to witness the closing phase of your military training today. As trainees drafted from civilian life to fulfill a democratic obligation to the state, you have indeed done your job well. With you as the spearhead of our scheme of national defense, we not only gain confidence in our security but also the reassurance that the manpower and willpower of that defense rests securely in the hands of the citizenry. In our pattern of popular democracy, this is as it should be. By willingly accepting the obligation to serve the colors, you have added fresh vigor to our concept of freedom and you have contributed substantially to the peace and safety of our republic at a time of great uncertainty in this part of the world.

It was an inspiring sight to watch your regimental field exercises under simulated combat conditions. Knowing that during your months of training you had to cope with many limitations because of our need to economize, it was imperative to note that your aggressiveness and high morale more than compensated for those limitations. This fact is encouraging because, during the last war, at Bataan and in many a resistance group, survival depended upon the ability to improvise.

But as I watched you demonstrate the results of training, discipline, and team-work on these mock fields of battle, I had a happier vision. I saw these fields and others like them in the Visayas and Mindanao as the rich and beautiful heritage of our native land, as the source of the abundance we are trying to achieve for each and every one of our citizens. And I saw you returning to those lands with a new outlook.

Many of the arts of war can be equally effective as arts of peace. From this experience you will return to civilian life and your homes with a new understanding of what can be accomplished through training, through organization, team-work, and discipline. You can apply these lessons to the war we are fighting on our second front, the war we fight daily and hourly in every corner of our land, the war against poverty and ignorance. You, members of our citizens army, can assure us of victory on both fronts.

In this war on two fronts, it is heartening to know that we do not fight alone. At our side on both fronts we find our traditional American friends and allies. Officers and men of the United States Military Assistance group have worked with us and have helped us materially in this task of building up the major services of our armed forces. Other agencies of the United States Government are aligned with us on the social and economic front. These friends and allies do not ask us to express gratitude for their help. They are content when we show that we have made the best possible use of their assistance, when we demonstrate that continued and expanded assistance is effectively employed in strengthening our nation as a firm anchor in the lifeline of the free world.

I ask you to give thought to these things when you return to your homes and communities. I call upon you to share the experience you have gained from these months of hard but rewarding work with your fellow countrymen. Show your neighbors that honest toil and a strong will can liberate them from the captivity of ignorance and property. Show them that your six months of trainee instruction served only as a beginning, not as the end, of your service to the country. Let them learn from you that service in the cause of freedom must be a continuous and sustained effort, but that such service carries its own rich reward. The discipline you learned in the ranks of the Army might well become the essence of national discipline, the discipline of hard, honest toil for the prosperity and dignity of each individual Filipino.

The division flag which I have just entrusted to your hands has a deep and inspiring symbolism which you would do well to carry always in your heart. The red stands for the warm blood of our heroes who gave their lives for things dearer than life itself; its white is the salt of toil and the tears of martyrs; in its blue is the tint of the skies and the seas of your beautiful country. Guard it at all times, and guard it well, that it may never be trampled by tyrants or aggressors.

Officers and men of the Spearhead division, I salute you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at Ft. McKinley trainees graduation ceremonies delivered Monday morning, December 19, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(12) , 6107-6108.