Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the launching of the National Fund and Educational Drive of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society

[Delivered at the Malacañang Social Hall, August 18, 1955]

FELLOW-COUNTRYMEN:

ON this day, the eve of the late President Quezon’s birthday anniversary, we are again gathered here to launch formally the 1955 Anti-Tuberculosis Educational and Fund Campaign. No tribute to the memory of that illustrious stateman and revered patriot can be more eloquent than our re-dedication to one objective to which, in life, he had given so much—the eventual eradication of tuberculosis. Today, that same enemy, more vicious than ever, continues to cause misery, suffering, and death among our people.

We can not be truly wealthy unless we are healthy. We can not achieve real prosperity until we can successfully halt the ravages of the White Plague on our population. Tuberculosis which accounts for 12 per cent of all death among Filipinos continues to hamper our economic development. It depletes our manpower by 30,000 lives each year. Furthermore, it imposes on our country an economic burden which, expressed in terms of the sum total loss in life-capital through premature death from the disease, loss of productive power due to disability during the following illness, and the funds spent in the care and treatment of cases—total to the staggering amount of P500,000,000 every year.

My friends, to allow 30,000 persons to die, and P500 million go to waste every year from just one single disease, tuberculosis— which can be prevented and cured —is indeed insufferable for even the strongest and richest country in the world to bear. This is the difficult problem which tuberculosis poses before us.

Fortunately, during the past 45 years the Philippine Tuberculosis Society has valiantly waged a war against this disease in close collaboration with the government health agencies. But while much has been achieved much more remains to be done. The campaign must be extended to the remotest barrio and intensified with unremitting vigor until every Filipino home is freed from the fear of tuberculosis.

We cannot win this grim struggle against tuberculosis without hard work by community members, skill and energy of public health leaders, a well-informed and cooperative public, and adequate funds. The most urgent of these factors is adequate funds without which the entire structure of any tuberculosis control program will collapse.

I am, therefore, appealing to the magnanimity of every citizen and every resident of this country, regardless of political loyalty, color, or creed to give, and give abundantly to the 1955 anti-tuberculosis educational and fund drive which the Philippine Tuberculosis Society is authorized to conduct from August 19 to September 30. I am making this urgent appeal to every man, woman, and child, fully convinced of the worthiness of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society’s humanitarian cause.

I now declare the 1955 anti-tuberculosis educational and fund drive formally open. As a firm believer in the crusade against the White Plague, I also avail myself of the honor of handing my personal contribution to this campaign, happy in the thought that by this I am performing a pleasant duty of good citizenship.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the launching of the National Fund and Educational Drive of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society at the Malacañang Social Hall, August 18, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (8) , 3989-3990.