Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the Feminist Movement in the Philippines

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, June 19, 1955]

MY FRIENDS:

WHENEVER a couple celebrates a silver or golden wedding anniversary, you will always find the male partner claiming more than his share of credit for the enduring partnership. You will hear him say that it was his patience, his tolerance, his kindness, his fortitude that steered the marriage through the shoals and rocks of marital life, to the calm harbor of a happy jubilee. The wife receives, at best, some vague citation for having “inspired” him to these grand achievements.

Tonight, on this golden jubilee of the feminist movement in the Philippines, I am sorely tempted to take this same selfish line and claim, for the men of this country, far more credit than they deserve for the amazing advances that have been made by the women in enhancing their social, economic, and political situation. It seems so easy to say that, after all these blessings were dispensed by the men who ruled this country exclusively until the grant of suffrage to the women in the late thirties.

But this would be a most superficial and unjust verdict on the feminist movement of the past half-century. The truth shines bright and clear underneath. The truth is that it was your patience, your courage, your fortitude, your unflagging determination that have won for yourselves the victories that you celebrate today, and it is my pleasure and privilege to salute you on this happy occasion.

The history of the feminist movement in the Philippines tells an inspiring story of steadfast dedication to a cause. In the beginning, its aims were modest and non-political: the Associación Feminista Filipina , which was the pioneer feminist organization in the country, hoped to encourage the women to take advantage of the new educational opportunities offered by the Americans and to train them in the social services. As the people’s nationalistic aspirations continued to burn ever more fiercely, however, it was inevitable that the women should also turn their thoughts and attention to political action. They demanded equal rights with the men in the field of politics and government, starting with the right to vote.

The struggle for this and other goals was tedious and difficult. Deep-seated prejudices and traditional taboos had to be met and overcome. But the women, through patience, fortitude, courage, and competence, proved themselves equal to every new challenge. They scored their initial achievements in social work: prison reforms, care of the infirm and the insane, juvenile delinquency prevention, beatification projects. They blazed the trial for activities and programs now taken for granted in our national life: literacy campaigns and adult education, puericulture centers, women and child labor reforms, maternity benefits, the advancement of the cause of teachers.

But it was in the sphere of political action where the feminist movement scored its most significant gains. One of its brightest hours was that day in 1937 when nearly half a million women, fired to zealous action by suffragette leaders many of whom are with us tonight, won in a plebiscite the precious right to vote and hold office for all qualified women of the Philippines. You may justly be proud of what you have done with this right and its attendant responsibilities ever since. Women have held the highest offices with distinction and competence. Our women voters now number almost as many as the men, and they certainly need not yield to the men in earnestness of purpose with which they take their political responsibilities. There is not the slightest doubt that the women will continue to grow as a potent political force in this country. I for one do not hesitate to give them major credit for the victory of the cause and principles which we espoused in the last elections,

The Filipino woman is today the most advanced woman in this part of the world, socially, economically, and politically. There is as much as this to celebrate tonight. All of you, who have done so much for so long to make this possible, may rightly feel proud and gratified.

I ask you to remember that all this could have been gained and achieved only in a free society. In a police state, the iron rule is to restrict and contract, not to expand the frontiers of freedom. The less rights and powers are ceded to the citizenry, the less danger there is that those in power may be overthrown. You have reached the eminence of free and dignified citizens because you had staked your claims for civil and political rights in the favorable climate of a free society. It is your duty, therefore, both to the past and to your future to see to it that our free institutions are preserved and strengthened against whatever threat, that you may continue in the tranquil exercise and enjoyment of those hard-won rights.

Aside from this, I address to you another bigger challenge yet. Your successes, following the pattern of events of the past half-century in our country, have been felt chiefly in the cities and urban centers. They have hardly caused a ripple in the rural areas, where so many of our women continue to live in conditions of ignorance and primitive living not far removed from those which had prevailed all over when you began the good fight to reform them fifty years ago.

I ask you to direct your efforts and extend your assistance to the women in the rural areas. I know that you can effectively supplement and reenforce the administration’s efforts in this field. You can help and instruct them in so many activities—in the proper care and education of children, in healthful living, in cottage industries, in literacy campaigns, in increasing the production of their farms, in political action. You can guide them to new heights of social, political, and economic achievement.

It is my firm belief that the final test of whether we shall have succeeded or failed will depend ultimately on how well or badly we had fared in bringing progress to the vast majority of our people who live in the farms and barrios. I ask you to accept this same standard by which to measure your works and progress henceforth. Judging by the record of the past fifty years, I have no doubt that your performance on this new mission shall be as richly hailed and applauded fifty years hence.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the Feminist Movement in the Philippines, delivered Sunday evening at the Manila Hotel, June 19, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (6) , 2850-2852.