Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Installation of Officers of the Jaycees

[Released on July 4, 1954]

MR. PRESIDENT, DISTINGUISHED JAYCEES, MY COUNTRYMEN:

I AM happy to have for an audience on this anniversary of our Independence this distinguished body of young Filipinos. For you who are young, especially for you who are leaders among the young, independence is not just a glory achieved but a challenge to face for many years to come.

I can almost hear you say: “That is right. Now that we have independence, what shall we do with it?”

This is what I would like to discuss with you this evening.

There are several things we can do with our independence. We can make it strong, we can make it economically real, we can make it politically mature. We have the years ahead to do these things soberly and thoroughly. But it seems to me that there is one pressing thing that we must do about our independence today. We must defend it.

Defend it from whom?

There was a time when the task of Philippine statesmen was not the defense of independence—but the winning of independence. The great historical names that we now venerate are those of the thinkers, the leaders, and the martyrs of a movement whose objective was clear—the political emancipation of our country. To achieve this objective, they had to fight oppression, colonialism, and misunderstanding by men from other lands.

Now these enemies have been conquered, and independence is ours. It is now our task to defend it.

We can not defend this independence by closing our eyes to the realities around and within our shores, out of fear of arousing the real assailant.

There is no mistaking who this assailant is. He is the Communist.

From the outside, the world of the Communist now threatens to encircle us. From the inside, the Communist has for years been up in arms against the sovereignty of our people.

The Communist threatens our very civilization—the substance to which our independence gives form. His objective is the destruction of our God and our civilization. In their place he seeks to establish a Godless dictatorship by all means available—by deceit, by infiltration, by open aggression. He is all over the earth, threatening the fundamental rights of man, destroying liberty wherever it is found, trampling on national independence in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, seeking to rule the world.

The threat of Communist enslavement is, in other words, a total and worldwide threat. It is for this reason that, on our part, we have sought to strengthen the bonds of alliance with other free peoples courageously fighting and resisting this threat. Only recently, we have concluded arrangements with the United States for the organization of a joint council that will keep a constant check on our security requirements, to help us maintain a maximum level of preparedness for any eventuality. In principle, we are also in favor of any collective security arrangement that would strenghten our hand against this menace, provided such an arrangement does not frustrate the legitimate aspirations to freedom of other Asian peoples.

It would be fatal for us to entertain the fear that such positive alliances might “provoke” the Communist. This fear is based on the suicidal belief that the Communist is merely a peaceful reformer, moved to violence only when vexed beyond patience.

That is not the Communist we know in this country. We know personally the armed Communist, who, without provocation, murders his own countrymen to achieve his ends. We know personally the Communist propagandist, who, without provocation, lies and rants to confuse his own people. We know personally the Communist infiltrator, who, without provocation, commits the subtle act of treason by worming his way into key positions in our government in order to disrupt it, and render it ripe for seizure.

Yes, the Communist that we know needs no provocation. He is already within our shores, fighting us with guns, lies, and deceit. And so, along with the strengthening of our external chain of defense, together with free countries, we must strengthen our internal defenses. Our gallant armed forces are routing the Communist armed attack. But now, it seems, the enemy would like to revitalize his revolution by turning to deceit and infiltration. Against this new and perhaps even more dangerous attack, we must alert all, our people.

But it is not enough to alert our people. We must fortify them spiritually, physically, and mentally. We must confirm their faith in God, build up their confidence in the work-ability and superiority of the democratic process.

Ultimately then, the success of our internal defenses depends on the reaction of the common man. If he does not lose his faith, if he is not forced to look to other systems because of our failure to improve his lot, then our defenses are impregnable and our cause is won.

In the end, the real defender of our independence is the common man. We need only show him that it is worth defending.

Let us show him that it is worth defending.

You have a splendid organization, with young, intelligent, and energetic members in every part of our country. Ask them to help the common man—to give him just wages, to recognize his basic rights, to treat him fairly always, to assist him in his climb to the level of the dignity of man.

For my part, on this day of independence, I renew my pledge to the people of our country that my energies shall be devoted to the upliftment of the lot of our common man and the confirming of his belief in the democratic ideal. I can think of no better contribution to make to the defense of our independence.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Magsaysay at the Installation of Officers of the Jaycees. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(7) , 3021-3023.