Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On “Bataan Day”

[Delivered on April 9, 1954]

DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

TWELVE years ago, the armed forces radio on Corregidor, known as the Voice of Freedom, broadcast its last bitter message to the world.

It said: “Bataan has fallen.”

Many have asked since, “Why should we commemorate a defeat? Why should we keep alive the painful memory of Bataan?”

Part of the answer to these questions was given by the Voice of Freedom on that same fateful broadcast.

We recall those words now. “What sustained the men of Bataan through these months of incessant battle,”—said the message—”was a force that was more than physical. It was the force of an unconquerable faith—something in the heart and soul that physical hardship and adversity could not destroy . . . . The spirit that made Bataan stand cannot fall.”

It is this spirit of fortitude, endurance, and faith that we commemorate when we observe the fall of Bataan.

In this sense, Bataan is one of the great triumphs of man. It has become a symbol of the power of the human spirit to rise above adversity, a symbol of its capacity to survive against the dark forces which seek its destruction.

This priceless spirit was what impelled our American friends and allies to fight their way back, through a hundred outposts of heroism, across the Pacific. And it was also this spirit which enabled our own people to stay in the hills and mount an increasingly victorious battle against the powerful enemy.

But if Bataan has been a triumph, it has also taught—in the years since—a very stern lesson. And this is, that it would be foolish—and perhaps fatal—to remain complacent against our enemies, potential and actual.

Three months ago, we said that our first and principal concern was the security of the nation. Nothing has changed in our situation since then. The same urgency prevails. If we repeat this now, it is only to emphasize the necessity for adequate solutions as it lies in our power to make them.

We must, therefore, exert all our efforts towards the strengthening of our defenses. It is my grave responsibility, as chief executive, to see to it that the state is kept secure against all internal and external threats. I mean to discharge this responsibility with energy and decision.

The fresh outbreak of Communist activity in neighboring countries underscores the fact that this peril—far from lessening—has been creeping forward at a steady pace.

Nor should the apparent inactivity of the Communists within our own borders fool us. It is true that we have crushed the striking power of the Huk armies as a military force. But their power to corrupt the mind remains. The Huks, in short, have ceased to be a force without ever ceasing to be a threat.

We stress this struggle for internal and external security because it is undeniably a part of the trust we have inherited from the defenders of Bataan.

The men whose graves lie on Mount Samat died to maintain the integrity of our frontiers and in this way preserve for us and our descendants the continued blessings of the democratic way of life which we have chosen for ourselves.

In the fight against Communism, we have found ourselves ranged beside a nation whose sons—together with ours—died on this same spot twelve years ago.

We are happy to think that by that single act of common sacrifice, America and the Philippines have forged a further link in a relationship already unique in the history of nations.

This occasion—and the memories it evokes of a great joint undertaking—attests to the strength of the traditional friendship between our two peoples. It is our hope that in the years to come, the American and the Filipino people will continue to face their common problems and common perils in the same spirit of loyalty to democratic ideals which guided the men of Bataan.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay’s “Bataan Day” speech, April 9, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(4) , 1538-1539.