Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines During Loyalty Day

[Delivered at Camp Murphy, July 3, 1965]

GENERAL VARGAS, MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL STAFF, OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES:

EVERY year at this time the officers and men of the Armed Forces gather together to renew their pledge of loyalty to the Republic and to their commander-in-chief.

It is always a privilege to accept this renewal of your solemn pledge.

It is particularly a privilege to receive the loyalty of men whose love for their country finds its limits only in death.

There is one word that has no place in this history of our armed forces—compromise. It is so with the Filipino soldier today as it has always been with every Filipino in history who has taken up arms either to gain liberty or to defend it.

There are forces at work in the world today which would like to dilute your loyalty to the cause of freedom and justice with the spirit of compromise. There can only be one result should their campaign succeed—the disaster of war and the possible conquest of free lands by Communist arms. If it is necessary that our people should be warned and protected against this spirit of compromise, it is all the more urgent that you yourselves, who shall be called upon to five up to your pledge of dying for your country if that disaster should come, steel your minds against ‘he false attractions of that campaign.

I am glad to note that the officers and men of our armed forces are conditioned to fight for liberty not only physically but also mentally and spiritually. Those few among our people who might be entertaining in their minds and hearts the seductive ideas of compromise that others would have us accept, should find a strengthening of their faith in the shining example of your uncompromising loyalty.

There is one more quality of the loyalty of the Filipino soldier which should be a source of pride and guidance for our people. It is that your loyalty, given substance by the knowledge of the value and meaning of those liberties and the institutions which you are pledged to defend, moves you to act in then defense forthrightly and without hesitation. Our history of a long but successful struggle for freedom, our experience in substantial self-government even before attaining our complete emancipation, these things have been more than sufficient to give our people a permanent tradition by which we are aware of the concrete meaning and of the responsibilities of nationhood. Today we are faced with problems of external and internal defense, and internal economic reconstruction. It is not the time to fight the battles of the past or revive questions already settled either by the blood of our soldiers or by the successful persuasion of our statesmen. It is the time to face the present, to be ready against the new enemies of our freedom and to approach, with both realism and foresight, the problems of our own time.

All this is why the whole nation should be grateful for the example of your loyalty. In the name of our people, in the name of liberty and justice not only for ourselves but for all mankind, I accept with pride your solemn renewal of fidelity to the cause of freedom.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay during the Loyalty Day. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(7) , 3548-3549.