Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On Labor Day

[Delivered on May 1, 1956]

ON this day dedicated to the working men and women of our nation, it is a pleasure to greet you and congratulate you on your accomplishments and progress during the past year. In these greetings and congratulations I am sure that I speak for all our fellow countrymen, for the nation is only as strong and happy as those who work to give it strength and substance.

Labor during the past year has made great progress, greater indeed than in any similar period of our history. I am proud that this Administration has taken part in, and contributed to, that progress.

I grew up as a worker and I know the problems of the humblest workingman. It seems to me I can say honestly that I have brought to the administration of government the perspective of the worker. I ran for election two and a half years ago on a platform for the welfare of the common man. On this Labor Day, I wish to recommit myself and my Administration to that goal.

Under this Administration we have seen a tremendous expansion in the field of labor organization, and we have seen the healthy development within those organizations of the process of democratic and effective collective bargaining. Thanks to this democratic instrument of labor management relations, many of our workers now enjoy benefits which, until very recently, were known only in the most advanced industrial countries. In practically every recent labor-management contract such benefits as paid vacations, paid sick leave and maternity leave, job security, and substantial increases well above the minimum wage have become commonplace.

While the major credit for this accomplishment goes to labor itself, your government, by legislation and by the good offices of its various departments, has seized upon every opportunity to advance your cause.

In addition to direct assistance to the labor movement as such, this Administration has worked to advance and protect your well-being at other levels of national activity. We recognized that it was not enough to help you secure more pesos for your day’s work, but that it was also important to assure that the purchasing power of those pesos be kept as high as possible. For this reason the Administration has held firmly to a monetary policy, which guarantees that your income will continue to have increasing value in terms of your needs as consumers.

Another way in which we have indirectly served the cause of labor is by encouraging the increase of productive investment and by stimulating the establishment of new industrial enterprises. By creating these additional job opportunities we create a higher market for the services of labor. Only by such constant increase of job opportunities through increased investment can labor’s gains be preserved and increased.

I am happy to say that a majority of organized labor recognizes that the expansion of labor’s rights imposes an expansion of its responsibilities. By giving fair and honest effort in exchange for fair and honest treatment, labor creates the atmosphere of confidence and security which is needed to attract foreign and domestic investment, and only with such investment can we hope for a steadily rising standard of living.

Another gratifying evidence of the maturity of our labor movement is its success in keeping to a minimum the influence and infiltration of the communists. However, as you grow in strength, it is wise to remember that the red conspirators will make even greater efforts to capture you. Your vigilance must not be relaxed. None of the communist lies and promises can conceal the fact, that in communist countries themselves the worker is nothing but a slave , and the union is nothing but a government tool to control him . Under communism, a union is denied even the elementary right to strike. Its only purpose is to impose speed-up and overtime without pay, under the guise of patriotic contributions.

Looking back over the past year, Filipino labor can see with pride and confidence that its democratic path is the right one . I am sure that for the coming year your leaders are planning wisely, so that your government’s program of economic expansion can continue at a faster pace, for with such expansion there is not only the assurance that you will retain your present gains, but the promise of even greater ones.

If the past year was good, the coming year can be even better. Stand firm on your legal rights and your government will support you. Guard well the honest and democratic character of your organizations to assure public recognition of your influence as a stable and constructive force. Deal fairly and generously with the employer who deals fairly and generously with you. Your greatest growth will come about when it is realized that responsible unionism holds the key to industrial peace and prosperity.

As I have said, our nation and its workers need urgently the expansion of our economy. Let us show those who wish to invest in that productive expansion that they may count upon a diligent and responsible labor force. But let it be clear to all: under this Administration there is no room in our land for any enterprise that cannot pay its workers a decent and reasonable wage. Among free Filipinos, slave labor will not be tolerated.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech on Labor Day, May 1, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(5) , 2496-2498.