Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the launching of Community Chest Drive

[Released on June 1, 1956]

IN my many visits to the far-flung barrios in our rural areas, I have been a happy witness to countless community welfare programs in action. I have seen school houses and churches, bridges and roads, come up through the voluntary efforts of barrio folks; I have seen wells and irrigation canals jointly built by free labor for the common use of the people; and I have seen barrio volunteers fight hand in hand with government peace guardians against dissidents and disturbers of the peace. I have seen little ones in the care of kind neighbors, and sick ones nurtured by loving friends. The barrio people form the backbone of our nation; the barrio people are our strong allies against the red threat in the distant horizon, for the barrio people have an effective and practical way of solving their economic and social ills and of meeting their needs and those of their fellowmen, by supplementing the help that they receive from the government, instead of relying on it alone.

The Community Chest, similarly, is a community welfare program in action. Without waiting for direct aid from the government, civic minded and highly responsible citizens of Greater Manila, including good friends from abroad, have worked together so that as a result of their efforts, about a million people are provided with better opportunities of growing into normal citizens, given better health, protection, guidance, and education and assisted in spiritual, social, cultural, and recreational activities.

From the practical point, the Community Chest is a response to the people’s desire for a united and business-like system of fund-raising; it is a successful experiment to make one campaign in place of multiple appeals.

I am happy to launch this year’s Community Chest fund drive, for I fully realize that this afternoon I am launching the united cause of 18 affiliate Red Feather agencies that are rendering invaluable services to the community.

President Evangelista, I wish you another successful year in your administration of the Community Chest.

My good friend, Commissioner Manuel P. Manahan, here is my contribution. With it goes my fond wish that the Community Chest drive this year be another feather on your cap. Good luck, and to all— Mabuhay!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay at the launching of Community Chest Drive. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(6) , 3010.