Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Business Writers Association dinner

[Delivered on February 20, 1956]

MY FRIENDS:

I AM grateful to the Business Writers’ Association of the Philippines for the opportunity personally to congratulate the outstanding firms and businessmen of the year 1955. The awards given to them are an appropriate recognition of the vital role of business leadership in the development of our country.

As correspondents and writers on business affairs, you are keenly interested in the economic welfare of our people and in the government’s plans for providing the climate and incentives which will encourage private industry to move forward more confidently under its own initiative. I propose therefore, to discuss the fiscal policy and other tools available to the Government for achieving economic progress and also to outline the indispensable role of private enterprise in this common effort.

We stand on the threshold of a great era of social and economic advancement here in the Philippines. We have the human and natural resources, the basic plans, the realistic goals, and the will to achieve the level of prosperity and happiness which rightfully belongs to our people. We need only sharpen the precise action measures and perfect the tools of implementation.

We have had many economic plans and programs for national development since liberation. But seldom were these plans translated into practical financial terms and backed by well-defined fiscal policies to assure their faithful and effective execution.

Now, for the first time, we have joined our broad plans for social and economic growth with the specific measures required for their financial and administrative realization. I refer to the 1957 Fiscal Plan embodied in my recent Budget Message to Congress. The nation’s taxing, borrowing, and spending powers have been deliberately employed in the Plan as instruments of economic policy. The Plan presents to the Congress and the public a candid, comprehensive appraisal of our resources and the realistic financial measures to stimulate social and economic development.

The P640 million which we were able to extract from all financial resources for allocation to economic development in 1957 gives me great satisfaction. This sum comprises almost one half of the total amounts available for expenditure next year, and will greatly strengthen our attack on the problems of unemployment and low per capita income. The wise expenditure of these funds for productive purposes will spearhead the assistance which the Government gives to the private sector of the economy, emboldening it to risk more capital, use more of our idle resources, and employ more of the labor supply.

The economic bases of the Plan and the program priorities followed in its formulation are in consonance with the Five-Year Economic Program which I endorsed in my address before the Far Eastern University in 1954. This blueprint for the direction of the nation’s industrial and agricultural growth is still sound in perspective.

This is by no means to imply that our economic program will not be changed to conform to new circumstances. Indeed, I have directed the National Economic Council to update adjust, and perfect our basic plans and to devise more specific measures designed to increase industrial and agricultural production. But the fundamental objectives of our economic development effort need no revision and bear re-statement at this point.

These fundamental objectives are: to provide a progressively increasing number of jobs, to expand and diversify production, to minimize our dependence on imports to bring about a more equitable distribution of income, and to raise the living standards of our people.

Our economic and fiscal policies, while bold and forward-looking, are tempered with prudence to assure sound and steady progress toward our goals. We cannot spend our way to prosperity through unlimited public borrowing. Our economy demands much more skillful planning and allocation of resources and a more judicious use of the national credit. It is for this reason that I have stressed the importance of essential safeguards to our public borrowing policy.

In addition to fiscal policy as a prime instrument of economic development, the Government has a second vital tool in the form of exchange control. Through this device we are able to marshal our foreign exchange earnings and to channel these resources to investment uses which will provide the most beneficial returns.

While our ultimate objective is elimination of exchange control, the plain fact is that today and for some time to come we must maintain an effective control system. Not until domestic production has been substantially increased can these controls be safely relaxed.

It would be folly to allow the country’s hard-earned foreign exchange to be dissipated on luxury and other nonessential goods which provide neither general nor lasting advantage. Furthermore, there is no reason why scarce foreign exchange should be used to pay for more imported commodities when our domestic producers have demonstrated their ability to produce like or similar commodities at comparable prices.

Our basic foreign exchange control policy provides that increasing amounts of our dollar resources be devoted to imports of machinery and equipment needed to establish new productive facilities which will make greater use of local raw materials.

A third essential tool which is available to the Government in stimulating development relates to monetary and credit policy.” I want it clearly understood that my position in favor of firmly maintaining the value of the peso is not just a matter of theory. It is a matter of stern, practical responsibility. There are many technical reasons for supporting the value of our currency, but to me the most compelling reason is the welfare of the great majority of our people, the wage earners. Any reduction in the value of the peso would be a cruel and disastrous blow to the very people who can least stand it, to fixed income groups like our government employees, and to low wage-earners who could not hope for speedy adjustments to save them from hunger and privation. I will continue to resist the imposition on them of such sacrifice by every means within my power.

Our banking and financing facilities have come to be shaped largely to meet the short-term credit needs of farmers and traders. The long-term credit needed by many entrepreneurs who could provide additional jobs through investment in new lines of production is not available to the extent needed, even though some improvement has been made in recent years.

It is therefore obvious that the financial structure of the banking community needs to be more flexible to make credit available in larger amounts, on a more selective basis, and on more favorable terms to those wishing to undertake productive enterprises. With the additional funds now being made available to the government’s financial institutions, and with the adoption of selective credit priorities, the extension of adequate credit for productive processes will be greatly facilitated in the future.

But the Government alone cannot produce economic growth—its indispensable partner is private enterprise. The essential role of the Government in this common undertaking is to take the leadership in pointing the direction of economic progress and to help create the environment which will encourage private investment in productive fields.

Our Government is providing the social overhead capital in the form of education, health, and social welfare services. It is constructing the highways, power, irrigation, communication, and other facilities which are in direct support of the productive process.

Under my Administration we are also encouraging business by using the tools of government I have already described: a sound fiscal policy, including a tax program which offers incentives to business; a tariff policy which gives protection to young industries; exchange control which conserves the dollars needed for productive industry; and credit resources which provide businessmen with adequate financing. By weaving together these various tools into a pattern favorable to private initiative, we are ensuring that atmosphere which inspires business enterprise to advance to new productive frontiers. In a free enterprise economy, government should do no more and private business must be expected to do no less.

I would like to stress that this government will not prescribe for private industry the rigid laws of economic control which characterize the practice of certain other countries. We shall, within the board limitations of the public interest, encourage the development of private industry in accordance with the dictates of feasibility and profitability as determined by the individual businessman.

The future calls for intensified investment on the part of our own possessors of capital wealth. With our rich natural resources and large consumer’s market, this represents good business, but equally I should like to base my appeal to our own citizens for an increased level of investment on patriotic grounds. Foreign capital is likewise welcome and can be assured of fair treatment.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that our economy cannot remain static. We must forge ahead fearlessly and with a venturous spirit. At the same time we must be ever vigilant against economic dislocations which would negate our gains. We must continue to draw upon the capacity and ingenuity of our people in this all-embracing task of attaining a resilient and viable economy. The Government will continue to do its part. I urge you to do yours.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech at the Business Writers Association dinner, February 20, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (2) , 611-615.