LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

IT is with great pride that I stand before you today to greet you on the 2nd biennial convention and the beginning of the 5th year of your great movement.

The National Movement for Free Elections was born at a time when, because of flagrant abuse of the ballot, the masses of our people were beginning to despair of the processes of democracy. It was a critical and crucial year. The Red insurgents, whose military effort was gradually being smothered by the newly spirited drive of our armed forces, were looking forward eagerly to another farcical election. They expected that one more barefaced violation of the people’s will would break their faith in the workability of democracy and would pave the way for a popular welcome to the idea of a regimented political and economic life.

When your movement began in August 1951 you proceeded to awaken our people. You awakened them to the fact that if they wanted their freedom they would have to rise and defend it themselves by their own initiative, collaboration, and watchfulness. It was a revolution that you began, a peaceful uprising against the old lethargy, the old apathy, towards the sacred right of the ballot. You gave life to the almost moribund concept of a free vote. Here was a sacred right reduced to gracing the oratory of demagogues. The people had grown cynical about its substance. You rescued them from their cynicism and showed them the way to win back that substance.

Naturally even a newly awakened people could not, by mere peaceful watchfulness, protect their freedom of choice if the Government forces were not in some way prevented from being used as tools for the frustration of that peaceful effort. In my own humble way, I did all I could as secretary of national defense to see to it that your peaceful effort was not defeated by the very forces which were supposed to protect your rights.

Thus, the various elements of your armed forces were so disposed all over the country that they could serve in a positive way to cooperate with your followers in assuring the freedom of the ballot, especially in those places where that freedom had recently been desecrated.

We all know the results of your efforts. The people were indeed awakened and they marched to the precincts on that election day of November 1951 determined that their vote would be free. And when it was all over, when the results came in and the nation realized that there had just been held a free and honest elections, our people said a prayer of thanks. Democracy had been saved.

I am certain that our people have not forgotten and will never forget your heroic movement.

You did it again in 1953. And the question now seems to be: Now that the people are fully awaken, is there need for NAMFREL to continue existing? My humble answer would be yes. The people are now awake but overconfidence may yet lull them back to the passiveness which bred the big and little tyrants who once made a mockery of the people’s will. It is your mission to remain as a constant and persistent reminder to our people that the ballot, the cornerstone of the democratic structure, will continue to be free only as long as the people are organized for its freedom. And the Communists would be the first to celebrate the disbandment of your movement, for they would be the first to profit from the failure of Philippine democracy.

Gentlemen, your people need you. Do not relax your efforts. Redouble them. For in that way lies strength, peace, and liberty for our Republic.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech before the NAMFREL, August 14, at the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (8) , 3986-3988.