Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay On the occasion of the First National Jamboree of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines

[Delivered in Balara, Quezon City, April 23, 1954]

MR. VARGAS, MR. PANGILINAN, BROTHER SCOUTS:

MANY of you will recall that during the last presidential campaign a few of my critics spread the word that I did not deserve to be taken seriously because I was—in their own word—”only a boy scout.”

I was a boy scout because I prized honesty and integrity above all virtues.

I was a boy scout because I pledged myself to the defense of the poor and the weak.

I was a boy scout because I had risked my life—and continue to do so—in defense of our country.

I am not sure if those critics realized clearly what they meant when they called me a boy scout, but I do know that this was one of the highest compliments I had ever received. And this afternoon, you have confirmed this compliment by inducting me as “tenderfoot” in your organization. If my critics are still around, I would like to inform them that—as of today—I am officially a boy scout proud of that distinction.

You are opening your first National Jamboree today.

This is of course a historic moment in the Boy Scout movement in the Philippines. I do not know if this place—Balara—was chosen as the site for your jamboree because of its historical association, but you could hardly have picked a more appropriate one. For right here— where your tents stand and where you will work and play for the duration of your jamboree—was where Andres Bonifacio and his Katipuneros established their first field headquarters during the revolution.

In a sense, the Katipuneros were our first organized group of boy scouts. I am not trying to make a joke. They were patriots, but no one has ever been a patriot without having in abundance those qualities and virtues which constitute the ideal of all boy scouts. I mean that the Katipuneros had courage, loyalty, love of country, and an overwhelming sense of responsibility for the fate of their fellowmen.

Today, no set of virtues is more clearly needed by our people. We are trying to build a future which shall be free from fear and free from want, and in this great collective enterprise, everyone—the young and the old aloke—has his important role to play.

All of you have heard of the Huks. Many of you may even have had a first-hand experience of the havoc caused by this misguided band of men. As long as they persist in their beliefs, they are enemies of our people, for they wish to destroy the liberty and freedom which we have won for ourselves at the great sacrifice of life and comfort.

Many of you have also heard of the war in Korea. Our countrymen fought in that war while the fighting lasted, and a great number of them were killed in battles against the Communists. Those Communists are our enemies, too, for they wish to destroy that atmosphere of peace and concord among men in which alone the happiness of the human race could flourish.

Do not make a mistake. The Huks have been partly destroyed as an organization and the Korean Communists have agreed to a temporary peace, but fighting still goes on in many of our neighboring countries—in China, in Malaya, and in Indo-China.

There is a war in Europe, too, but though this war is conducted across the conference tables and not on the fields of battle, the same basic problem of Democracy vs . Communism is the great issue which must be resolved.

In this world-wide struggle, all of us have a stake—particularly you. On the results of this war will depend whether you— and your brothers and sisters—will have a future in which you could think, work, and play as you

choose; or whether you would think, work, and play only as the Communist tyrants would wish you to.

Clearly, you are on the side of Democracy. But how can you help win this war?

You can help win this war if you are steadfast in your purposes, courageous in carrying them out, and at all times loyal to your ideals.

This, I believe, is the meaning of the boy scout movement. But beyond that—and in a larger sense—this is also the meaning of citizenship in a democracy.

I am confident that with your high ideals and the actual practice you have had in cooperative living. Democracy will have worthy guardians in you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay on the occasion of the First National Jamboree of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, in Balara, Quezon City, April 23, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(4) , 1540-1542.