Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Public Schools Superintendents

[Delivered at the U. P. Home Economics Building, May 13, 1954]

DISTINGUISHED SUPERINTENDENTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I CAN REMEMBER when the maestro— in his inevitable americana and necktie— was an object of respect, affection, and even of veneration.

Then the wheel turned. For years, no one was more neglected than the poor maestro . In social functions, he counted least; his opinions mattered little even in his specialized field of education; and worst of all, he was tolerated as a sort of necessary evil, expendable except for the fact that the children must learn their alphabets.

In my administration, we propose to challenge all that. We wish to restore the teacher to his proper position of dignity and authority, and we wish to grant him that measure of independence he needs for the fullest exercise of his responsibilities and duties.

In making this assurance, I merely underscore the fact that sound, fully democratic education in one of the basic objectives of this administration.

Moreover, I wish to emphasize that in the pursuit of this objective, the school teachers and officials inevitably play the key roles. If these roles sometimes seem to lack glamor, they are nevertheless of the highest significance to the future of our country.

Someone has said that if you win the youth, you win the future. This truism has been perverted by the totalitarians and utilized for the attainment of their own sinister ends.

We, too, wish to win the youth—but not to a slavish and unquestioning devotion to any set of dogmas. On the contrary, we wish to win them over to the appreciation and recognition of the principle and spirit of free and intelligent inquiry.

This is the meaning of democratic education.

Today, we live in a divided world. Our survival in it depends on the kind of decisions that we make.

It is therefore imperative that we learn the issues in their correct light and that we make discriminations and choices among facts undistorted by bias or the desire to mislead.

Needless to say, democratic education must start from the ground up. An education which provides tools only to a self-constituted upper-class elite is worthless. It encourages dangerous delusions among the “educated” and it promotes a grievous social cleavage in which the great majority are prevented from expressing their aspirations and therefore loses touch with the government which is supposed to represent them.

In a word, this kind of education hinders rather than promotes the growth of democracy.

We cannot—and we must not allow this to happen. Fifty years of training in the democratic principles have impressed on us the rightness and fitness of this way of life for our people. We cannot permit it to be endangered so easily.

The object of our national educational policy is not just to produce literate people—meaning people who can read and write—admirable as that is, but to produce people fully equipped to participate in the community activities. The object, in short, is to produce complete citizens—aware of their environment and able, through their training, to adjust themselves to it.

Only through this means can we hope to make democracy mean something to our people.

Through this means, too, we insure the perpetuation of those principles for which, many times in our history, we have given up our very lives.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay’s speech before public schools superintendents at the U. P. Home Economics Building, Thursday evening, May 13, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(5) , 1961-1962.