Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of the 1956 UN Flag Ceremony

[Delivered at the Independence Memorial Grandstand, Luneta, Manila, October 24, 1956]

MY FRIENDS:

WHEN, a few weeks ago, the Suez Canal controversy was at its height, the persistent question in many diplomatic posts in Asia and other countries in Europe and Latin America was this: Why was the United Nations not being used? Why, against its impressive record of successful mediations in most of the great conflicts of our time, were the parties to the Suez Canal dispute not availing themselves of the good offices of the United Nations?

On my part I had the certain feeling that the United Nations way, which to me is the reasonable way, would prevail in the end. Sooner or later, I thought, the tested methods of conciliation used by the world organization in former crises would be used again with every promise of success. And that exactly was what happened. The principals, on sober second thought, went to the Security Council, which is now occupied with the problem. This action halted the warlike demonstrations which for a time placed the world perilously on the brink of war.

Thus, once again, humanity was saved from possible catastrophe by the intervention of the United Nations. Since then, efforts have been exerted to bring about a peaceful settlement of a situation which otherwise would have led to a breach of the peace.

Over the years, United Nations performance in the peaceful settlement of disputes has been highly successful. Way back in 1946, Russian troops tried to occupy little Iran, but through the good offices of the Security Council, the occupying troops were persuaded to abandon their original intention, and the Iranians are now as free as you and I.

It took only moral pressure on the part of the United Nations to prevent Iran’s enslavement by the Communists, but in another instance—that of Greece in 1947—the General Assembly had to see military force used on behalf of the legitimate Greek government to repel aggression from neighboring Communist countries. And in that way the Greek nation was saved from the clutches of Stalinist tyranny.

Other cases of effective United Nations intervention must not be forgotten. In 1949, the India-Pakistan feud was stopped short of war by the Security Council, which prevailed upon the parties to agree to a cease fire. In Indonesia, the same year, United Nations mediation put a stop to the so-called “police action,” by the armed forces of the Netherlands, eventually making possible the organization of the Indonesian Republic and its subsequent admission to the United Nations.

Then came the Berlin episode of September, 1948. Soviet Russia took it upon itself to restrict transport and communications between the Western zones of occupation in Germany and Berlin. The United States, the United Kingdom, and France, in separate notes to the Secretary General of the U. N. General Assembly, denounced the Soviet act as a direct threat to the peace. The Soviets, however, ignored the protest. With bated breath, the world waited for the first trigger-happy Soviet soldier to fire at the Allied planes which had countered the Soviet pressure tactic with an airlift of urgent supplies to Berlin against the land blockade set up by the Russian military. Humanity found itself again on the brink of war, until the Security Council and later on the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary General mediated in the conflict. As a result the Soviets, having failed in their blockage, were dissuaded from more reckless attempts to bring West Berlin to its knees.

All of you today are familiar with the bloody episode of Korea. You will recall how, with the assistance of so-called “volunteer” forces from Communist China, troops of North Korea crossed the 38th parallel to invade the Republic of Korea, which the United Nations itself had helped to bring into existence. That was aggression pure and simple, and it became the manifest duty of the United Nations to stop it. Thus began the first collective armed action in the United Nations’ history.

Sixteen member states, among them our own, pooled their resources, military and economic, to stop the aggressors in their tracks. It happened that owing to the veto used by one of the first permanent members of the Security Council, namely, Soviet Russia, that the Council found itself immobilized before the Communist attack; hence, the “uniting-for-peace” action by the General Assembly in order to cope with an actual breach of the peace. The Assembly, however, left no room for doubt that its aim was not to wage war but to stop an unprovoked attack. And the Korean episode possed down in history as an example of effective localized armed action in behalf of world peace.

It must be pretty clearly understood by now that the United Nation is here to stay in the supreme interest of world peace. Eleven years ago, when the United Nations was launched in San Francisco, the atomic era had barely begun, and although we had seen an arrogant military crushed by the blast of the first atom bomb, there was not yet the frightful spectre of the nuclear weapon. Now we know for sure not only that the more destructive hydrogen bomb exist, but that its use in a general war would blanket every human habitation on earth with deadly fall-out. And you and I, and all the rest of humanity, no matter how piously neutral we might be, would go out of existence with the rest of the species.

Such is the grim prospect for this best of all possible worlds of ours, should the irresponsible among us throw discretion to the wind and let their tempers get the better of them.

With all its trials and tribulations, life is good and we all enjoy living. But the way to live is in peace, not in suspicion and fear. And here is where the United Nations comes in, to help recast our world into a community of good neighbors and friends.

It is the special characteristic of the community being developed under United Nations auspices that, while each nation retains its identity and its character, all are animated by the desire to be neighbors of a world-community pulling together to attain higher standards of life for all.

As noted in the Soviet veto on Korea, the arrogance of power has at times frustrated the work of the Security Council. But this is not so in the General Assembly, where all the members, big and small, rich and poor, are co-equal in their standing as sovereign states. In this body, the vote of the Philippine Republic has the same weight as that of the biggest world power.

As a small nation, the Republic of the Philippines has a special interest in the growth and effectiveness of the United Nations. Not only our existence as a nation, but also the realization of our moral right to equal status with other nations, regardless of size, depends upon the achievement of a world ruled by law and not by force.

Modern technology has stripped us of such defenses as our rugged coastline and the broad seas which surround us. It has neutralized the courage and the fighting zeal of our citizenry. Alone in a jungle world, our nation could only hope to die bravely in defense of its freedom and integrity. This, we are convinced, is not the destiny of small nations which civilization and the growth of the human conscience has brought into being. A pattern more in keeping with what the human mind can conceive as being the divine way, is the pattern of the United Nations. It is a pattern of peace and justice, of cooperation and brotherhood, of mutual effort in realizing for each member of the human family the fullness and richness of life which the Almighty holds forth to those who walk in the paths of righteousness.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay on the occasion of the 1956 UN Flag Ceremony. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(14) , 6133-6136.