Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the U.P. Loyalty Day Celebration

[ Delivered at Los Baños College, October 10, 1954 ]

THIRTY-SIX years ago, the first World War was being fought between those who believed in man’s right to freedom and a government of his own choice, and those who believe in rule by force and conquest.

Thirty-six years ago, on this date, a call was heard at this institution for volunteers to join in that struggle. In a thrilling demonstration of unity, every man present—student and faculty member alike—stepped forward.

Each year since, that magnificent display of loyalty has been celebrated here at Los Baños and remembered with pride throughout our nation. In those early days we were ruled by the United States. Today we rule ourselves. But there has been no change in our celebration of this occasion because the loyalty we honor was loyalty to an ideal—loyalty to the concept of freedom.

Today again we face the challenge of freedom versus slavery. Again, throughout the world, free societies must defend themselves against the aggression of a new would-be world conqueror—Communism. We hear again, in our own homeland, the call to serve our ideals.

The task we face calls for great effort on the part of all of us. It is not enough for us to man our defense post in the world struggle. It is not enough for us to defeat and control the Communist aggresor at home. While protecting our basic freedom on all fronts, we must at the same time speed the building of democracy in our land. To those of our people who have never known it, we must bring the blessings that a free society has to offer.

Political democracy is well rooted among our people, but it must have the nourishment of economic democracy if it is to survive.

Democracy means equal opportunity. Equal opportunity means that each of our citizens must have access to the means of working toward a better life. His reward will depend upon the amount of effort he is willing to contribute, but it is his democratic right to be able to make such effort.

Many obstacles lie in our path: the forces of nature—the effects of past wrongs—our own inertia and lack of enterprise.

Take just one field— your field , which is agriculture. Here we come up against all the pressures I have mentioned. Our country is both under-developed and badly developed. Much of our land is still virgin soil. Our farms do not yield as much as they could, and do not produce as many different crops as they should.

We are saddled with an outmoded system of land tenure. More than half of our farmers are tenants and farm owners with less than two hectares. With low incomes from their little fields, these tenants and small farmers become the prey of usurers, unscrupulous landlords, and speculators.

To a large extent, our agricultural methods are still primitive. Many of our farmers do not have the tools of modern science and technology—tools which have long been available to the farmers in more progressive countries.

Many of our small farmers do not have title to their lands. There was a five-year program to give land titles to fifty thousand farmers. But five years is too long in this case. By sound planning—by vigorous action—we intend to complete that five-year program in one year.

Centuries of neglect have left many of our farming communities in the grip of inertia, victims of all the evils of under-employment, low production, and low income. Our agricultural development was lopsided and lacking in direction, with the result that our economy became dependent on a few export crops. The prices of these crops fluctuated continually, making it difficult for us to attain economic stability.

On top of all these, we have had to repair the ravages of the Second World War and of the Huk rebellion. At the height of the dissident movement, thousands of farmers fled from their homes in remote barrios and became squatters in well-protected but crowded cities. These displaced farmers are moving back to the barrios with the restoration of peace and order. The increase in rice production is one of the immediate effects of their return to the farm.

We have also suffered from two adverse effects of the cold war. Some of our own funds which could have been used for economic development have been diverted necessarily to our national defense program. A large share of free world resources which might have been used to speed up the economic and social progress of the less developed countries have also been diverted to armaments and defense establishments.

Such is the problem which we face in the field of agriculture. To cope with it, we have developed a practical, comprehensive program.

Our farmers need know-how and operating capital. The Government is determined that they shall have both.

This Administration is making available the funds needed by the farmers through the ACCFA, the rural banks, and other government credit agencies.

Our farmers are good credit risks. This fact is reflected in the repayment record of the cooperatives affiliated with the ACCFA. More than ninety per cent of last year’s ACCFA crop loans to farmers has been repaid.

All the money in the world, however, would be useless if the farmers do not learn to use it wisely. This is where the scientist, the researcher, and the extension worker come in. They work as a team to provide the farmers with modern techniques and the know-how to invest their money with profit to themselves.

New roads, bridges, artesian wells, irrigation systems, health centers, and community development projects, are putting an end to stagnation in the barrios. Fresh life and new ideas are being funneled into our farming communities. Under the five-year highway development program, thousands of kilometers of feeder and barrio roads are being built, linking rural communities to towns and markets. Army engineers are working day and night, helping to speed up the completion of this program. The same energy and drive are being applied to the job of building artesian wells, health centers, and other facilities of wholesome barrio life.

Pre-fabricated schoolhouses will be constructed in the barrios where they are most urgently needed as part of a frontal attack on the problem of providing better education for our school children.

The implementation of the Government’s policies on land tenure and land settlement is being accelerated. A new law has been enacted to improve tenancy relations and establish leasehold tenancy contracts by choice of the tenants themselves.

A program for self-sufficiency in our principal foodstuffs, particulary rice, eggs, meat, and dairy products is being implemented.

In the case of palay, price supports are being provided for the first time. Under this system, the NARIC will buy as much palay as our farmers are willing to sell, at a price giving them a fair return for their investment. Price supports should help to eliminate the profits obtained by speculators at the expense of the producers.

The quality of our principal export crops is constantly being improved. Livestock production is being increased.

Maximum use is being made of aid from the Foreign Operations Administration. Counterpart funds amounting to more than 120 million pesos have been appropriated to “match” FOA loans and grants totalling more than 100 million dollars. The projects include an integrated research program, control of plant pests and animal diseases, fertilizer distribution, gravity and pump irrigation projects.

Our delegations to the United Nations have supported measures to safeguard primary producers like the Philippines from disastrous price fluctuations. They have also proposed a fair adjustment between the prices of raw materials and the prices of manufactured goods, especially the capital equipment needed by the less developed countries.

Thus, we have placed this central problem of our economy under a concentrated, vigorous, and sustain attack.

Within the framework of our plan for a balanced economic development, we have given emphasis to the implementation of our farm program. Ours is an agricultural country. It is our concern to increase, diversify, and make more efficient our agricultural production. Increased production means better living, greater purchasing power for the rural communities where seventy-five per cent of our people live, more security, and wellbeing for all.

Our agricultural development is one of the essential bases for the development of industry, which we also need to build up a balanced economy and create jobs for that segment of our population which cannot be absorbed by the farms. Industrial growth will be stimulated by the availability of raw materials from agriculture and by the demand for finished products that the farmers will require. Agriculture in turn will benefit from industry’s increasing use of raw materials from the farms. It is a creative, wealth-producing chain reaction which we are trying to start and sustain with our farm program.

More and more of our farming folk are being induced to stay on the land as we make their fields more productive and their villages better places to live in. Thus, we hope to enrich our rural communities and at the same time halt the drift of rural people to the cities, which are not yet ready to make fruitful use of their services. Our aim is to offer to our youth a future on the farm as attractive as any that they can find in the cities and towns.

The farm is one of the decisive arenas of our struggle to raise living standards. The future of his Administration—perhaps even the fate of the Republic—will largely depend on what happens or does not happen in our villages. This is true of the Philippines; it is also true of India, of Burma, of Indonesia. All these countries are trying to raise themselves by their bootstraps, racing against time to improve the lot of their peoples in the face of tremendous odds.

This is the challenge that we face today. We are called upon to telescope within the span of ten or twenty years the economic and social development which normally might take a hundred years. And we are required by our history, our traditions, and the mandate of our people to do so within the democratic framework, without violence to our free institutions.

We cannot accomplish this task unless we close ranks. We are embarked, of our own free choice, on what may be described as a forced march. We have one supreme objective—to place in the hands of all our people—in the shortest possible time—the means to live in dignity, to work without fear, to prosper in freedom and peace. But to reach our goal we must be vigilant, hard-working, self-disciplined, and self-denying.

As we celebrate the spirit displayed here at Los Baños in the past, let us think of today’s call to service. It is not a call to shoulder a gun on some far battlefield. It is a call to serve our fellow-countrymen right here at home.

Here at Los Baños are being created the weapons to fight poverty and want. In your hands are the skills and know-how to arm our people in the neglected rural areas with the means of getting greater benefit from their labors, of breaking through the walls of ignorance into the rich land of a modern free community. Are you willing to give that extra measure of devotion to our national ideal? Are you willing to go beyond the strict boundaries of duty to make sure that your weapons of productivity get into the hands of those who need them?

Your personal dedication to this need cannot be ordered. It must come from your hearts, from your own determination to speed the building of a strong, free Philippines. It is a call for volunteers. What is your answer this time?

Source: Presidential Museum and Library