Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Youth Moral Rehabilitation Rally sponsored by the Manila Lions Club

[Delivered at the Rizal Memorial Stadium, August 19, 1955]

PRESIDENT “OTI”, DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE MANILA LIONS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THIS month has been and will be a month of many important decisions and events for our country. At least three international conferences will be held in Manila affecting our economic, political, and cultural policies, and we are about to see the commencement of the campaigns for this year s national and local elections.

In-spite of all these truly important things that make great demands upon our attention, I did not hesitate to accept the invitation of the Manila Lions Club to come here this afternoon to assist in the launching of the Youth Rehabilitation Movement.

I consider this movement no less important than such things as economic and political conferences. I look on it with as much concern as I do on a movement for free elections and on the elections itself.

I note that this movement is propelled by one fundamental principle: that to improve the community, the people must share responsibility with the Government. That is typical of the well known unselfishness of the aims of Lionism. Both the Government and the people of our country have been the beneficiaries of this unselfishness.

Why is this movement as important to us as any other official or civic undertaking today?

We might ask first: What are we planning and working so hard for today? Is it not to secure a future that shall bring peace, propsperity, and safety to our children? Do we not undergo all our sacrifices for the sake of our children and for the sake of the Philippines that shall belong to our children?

No doubt the answer to these questions is yes. And yet is it not possible that, while we are feverishly planning and working for our children’s future, we have neglected our children’s present?

We may not indeed be guilty of such neglect, but with our thinking oriented to planning and working for our future, we have been coming dangerously close to minimizing the importance of the moral development of our youth today.

We owe it to the Manila Lions that we are now being awakened from this perilous passivity towards the moral problems of our youth.

My friends, there is no point in building for our future if the men and women who will live in that future will not have the moral fiber and disposition with which to enjoy it properly and preserve it for other generations. We are all greatly concerned about the many unspeakable instances of moral degradation among our youth. It has been pointed out by your President, Mr. Arellano, that this degradation is not to be found among the poor alone but that as a matter of fact, it has infected the children of the well-to-do and the rich as well. I am glad to note that in your movement, you urge every citizen to begin not by finding fault in other persons or institutions but by reexamining his own attitudes and actions towards his own children.

It is a healthy procedure—this self-examination and self-correction—a procedure which might well be adopted with great benefit to our country in the solution of the many problems that confront our people.

Indeed, the solution of the problem of moral degradation among our youth lies primarily within the little circle of the family. The work of the priest, the teacher, the social worker, must be supplementary to, and not merely supplemented by, the work of the father and the mother. There is no greater responsibility in this country than that of fatherhood and motherhood. At least equal to any responsibility as President is my responsibility as father to my own children.

My dear Lions of Manila, if you should be able to awaken our citizenry to the responsibility of fatherhood, I think you would be justified in considering this movement a success. You would then have achieved perhaps the most distinguished and effective undertaking of the many which you have initiated for the benefit of our people.

I see by the presence of these many citizens here that already your movement has caught fire. Permit me to add to the enthusiasm of this event my pledge that I will do all within my official and personal capacities to contribute to this great endeavour.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us congratulate the Manila Lions Club. This is a movement that provides a pattern for civic action in our time, for it challenges the citizen to re-examine himself and to perform his greatest civic duty—that of rearing his children for their future in our Republic and for their life beyond our world.

Ultimately, it is a question of a confirmation not only of our youth, but of our youths’ parents and of all our people in the ways of Godliness. Your Government’s policies today are directed towards the preservation of this Republic from the godless forces that are at large in Asia. While we strengthen ourselves against godlessness from the outside, this movement would have us remember to strengthen ourselves against godlessness within our own borders. This is the real message of the Youth Moral Rehabilitation Movement. Let us all heed this message. It means true security and strength for ourselves, for our children, and for generations to come.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech before the Youth Moral Rehabilitation Rally sponsored by the Manila Lions Club at the Rizal Memorial Stadium, Friday afternoon, August 19, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (8) , 3992-3994.