Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On launching the one-year thrift campaign

[Released on June 1, 1954]

IT GIVES me great pleasure to open this nation-wide campaign for thrift which commences today and ends on May 31, 1955. Before anything else, I wish to congratulate the Bankers Association of the Philippines for sponsoring this campaign. I know it is in the best of hands.

The cornerstone of the program of this Administration—the improvement of the condition of the masses—is already well known to all. I fear, however, that when this objective was publicly announced, the overwhelming majority of the people felt that our salvation would just drop like manna from Heaven, and that the search for remedies for our social and economic ills had ended when the announcement was made.

This is not so. There are many things we must have and must do to attain our objective. Of the things we must have, perhaps the most important is capital. “Thrift Year” has been proclaimed to remind ourselves that one of the greatest obstacles to capital formation in this country is the lack of thrift among our people.

For a poor and under-developed country like ours, whose present wealth consists mainly of its potentials, we have been spending too much and saving too little. Austerity is one thing that we, as a people, have not put into practice sufficiently. We can even say that thrift has for sometime past become a neglected virtue. In recent years, private and government savings constituted only about three per cent of our national income, compared to 10 to 15 per cent in more advanced countries.

Let us not seek elsewhere for a remedy to this situation. The remedy lies in us, in our determination to save enough, not necessarily for our exclusive use but also for the use of those of our countrymen who need capital for investment in productive and gainful pursuits.

Savings locked in drawers and safes will aid only their owners, but savings deposited in banks and banking institutions or invested in government and industrial bonds become economically useful to the entire community. It is savings of this type that have come to the rescue of such highly developed countries, like the United States of America, Great Britain, France, and Germany, in times of economic and financial difficulties, during World War I and World War II, and even during periods of peace.

My friends, I appeal to each and every one of you to support this thrift movement not by merely accepting the idea but by practicing it. The small but constant trickles of savings finding their way into banks and other financial institutions will, in time, become a mighty torrent of capital funds that will serve the country in normal times as well as in periods of economic distress.

Our program of economic development is essentially a program of self-help, and it is only through increased savings on our part that we can make possible a substantial increase in our domestic capital investment. Our economic and industrial development will be greatly accelerated by the regular and systematic accumulation of savings, and by utilizing such savings in the financing of productive enterprises and activities. A marked increase in the savings of our people will enable us to respond effectively to the frequent call of the Government for funds when government securities are offered for sale.

In the present state of our economy, the practice of thrift should not be a mere habit but a patriotic duty. Knowing our people, I am confident that they will not fail in this new challenge .

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay’s speech launching the one-year thrift campaign, June 1, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(6) , 2429-2430.