Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of his acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Engineering, Honoris Causa , by the FEATI Institute of Technology

[Delivered on March 29, 1954]

THE honor you have conferred on me represents, in a sense, the fulfillment of a youthful ambition. I had started out to be an engineer, but the strain of combining a strenuous livelihood with serious study told on my health and forced the suspension of my studies, until eventually I had to abandon engineering entirely. The pain of that renunciation is assuaged somewhat by the honor you have just conferred on me. I hope I prove myself worthy by hurdling the most difficult engineering problem that perhaps could confront any Filipino, and that is, to make the heavy, cumbersome, complicated machinery of our government function smoothly and efficiently, that it may generate the benefits and services which our people have a right to expect from it.

It is gratifying to see that so many of you have chosen to pursue a career in technological fields. You have made a wise decision that will benefit not only yourselves but the country as well. From a purely selfish stand-point, you will find the field of technology fertile with opportunities for jobs, advancement, and success. This field will grow and expand as the years go by, as our development progresses and our industries rise and prosper. The prospect ahead of you is one of continuous opportunity, so unlike the specter of disillusionment and stagnation that hovers over some glutted professions.

It is not you alone, however, who will profit from the training and education you have obtained in this institution. Our country, our people, the generations to come, will be the beneficiaries. I do not exaggerate when I say that one of the most serious draw-backs to our progress and development is the deficiency of our technical man-power. You will help relieve this problem, and in effect you will be helping this country move faster and more efficiently towards the realizations of the goals that we have set.

I expect that soon you will be applying your specialized skills and technical know-how to specific functions. There is no doubt but that the substance of what you will have to offer will contribute to our general store of accomplishments. Over and above concrete and immediate results, however, I expect you to bring a new spirit to your respective spheres of activity.

You have been trained to think and act in terms of new machines and modern inventions. You have been taught to keep pace with swift, constant advances in science and technology. I ask you, wherever the future may take you, to bring with you this spirit of confidence in the progress of man, that you may infect our more timid countrymen with the same sense of self-assurance so essential to survival and progress in this age of wonders. There is danger, unless our people become properly oriented, that progress may pass us by, that we may lag hopelessly behind the rest of the world. The country will depend on you to wear down and destroy this resistance to progress, that our people may learn to accept and use, for their own advancement and well-being, the tools and wondrous blessings of their age.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay on the occasion of his acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Engineering, Honoris Causa , by the FEATI Institute of Technology, Monday, March 29, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(3) , 1014-1015.