Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Jaycees

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel Fiesta Pavilion, July 8, 1956]

PRESIDENT ARANETA, PRESIDENT MEER, DISTINGUISHED OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE JUNIOR CHAMBER, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM HAPPY to be once again among my friends—the Jaycees of the Philippines. I feel a great attachment to this group of young Filipinos which perhaps I have, up to now, not sufficiently expressed. I have had the opportunity of expressing publicly my support for your many worthy projects. I have had the privilege of cooperating with you in your program of civic development.

But, although my attachment to your group was strengthened by the fact of our mutual collaboration, my admiration for your principles and for your work was born even before I had the occasion to support your efforts. It began years ago when you were first organized in the City of Manila. I read your principles which commence so aptly with “‘Faith in God” and speak of service to country and freedom—and I agreed with them completely. And then I saw how, after adopting your principles, you put them into action quickly, efficiently, and effectively. While others spoke of cleaning up the city, you rolled up your sleeves and began to polish up monuments, to tidy up swampy eyesores and even to sweep up garbage. It was such a novel sight, these young professionals and businessmen, casting aside false dignity and pride, and going about calmly practicing what they preached. As you will recall, the event was received with some cynicism, mainly by those whose concern for the welfare of the community of Manila never went beyond the talking stage.

I was then a member of Congress and, although I did not then have the opportunity to express it, I admired the way that the Jaycees, unaffected by this cynicism, went on to do the job of improving the life of the community in the nation’s capital. I felt that you were then displaying the sort of action by which our communities everywhere in our country could be materially improved within the framework of our democracy and spiritually strengthened against ideas that were subversive of that democracy.

Today our policy of vitalizing our liberty by giving its meaning, through concrete action, for the millions that live in our urban and rural communities, is but an official extension of your active concern for the details of community life. Like your program of action, our barrio projects were initially received with cynical comment from those who expected from our administration the usual grandiose designs which never touch the life of the common man. But like you, undaunted by critics, we proceeded to implement our projects.

Your resolute labors towards organized action for the public welfare have, since your first projects, received public recognition time and again. The success of your action is eloquently attested to by the swift spread of the Jaycee ideal and the establishment of your many chapters all over the Islands. I like to thing that there is more than a superficial similarity between the general and enthusiastic acclaim for your organization’s activities by our countrymen and the repeated concrete expression of popular acceptance of our program of rural development. Both successes are due to the same realization that the strengthening and the defense of our liberties must first begin with determined action towards the material and spiritual revitalization of the masses of our people.

The parallel paths which your organization and our administration have taken for our country’s welfare have not stopped at our shores. They have gone beyond into the field of international relations. Here again in at least one instance the Jaycees blazed the trail for our own official action. Even before we recognized South Vietnam and while we were engaged in a bitter and prolonged debate on the academic merits of such recognition, you and your co-workers were already afield in the cities and countrysides of that gallant young neighboring republic, confirming the faith of its people in the ways of democracy and strengthening their will against the Communist aggressor, thus keeping the latter at least one step further beyond our own door.

You began doing this even before your government, by signing the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, was able to align itself with those whose answer to the threat of Communism is not compromise or despair, but, as the Jaycees would have it, confidence, mutual cooperation, and collective action.

All this is why I feel so proud to be counted as a friend of the Jaycees of the Philippines. Our country has profited by you, not only by the direct benefits derived from your civic action but also by the example which you have set for our internal and international policies.

In congratulating the officers who have been inducted tonight, I wish to remind them of this great tradition of the Philippine Jaycees. You are assuming a responsibility no less grave than those of public officials. For you must now assume the leadership of young men whose record of achievements includes that of having, by action and not by words, shown our government and our people the way to happiness, freedom, and peace for our Republic. May God grant you the wisdom with which to discharge such an important and necessary duty. For we shall always need of the spirit, the action, and the example of the Jaycees of the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech before the Jaycees, at the Manila Hotel Fiesta Pavilion, Sunday evening, July 8, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(7) , 3555-3557.