Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Association of College and University Professors (PACUP)

[Delivered at the Far Eastern University Auditorium, June 10, 1955]

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THE invitation to speak to you was one which I was very happy to accept. Part of my satisfaction was due to the knowledge that I would have an understanding and responsive audience composed of some of our best minds. But uppermost was the thought that this would be a chance to communicate directly with the men and women who personally bear a national responsibility very close to my heart. I refer, of course, to that most important responsibility of training our youth for useful and constructive maturity.

Only recently, I had occasion to express a few thoughts regarding the role of our institutions of higher learning in furnishing the leadership needs of our nation. I emphasized the importance of bringing the powerful tool of knowledge into action in coping with the practical problems of our national existence. My remarks to you now are in the same spirit, but on a more intimate and individual level. Yours, after all, is the closest and most personal contact with the youth who will determine the future of our country and our people.

There is nothing I can say to you about the methods of education. You are the specialist, and your competence is unquestioned.

Likewise, there is nothing I need say about your devotion to your task, about the sincerity of your efforts. It is too well known that your profession is noted for unselfish performance, that there has never been adequate reward for the responsibility you bear and the social contribution you make.

Despite this last fact, what I ask of you now is an extra measure of effort, extra attention on your part to one aspect of the educational process. This is the development of what we need today—and what you can give us: a more thoughtful, a more critical, and a more active citizen.

This new citizen must fully understand the serious demands of the democracy of which he is a part. He must be made to realize that the democracy of today as the calesa is different from a modern car. In the calesa of our fathers you could joke and talk and leave it up to the horse to find his way: a mistake then was not too serious. The same behavior in a car of our day usually means disaster and tragedy. Today’s driver must be skilled and sober. He must understand his vehicle, and know the rules on the road he travels.

The same is true of our citizen, of our public servant, and of our government. Events move too swiftly for us to be able to take an attitude of indifference toward the course of our national life. Carelessness on the part of government and lack of interest on the part of our citizens can be costly and tragic, not only to this generation but to many others to come.

Our citizen of today must learn to insist on facts. He must learn to demand that policies based on labels and slogans include the details of their operation, of their consequences. How will this policy, he must ask, affect me personally? How will it affect my children ten years from now? How will it affect our nation?

A certain amount of politics is necessary under our system but our citizens must refuse to let politics—politics in its basest sense—dominate government. The political game is exciting to those who participate in it, but it is played chiefly for the benefit of those individuals. It must not be permitted to take the place of the duties and junctions which the public servant is paid to perform. When the game of politics actually slows down the process of government and impairs its efficiency, it becomes a very costly game which the citizen should not tolerate.

I realize that you do not reach all the voters of this land, but your students can become the missionaries of good citizenship in their community. They can become the molders of an informed public opinion without which a democracy cannot operate. You must impress upon them the fact that they are part of the community and that their community is part of our nation—and that our nation is one of a community of nations. The accuracy of their judgment, therefore, has a tremendous effect far beyond their own experience. We do not expect each of our citizens to become expert in all the many fields of public affairs. We ask only that he perform his tasks as a citizen and a voter conscientiously, honestly, and with sober deliberation.

Whether in government or out, the citizen is a part of government under our democratic system. He must contribute his intelligence to the common pool. Under your guidance he has studied economics, perhaps, or political science, or logic. He has studied history and philosophy. But he has wasted your time and his own if he has not learned the practical application of his learning to his own problems and those of his community.

As a free people, we have chosen to live under a system of popular self-government—under a democracy. As moulders of the minds and character of our youth I ask you to give us the citizen of informed and critical judgment. In doing so you will realize the noblest aspiration of your profession, and your nation will realize the fullest flowering of its heritage.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech before the Philippine Association of College and University Professors (PACUP), delivered at the Far Eastern University Auditorium, June 10, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (6) , 2848-2850.