Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At Silliman University

[Delivered on November 25, 1956]

PRESIDENT RUIZ, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY AND STUDENT BODY, MY FRIENDS:

IN appearing here at Silliman, I feel it my first obligation to pay sincere tribute to the founder of this great University, Dr. Horace B. Silliman, who has generously contributed, through this institution and its graduates, to the progress and happiness of our country. For Silliman is one of our leading universities. Even the Monroe Survey of 1925, which many thought was overly harsh to, and critical of, Philippine schools and colleges, singled out Silliman saying that its plant, personnel, and instruction were “of the highest standards” and fully deserved “the high esteem in which it seems to be held throughout the islands.”

Universities like Silliman are the index to a nation’s capacity for greatness. Their graduates man the professions and direct the economy and their scholars, philosophers, and intellectuals create the blueprint of national life, forever guiding it to a nobler and loftier destiny.

The tradition of enlisting university men to build the philosophical basis of statesmanship is so well-established in America, as in Europe, that as soon as the Philippines became America’s responsibility, Washington sent scholars and intellectuals to Manila. When President McKinley sent his first Commission to the Philippines to conciliate the Filipinos, to report on their social and political developments, and to recommend the means and methods of administering their country, he relied heavily on university men. Of the Commission’s only three civilian members, two were scholars—Dr. Jacob Gould Schurman, president of Cornell University, and Professor Dean C. Worcester of the University of Michigan, perhaps the only American who had written a book on the Philippines up to that time. When the President formed the Second Philippine Commission headed by William Howard Taft, he again named two scholars—Worcester himself and Professor Bernard Moses of the University of California—to the five-man body. These intellectuals developed the benevolent philosophy of American rule in our country.

Influenced by the European and American tradition of utilizing intellectuals for the creative phases of statesmanship and by our own abiding faith in education, we Filipinos have always placed a great deal of reliance on our own university men. As we gained an increasing share in our government and while we were engaged in the task of convincing America of our readiness for independence, they played important parts. Trinidad Pardo de Tavera, Cayetano Arellano, Ignacio Villamor, Rafael Palma, the Kalaw Brothers, the Benitez Brothers, Jorge Bocobo, and many, others contributed their intellect and scholarship. They had of course been preceded by our great patriot intellectuals of the revolutionary period—Jose Rizal, Lopez Jaena, Marcelo del Pilar, and their contemporaries.

I have myself followed in my administration the policy of using the services of university men. I have found them most useful, especially in those aspects of our great task which require keen analysis of situations, thinking out problems and their solutions full circle, planning long-range programs, and advising on technical and specialized matters. Modern statesmanship has to do with practically all aspects of human life. And human life being constantly increasing in complexity on the one hand and the world being perpetually in crisis on the other hand, statesmen have to rely more and more on the trained thinkers of the universities, either mustered directly into service or reflecting and writing on the problems of the nation in their ivory towers. The Government’s efforts being aimed at the promotion of the people’s welfare in all its forms and facts, the public administrator can bring about positive action more swiftly and surely when he can count with such assistance.

As a progressive university, Silliman has contributed scholars and intellectuals to the public service. Silliman alumni have occupied and continue to occupy key positions in our government. Its present president, Dr. Leopoldo Ruiz, was himself until recently one of the outstanding figures in our consular service. I urge the intellectuals of this institution, as well as of our other universities, to continue to give increasing thought and study to our contemporary problems, domestic as well as international. Four universities are the pools of talent from which Government administration may freely draw specialized assistance. Silliman should be ready to serve as such when required. In fact, I am certain that, given its tradition of scholarship, service, and accomplishment, Silliman will not fail to rise to any national situation by which it may be challenged.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech delivered at Silliman University, Sunday afternoon, November 25, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (16) , 6870-6872.