Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Quezon Day dinner given by the Lions

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, August 19, 1954]

MY COUNTRYMEN:

TODAY we pause in our tasks to honor the memory of a great Filipino, a great leader and a courageous fighter. Manuel Quezon in his lifetime fought two great battles. One was against the killer, tuberculosis. The other was for the freedom of his people and his native land. I like to think that Manuel Quezon was the victor in both battles. He refused to yield to the wounds of disease until victory was assured in the fight for freedom.

Among our heroes, the life and wisdom of Quezon have special meaning for our generation. His experience was rich with the lessons of the past, but he had the imagination and practical foresight to think and act for the future. He did not claim to be a scholar. He did not claim to be a philosopher. His was the alert mind of the practical statesman. He knew the problems of his people as he knew the palm of his hand. And he had a broad understanding of the complex modern world in which they had to be solved. With these qualities, he guided our nation within sight of victory. Then his frail body demanded rest, and other hands took up the “good fight.”

Manuel Quezon was a realist. He knew the weakness of his people, and he knew their strength. He knew the power that lay in the Filipino passion for freedom, but he knew also that there was danger to that freedom in our habits of political and sectional rivalry, in personal ambition and pride. That was why, in his later years, one idea was uppermost in Quezon’s mind. He pleaded, he argued, and he fought for unity . Today, more than at any other time in our history, we need those qualities and those ideals of Manuel Quezon. We need firm and honorable principles to guide us. We need practical and realistic thinking to steer our course. We need the bigness of spirit that will give our every act the strength of a United Filipino nation.

As citizens of such a united nation, each of us needs a re-orientation of our thinking in terms of the world in which our nation exists. We must come to recognize, whether we like it or not, that we do not live and we cannot live apart from the rest of the world. On the contrary, we are a living and active part of that world. What we do has some effect on the lives of peoples of other lands. What happens in the world outside has some effect on the daily life of each and every one of us here in the Philippines. It is important that an understanding of this vital fact reach into every home, into every barrio of our land.

It is important to broaden our outlook to include the world because what happens across the seas may affect the life and future even of a new-born child in some remote barrio of this country. Let me cite an example: There was some amusement recently when I imposed a ban upon the slaughter of our traditional work animal, the carabao. It seemed so small a problem alongside many others. But since that time there has been a tragic change in the world. Half of Indo-China, our neighbor only hundreds of miles to the west, has disappeared behind the Iron Curtain, and the rest is threatened. This becomes meaningful to the humblest tao when we recall that some of our rice shortages have been made up by imports from that unhappy land. Should that source and others be closed to us, should fuel for our tractors become scarce, should a troubled world bring these and other hardships upon us, the unslaughtered carabao and his offspring become much more important. Put to work on our idle hectares, they might well mean the difference between starvation and survival.

That is what I mean by the longer and broader view. Each one of us must learn to think and act from this perspective. Only with such awareness can we reach wise decisions and take effective action.

Some of you may shrink from this heavy responsibility. You may say, we have had enough of war and hardship. Can we not stand apart and let other fight if they insist? I wish I could say yes, but the answer is no. I am convinced, and the great majority of our statesmen and experts agree, that we have no choice, that there is no safe neutral position to take. If there is to be a war, our islands lie in the path of conflict. If aggression is to continue short of world war, we are high on the list of victims. Our only chance for peace is to work to stop aggression by adding our strength to the strength of a united free world. Our hope for survival as a free people lies in the survival of that free world.

Some of you may ask, so soon after fighting and winning a war against dictators and aggressors, why is the world again a fearful and dangerous jungle? There is some confusion in people’s minds about the answer to this. Let me try to state it simply. It is a conflict between those who support the right of all peoples to freedom and self-determination, and the ambition of a new imperialism to dominate and rule the world.

If we examine a list of the nations of the free world, we are struck by the variety of political, economic, and social systems that co-exist and cooperate in peace. Spain, England, Sweden, India, Burma, the United States—these countries are governed under different systems. What is noteworthy is that they all live in peace and respect each other’s rights as self-governing peoples.

In conflict with these nations is a group of imperialist Communist nations. What sets them apart from us is their self-admitted program of aggression and conquest.

From their world headquarters in Moscow, they use duplicity to recruit agents in non-Communist lands. These agents, setting themselves up as the Communists parties of the countries in which they operate, are instructed and guided by their alien masters in a systematic campaign to undermine and overthrow the legal governments of their own nations. When sabotage and propaganda fail to do the job, they are given soldiers and arms to complete it by violence. The main Communist propaganda machine tries to sell the fiction that these operations are “national liberation” movements, but there is overwhelming evidence from their own presses that it is a systematic plan of aggression designed to be used in every free country of the world.

This description is not just a theory. It is the plan that aggressive international Communism distributes to its agents throughout the world in countless books and periodicals that anyone can read. This is what has destroyed world peace. This is the program of aggression which we of the free world are resisting today, and must continue to resist if we wish to stay on this side of the Iron Curtain. Not only must we continue to resist it singly, but we must stop its advances in collaboration with countries which share our ideals and aspirations.

Each new conquest means a stronger aggressor. The people of conquered lands become slave labor. Their resources become war material for the aggressors next venture. Unless the free world take steps to stop the slow erosion of its strength, the time is not too far off when the aggressors will have captured the material strength for a massive aggression which might end freedom on the face of the earth. That is what troubles the world today and lays the cold hand of fear on every one of us.

What is the answer for us? As I have already pointed out, there is no safety in neutralism because the aggressors do not respect either moral principles or international law. I have said before and I still firmly believe, that the only hope to avert a war, and the only way to win a war if it is forced upon us, is through the united action of the free world.

Next month, some of the free nations will meet here in the Philippines to discuss the problem and try to work out a solution. We hope to find unity among them, but it is imperative that we assure unity among ourselves. Manuel Quezon foresaw this need, and today’s events prove his wisdom.

The unity which Quezon asked from his people is what we need now to guard our freedom and assure our survival. We can achieve such unity only if we face the fact that our domestic successes and our domestic failures will mean little if we ignore the storm-signals of the outside world. We must stop thinking of ourselves as Ilocanos or Visayans, as Nacionalistas or Democrats or Liberals, as Christians or Moros. We must think of ourselves as citizens of the Filipino nation, the Republic of the Philippines. Whoever puts personal or sectional considerations above the interests of the Republic, betrays the principles and ideals upon which the Republic is founded. He betrays the memory of Manuel Quezon. He betrays his own heritage as a Filipino.

Today our thinking must be national. We must think in terms of developing our whole economic strength. We must provide for the physical and mental health of our whole population. We must tighten and reinforce our defenses against the enemy inside as well as outside our shores. We must bring into action the full strength of our human and material resources. We must clear our minds and spirits of all doubt and indecision. We must forge strong ties of common determination, common purpose, and common action with all who think as we do. We must do these things because we have an obligation to our past, to the memory of Quezon and of those who preceded him. Our obligation is to spare no effort, no sacrifice, to preserve what they fought to secure—Filipino freedom.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Magsaysay at the Quezon Day dinner given by the Lions. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(8) , 3535-3539.