Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Batangas Lawyers Association

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, November 24, 1956]

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM grateful for this opportunity to address the members of the Batangas Lawyers Association.

To be a Batangas lawyer is to be possessed of a rare combination of qualities—the nobility that is associated with the legal profession and the fierce pride and courage which are the marks of a true Batangueño.

Men propelled by these qualities have provided the thinking and the leadership in every phase of our national effort to secure freedom and preserve it.

In the dawn of our freedom, it was a Batangas lawyer by the name of Apolinario Mabini who with his giant mind and brilliant pen outlined the philosophy of our revolution and the legal bases of our first Republic. Other Batangas lawyers surrounded him providing that libertarian movement with advice, inspiration, and action. Felipe Agoncillo was the first Philippine diplomat and Sotero Laurel, sire of lawyer-patriots, served brilliantly in Aguinaldo’s Ministry of Justice. Diego Gloria, Braulio Bihasa, Pablo Borbon, Vicente Illustre, these were others from the province of Batangas whose legal talents were placed in the service of our people in that era of struggle and decision.

As we went into our period of preparation for freedom through constitutional processes, other Batangueños rose to grace the legal departments of government and the legal profession. Justice Araullo, Teodoro Kalaw, Ramon Diokno and Eusebio Orense to mention only a few of those who are no longer with us.

Of those who are with us, who will dispute the contribution of the Laurels, the Rectos, the De Joyas, the Ozaetas, the Levistes to the formation of the foundations of law and justice that are the anchors of our Republic?

Indeed, if Philippine law and Philippine justice are the pride of our people today, it is due in great measure to that rare combination of nobility, pride, courage, and sheer brilliance which the great lawyers from Batangas has displayed in the courts, in the legislative chambers, and in every field of legal endeavor in our democratic society.

These are qualities now shared by every Filipino lawyer worth his name. Indeed, there is only one quality which is not present in the great body of Filipino lawyers today—unity. Because of this lack of unity, the Filipino lawyers have not reached, as a group, that maximum of effectiveness in the service of our people that they have individually attained.

I am not a lawyer and I will not pretend to tell this group of distinguished lawyers of the benefits to their profession of a unified national lawyers’ group. But in the discharge of the duties of my office, it is not difficult to see the necessity for such unity in the interest of the public service. There is need for unified advice on which the executive may call in appointments to positions involving the legal profession. There is need, I dare say, for such advice for Congress to seek in the passage of legislation. There is need for such unity in aiding the Supreme Court and our judicial system to uphold the effectiveness and the majesty of the law.

These are not new ideas. I believe it was Senate Jose P. Laurel who as early as the 1920’s began the move for a unification of bar associations in the Philippines. I trust that Senator Laurel will continue to lead in the accomplishment of this worthy end. And I hope that with the inauguration of the Batangas Lawyers Association the Philippines has found a group of lawyers which will work as such towards this end.

I can think of no better organization than this association of Batangas lawyers to spur the formation of a truly national lawyers’ federation. For the Batangas lawyer possesses not only the nobility of his profession but also the pride and the courage of his provincial heritage. The Batangas lawyer is a patriot who will not only subscribe to unity but will lead in making that unity a reality.

May I congratulate the officers and members of this association for this brilliant inauguration. Let this be the signal for great accomplishments in the defense of individual freedom and the forging of unity in our land.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Magsaysay before the Batangas Lawyers Association, November 24, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (16), 6869-6870.