Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Alumni Homecoming of the College Editors’ Guild

[Delivered at the Philippine-American Homes Clubhouse, October 27, 1956]

MY FRIENDS:

WHEN the invitation was extended to me to address this gathering of alumni and members of the College Editors’ Guild, it was suggested that I speak on positive nationalism.

It seems to me that we should first agree on one thing—that there is only one kind of nationalism, that one which the dictionary defines as “devotion to, or advocacy of, national interests.” If we insist on emphasizing its positive aspect, it is to remind ourselves that devotion to national interests demands more than mere lip service. It calls for the practical expression of that devotion in our daily lives. To me nationalism is a living force which should add to, and not subtract from, the material and spiritual assets of the nation. It is well to talk about it. But it is more important in the practice than in the definition.

This is not to say that words can not enhance positive nationalism. As college editors, some of whom have gone on to practice the profession of journalism with great distinction, you need not be reminded that words—when they speak the truth—the whole truth—discharge an important function in the development of our national life. Public information is a vital component in the structure of a democratic society. And you who are trained in this science have a mission to perform in the interest of our nation. Our people are entitled to expect from the alumni and members of this Guild leadership in the dissemination of truth. They expect you to lead in distinguishing truth from half-truth and from absolute falsehood.

The distinction between truth and half-truth or falsehood is as essential to our democracy as the distinction between the positive nationalism that builds and the mislabelled nationalism that destroys. For truth strengthens freedom. It helps the nation to think clearly and to proceed with confidence on the road to progress and security. Half-truths and falsehood can destroy freedom completely. They confuse the nation, rob it of its self-confidence, and leave it helpless on the road, an easy victim to the designs of tyrants.

There is more than one instance in which our people must be rescued from the confusion into which they are sought to be plunged in the name of nationalism. One example may be sufficient here. In an effort to drive us to the ways of neutralism, our people are told that we are not respected in Asia because of our close relations with other countries, particularly the United States, who are pledged together with us to the collective defense of this area against the Communist advance.

And where may we find support for this assumption? Leaders in Communist Asian territories will support it, of course. But there are only three such leaderships in East and Southeast Asia. Does this assumption find approval in the other Asian countries of this area? Certainly not among our allies in the very same collective defense pacts. Certainly not among our other fellow Asian countries who pursue the same policy towards the Communist revolution. And even the leaders of neighboring free countries that do not follow our chosen course are more fair in their appraisal of our relations than some of our countrymen. For instance, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia was only last May quoted in the world press as saying: “We have always envied the Philippines. The way the United States has helped build them up is an example of what we want”.

There are some countries in this area whose leaders follow a course of action different from ours because of various considerations. Their representatives have told us that they respect our right to our own policies just as we told them that we respect theirs. And they have not said that if their circumstances were like ours, they would not adopt our policies.

It is one thing to seek respect. It is another thing to harbor pretensions to leadership. The former we admit. The latter we do not even discuss. The leadership that we seek for this area is the collective leadership of free men. And we believe that the supremacy of freedom is not possible in this area or in any other part of the world if free nations do not take positive collective action in the defense of their liberties against the open and the convert attack of the Red conspiracy.

My friends, our press has been called the freest in the world. If this is so, then we should be proud of it, and it is my pledge that the constitutional freedom of expression shall not be unduly limited by any one in my administration. I ask you also, present and former college editors, to strengthen this freedom by leading in the observance of its responsibilities—the first of which is the responsibility for the truth. I do not advocate censorship, for censorship is precisely the suppression of truth. I advocate truth—the truth that will confirm the people’s confidence in the institution of democracy and put them on the right road to happiness and security.

My friends, I see by your roster that many of your colleagues have reached positions of distinction, not only in the field of journalism, but also in the fields of government and private enterprise and occupation. This is not surprising. There is perhaps no better training for leadership than a thorough training in the defense of truth. Do not fail your country in the responsibilities of your leadership. Give us the truth—the truth in government, the truth in business, the truth in the professions, the truth in every human endeavor, for it is only the truth that can lead to correct action. And action is the key to that advocacy of the national interests which is called for in the pursuit of nationalism in our time.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay at the Alumni Homecoming of the College Editors’ Guild. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (15), 6476-6478.