Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Pangasinan Medical Society on the 11th Annual Installation of Officers and Fellowship Luncheon

[Delivered at the Vicar Skyroom, Dagupan City, March 9, 1957]

MY FRIENDS:

I AM very happy to be here with you this noon on the occasion of the induction of your new officers. I hope that more professional organizations like this one will be established in the provinces. I have nothing against national organizations or Manila organizations; they have their own uses. But it is only smaller provincial units which can give the professional or practitioner a more intimate appreciation of his work and of the people he serves. Besides, it is high time that the provinces and towns and barrios of this country come into their own as self-reliant units, instead of depending forever on direction and supervision from Manila. This is in keeping with the Government’s program of building up the towns and barrios, of helping them to develop into strong economic and social units.

I feel a special satisfaction in being with this particular group. I have heard of the unselfish and patriotic work that many of you are doing in extending medical aid and services free of charge to the indigent people of your province. You are, through your own initiative, supplementing the Government’s efforts in this field. I wish that other medical organizations throughout the country would emulate your splendid example.

This project of yours springs from a quality of the mind and the heart which, I am afraid, many of our more fortunate countrymen have forsaken. This quality is a sense of your responsibility, your obligation to those who are less favored. During the height of the Huk crisis, when our more substantial countrymen realized that they were imminently threatened with the loss of their properties, their careers, and in many cases their very lives, they acknowledged the need of improving the living conditions of the unhappy masses as the only effective way of coping with the danger. The landlords were for land reforms; the employers were for higher wages and better living conditions for their laborers; the wealthy were for better opportunities for the poor. Fortunately, the danger has since passed, but unfortunately some of those same citizens who had acquired the gift of enlightenment in a period of crisis have lost it and have lapsed back to the old ways of selfishness and greed which had initially given rise to that very crisis.

I am happy to note the physicians of this province have not yet yielded to this temptation. I am happy to know that you continue to accept your responsibilities and obligations to our more unfortunate countrymen. Certainly, principles that are valid in time of danger should remain just as valid in time of comparative security. The challenge to help ameliorate the living conditions of the masses of our people is a continuing one.

I feel, therefore, no need to defend before this gathering the public health program of the Administration, which has been criticized by some as an encroachment on the legitimate sphere of activity of private practitioners. By providing health services and facilities to citizens, the Government is not engaging in competition with private physicians, for the simple reason that the Government’s free activities are meant only for those who are unable to engage private medical care. I am sure that those among you who are undertaking humanitarian work among indigents do not feel that they are competing with themselves. It is the same with the Government’s public health program.

The Government is, in fact, helping your practice by stimulating among our rural masses an awareness of the need and benefits of medical care. As the Government’s rural development program gains momentum and expands in scope, many more of our countrymen in the rural areas will be enjoying higher incomes and better standards of living. They constitute your potential clientele. From free patients they will in time become paying patients endowed with an appreciation of the need of medical care.

This, then is the stake that you—and besides you, our lawyers, engineers, architects, and other professionals—have in the success of the rural development program. Nothing is more false than the accusation that the Government’s special concern for the masses discriminates against other classes of our society, including the professionals. You know that one reason so many of our graduates and professionals choose to remain in Manila and the big cities rather than return to their native towns and barrios is the complaint that the opportunities for profitable practice are limited in the villages. This is true only for as long as our masses do not enjoy the prospect of economic betterment. But such is no longer the case, and as their incomes and standards of living improve, the opportunities for forfitable activities by our professionals will proportionately grow. You can see, therefore, that it is to your own interest and to your own benefit that the rural development program should succeed.

Once again, I wish to say that I am proud of the sense of social consciousness and responsibility shown by those among you who are giving freely of their time and effort in order to help our less fortunate countrymen. As long as our more favoured classes are imbued with this spirit, we need not fear a resurgence of the danger which nearly engulfed us all only a few years ago. May your tribe increase.

I wish to congratulate your new officers and wish them success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). President Magsaysay’s speech before the Pangasinan Medical Society on the 11th Annual Installation of Officers and Fellowship Luncheon, March 9, 1957, at the Vicar Skyroom, Dagupan City. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(6) , 1737-1739.