Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the University of the Philippines

[Delivered on April 5, 1955]

PRESIDENT TAN, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, MEMBERS OF THE GRADUATING CLASS, MY FRIENDS:

IT is good to be with you this evening, and to be permitted to share the atmosphere of hope and promise that prevails over this gathering of young people who have reached a significant milestone in their lives. For the academic honor conferred upon me, I am deeply grateful and profoundly moved. But this is a very personal kind of gratification, of consequence to me alone. What stirs me even more is the feeling of being privileged to have something of a preview of our country’s future.

This is not said to flatter you or to indulge in a flight of rhetoric. I am simply expressing a basic fact of human life which too often is forgotten. The past generation clings jealously to its values and condemns the present for any change. The present generation stoutly defends its values as the peak of aspiration. Both forget that they are merely temporary custodians of what really belongs to the future. To me you are the future, and I am excited as I look ahead to what you will have achieved when I have slipped into the background of the past.

When I was thinking of what to talk to you about this evening, many topics of great interest and importance came quickly to mind. The tense and precarious state of the world with its threat of war, and its threat of a dictatorship ambitious to conquer all mankind. Certainly these will strongly influence the pattern of your lives. Or, turning to the domestic scene, I thought of the many and serious political, social, and economic problems which challenge us as a people and will determine our destiny as a nation. They, too, are bound to affect you. But I remembered that in you I would have an audience far better informed on those subjects, perhaps, than most . . . far better equipped by training to grasp their magnitude and vital significance. I therefore decided upon a subject of more personal and immediate interest to you.

I would like to talk to you tonight briefly about a subject which is most timely in terms of our nation’s problems, most appropriate for the halls of this Institution of higher learning, and above all, most significant to you as individuals. I would like to talk to you about leadership—what it is, what it means, and what its functions are in this Republic.

In the first place, I think it should be remembered that in a democracy the title of leader is not something to be sought or to be seized. The title of leader, to have real meaning, must be conferred upon an individual by a community. It must be conferred on the basis of evidence that the individual has those qualifications which make for useful and constructive leadership.

I think it is also important to bear in mind that the title of leader is not to be considered solely as an honor to be worn like a medal, or to be framed and hung on a wall. True, it is an honor, a great honor, since it expresses the confidence and respect of one’s fellow citizens. But even more than that, it imposes a grave obligation and a heavy burden of responsibility if the individual who earns the title tries seriously to live up to it.

There are many kinds of leadership, and only one of them—not necessarily the most important—is that which has to do with politics and government. In a democratic society such as ours, leadership is essential at every level and in every area of national activity. In fact it might be said that the reason for the existence of this Institution is the need for a constant supply of individuals equipped with the knowledge and the training to assume the responsibilities of leadership when and if required. Every student who passes through the doors of this Institution should understand from the outset what I have already said about leadership. His community, his nation, has established and maintains this Institution so that the nation’s youth may have the means of developing their talents to the fullest possible degree. It is a public service, the cost of which is borne directly or indirectly by every citizen—by every resident—of the nation. It is therefore expected by the community and the nation that the men and women who emerge with skills and training will have a sense of obligation to use those skills in such manner as to benefit their fellow countrymen.

When I said that leadership in government is not necessarily most important it was not because of modesty or with the intention of minimizing the importance of government. But I think it is important to realize that government of itself is after all, nothing more than a means of guiding and regulating the complex mechanism which is a nation of more than twenty million human beings.

Government, of itself, cannot feed or clothe those human beings. It cannot give them employment or minister to their health. These things must come from the human and from the material resources which make up the nation. They must come from the hard work and vigorous initiative of every one of us, from the intelligent utilization of the riches with which God has endowed us as a people.

For example, there is a need for civic leadership—the kind that teaches and keeps the citizen aware of his rights and obligations under our form of government—that stirs him to intelligent action when those rights are impaired and persuades him toward responsible action when he neglects his obligations. Only with such civic leadership can our people know that their government is fulfilling its functions, and only with such leadership can the government be assured of the material and moral support which is essential to its successful operation.

Our economy needs leadership. It is needed at every one of the many levels which make up the huge complex machinery of the nation’s productive and distributive effort. In agriculture and in industry, in commerce and in trade, in transportation and scientific research—in all of these and in many more too numerous to mention there is the need and the place for your skills. There is the need and the opportunity for any or all of you to assume positions of leadership.

If I have not mentioned arts and letters and those other purely cultural areas of learning so vital to the spirit and mind, it is not because I consider them less important but because I feel that they can best flourish only if there is being achieved the state of material well-being which the other skills can provide. Nor do I consider even this as an order of rigid priority. The ivory tower has its place in every civilized community and the test of leadership within its confines is the success with which the product of the ivory tower is brought down into the marketplace to improve and enrich the life of the community.

It would be an insult to your intelligence for me to say that you are about to step into a bright world waiting to greet you with open arms, recognize your merits, and heap rewards upon you. On the contrary, you will be better armed for the struggle ahead if you know that the accomplishment of your mission in life means overcoming many formidable obstacles.

You will find yourself blocked by selfishness and greed. The mud of ignorance and vanity will slow your steps. Glib and empty oratory will dazzle and confuse you. You will have to cut away the bonds of prejudice and false pride, and resist the pressure of arrogance. You will have to learn to recognize these evils, expose them and destroy them if you are to realize your ambitions, and if society is to benefit by its investment in you.

I feel that you are equal to the task. You have the clear-eyed vigor of youth, and your minds have been sharpened into keen and precise instruments. You will not fail if you bear in mind always that your success and well-being as individuals cannot be separated from the well-being of your community, from the progress and development of your nation. You cannot fail if you have faith in your God and confidence in yourselves.

As useful citizens of today, I welcome you. As leaders of tomorrow, I salute you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). The President’s speech at the Commencement Exercises of the University of the Philippines, April 5, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (4) , 1817-1820.