Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Boy Scouts of the Philippines

[Delivered at Luneta, October 31, 1956]

THE Boy Scout movement is perhaps one of the happiest ideas ever conceived by man concerned with citizenship training.

Indeed, Scouting is a great force that can weld in this Republic a strong and enlightened citizenry. Properly supported, it can be the defensive and offensive weapon against present-day juvenile delinquency. Because it is attractive, as it is instructive, to the youth of the land, it can bring back to the fold those who have gone astray.

At this juncture, I would like to salute those men and women who 33 years ago sacrificed time and effort and money to see this movement grow, for indeed those patriots are the benefactors not only of the Filipino youth but of the nation as well.

The fruits of their self-abnegation, those one hundred and forty thousand boy scouts scattered throughout the Republic, are our most valuable citizens today.

We are spending millions, a big slice of our national budget, in the field of education. We are trying the utmost to equip our youth with the best academic education. Yet we find this wanting: we discovered our task is to equip not only his mind but his heart, not only his body but his soul.

And the most effective method to inculcate in the minds and hearts of our young ones is the scouting movement where the value of virtue and strong character is not only taught but practiced.

Our citizenry can benefit from the training of the boy scout. The Scout’s code of conduct teaches him to be skilled in practical and useful work; to be self-confident and reliant; to be cooperative and considerate of others; to be judicious in speech and action, yet courageous and brave; and above all, to be God-fearing, civic-spirited, and patriotic.

Our nation is young. And in our youth we are experiencing untold difficulties. At no other time in our nation’s history is unity and cooperation among the citizenry more imperative than now.

A boy scout has the ability to cooperate, the knack of working as a team. Yet we find among us, people who would indulge in fault-finding rather than help; who would destroy rather than build.

What progress could have been attained, what public welfare could have been achieved, had more of our people, realizing that the progress of one is the progress of all, put their shoulders to the wheel together and contributed to the common advancement.

Another boy scout trait is zeal to do a good deed each day. Yet we find among us, people who not only refuse to do a good deed but make it a habit and a goal in life to frustrate the good deeds of others. If only that ‘good-deed-a-day’ trait were a norm of conduct of our people, what forward strides our nation can make, what happiness and contentment we can bring to ourselves.

Because I believe boy Scouting is one of the greatest discoveries in citizenship training, because I believe it will not only check but finally eradicate juvenile delinquency, for the youth is tomorrow’s promise, I sincerely urge all our people to give their generous support to the scouting movement.

Only in this way can Scouting spread and bring its influence to an ever-increasing number of youth. Only in this way can it become a universal movement in our country in the foreseeable future. And only in this way can its salutary influence be felt by those who have not yet benefited from the training and teachings of the Scouting movement.

I join and congratulate you as you celebrate today the 33rd anniversary of organized Scouting and the 20th anniversary of the organization of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines .

May your observance of this Boy Scouts’ Week bring to focus the important role you play in nation-building. May your efforts be crowned with greater glories.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay before the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (15), 6480-6482.