Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the MOPC

[Released on December 20, 1956]

I AM very happy to join you this evening, to be able to visit with so many old friends, and to meet so many new ones.

The Manila Overseas Press Club is a place for which I have a particular sentimental attachment. During my campaign in 1952 a number of foreign correspondents tried to keep up with me. The casualties were returned to this club, where they were revived by the administration of stimulants.

Carlos Nivera, the club president whose term has just ended, is to be commended for the job he has done in improving the physical facilities of the club and expanding its membership. I need not point out that Mr. Nivera is an outstanding advocate of deficit financing.

At the same time, your new president, Don Huth, is to be commended for his courage in assuming the task of negotiating with the creditors. Fortunately, the members seem willing to spend long hours at the bar in an effort to keep your finances liquid.

Seriously, however, it is a real pleasure to watch the Overseas Press Club add year after year to its traditions, constantly expanding its influence in the community. In this friendly and informal atmosphere the great ideas and issues and problems of our time are discussed and explored, and out of these friendly discussions comes the understanding which enables newsmen to inform and guide their reading public.

This information and guidance is a great service, one of the greatest. Its accuracy and completeness could determine the very survival of democracy and freedom. Clear thinking and sound judgment are the great needs of the day. Such thinking and judgment must be well informed, and we look to you to inform us. I have complete confidence in your exercise of this responsibility.

Let me wish you a merry Christmas and continued success during the New Year.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech at MOPC, Friday night, December 20, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (18) , 7571.