Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Kick-off Ceremonies launching the Fund Drive for the Jose Rizal National Centennial  Commission

[ Delivered at the Malacañang Social Hall, March 15, 1957 ]

MY FRIENDS:

WE are met today to inaugurate the fund drive for the Rizal Centennial Commission. We are investing the event with fitting solemnity because it means so much to all of us. It is the historic privilege of our generation to celebrate the centenary of the birth of Jose Rizal. It is our good fortune to render in a special manner in our time the tribute which we owe to his greatness, to prove our loyalty to his memory, to express our faith in him. It is our duty and privilege to communicate to those who come after us the loftiest spiritual values of the legacy he left to our race.

As beneficiaries of his sacrifice, we are called upon—all of us—to contribute generously of our resources and our energies so that the celebration we shall hold four years from now may be worthy of the stature we accord to Rizal in the life of our nation. Let it not be said of us that we are lacking in the veneration which other peoples render lesser men. Let us make the centennial of Rizal’s birth truly a national event, with every Filipino giving his shave of the fund until the amount of ten million pesos required for this grand event has been raised.

In countries under the heel of the Communist tyrant, projects like the one we inaugurate today are insured against failure by resort to compulsion and coercion. But success thus achieved is of course hollow and empty. In our democracy, these enslaving methods have no place United to Rizal in his love of freedom, inspired by his dedication to the well-being of our Motherland, and encourage by his faith in our capacity for greatness as a people, we shall, I am sure, respond freely and heartfully to the present appeal to our generosity and to our patriotism.

I ask everyone to support this drive. It is my privilege to start it off with my personal contribution.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library