Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the Southwestern Colleges

[Delivered in Cebu City, March 16, 1957]

MY FRIENDS:

THE occasion which brings us together affords me a good opportunity to emphasize a fact we often take for granted in discussions of our national problems. This is the fact that the most valuable and indispensable asset of our national patrimony consists of our human resources. The wealth of our country is of two kinds: the material and the spiritual. To develop the first, we construct power projects and factories, and the rest of the apparatus which our economic and industrial program demands. To conserve the second we maintain a system of public and private schools in which the cultural heritage of our people shall be preserved, developed, and transmitted from generation to generation.

The dignity of the human person is one of the most sacred values constituting our national heritage. It was in defense of that dignity that some of the most glorious pages of our history were written in the blood, sweat, toil, and sufferings of our heroes. It was faith in that dignity which inspired Rizal to call upon the youth to consecrate the best years of their lives, their finest ideals, and their highest loyalties, in a pure oblation to the service and the welfare of our native land.

This same faith in the intrinsic value of the human person is now being ruthlessly suppressed as a hateful heresy in many countries of the world. The lords of communism and their sycophants in the Philippines would degrade man to the position of a slave of the state. They would educate him, develop him, train him to be a tool for the glorification of the State, an economic animal and a political pawn. We here in the Philippines hold the opposite view. Man is not a mere creature of the State but it is for him that the State exists. We hold this view by heritage, by tradition, and by conviction.

The basic conflict over the nature of man underlies the irremediable antagonism between communism and democracy. To consider communism as a mere political form or structure is to undermine the foundation upon which democracy stands. Furthermore, to pretend that here in the Philippines any political expression of communism may claim title to the sovereign right of the people to change their government, is to betray our heritage, uproot our deepest traditions, and stifle our most precious aspirations.

The late President Quezon condemned communism with characteristic bluntness. He said:

“I am against communism. I am a firm believer in the institution of private property. Should anyone attempt tomorrow to establish a school for the preaching of communism in the Philippines, our Government should right away stop it. Should anyone attempt to convert every Filipino into a Red, the Government should act without loss of time.”

We can do no less than President Quezon.

Communism is anti-Filipino. When Communist sympathizers in the Philippines say that their movement is indigenous and not under the influence or control of any alien power, it is merely to coat with the veneer of a so-called Filipinism the dagger they have aimed at the very heart of the Filipino way of life. We cannot for one moment afford to put in jeopardy the freedom of this way of life. Between it and communism there can be no peace, no paralyzing co-existence, no grey neutralism. There can only be conflict—total and without reconciliation.

Neutralism is un-Filipino. To attempt to foist it upon our people is to do them a grave disservice. The country has no need of fence-sitters in the struggle to preserve our way of life. Either we continually love and live this way of life, or communism, stretching across the earth and threatening us here and now, will choke it from the body of our nation.

We are a people with a history of courage. There is no place in that history for the fear of freedom, the fear to be on the side of freedom, the fear to be against slavery, the fear to strike a light for liberty amid the encircling gloom that is communism.

Our democracy is a system of freedom. Our government rests upon principles worked out over many centuries, in many lands. It is the outcome of the long and arduous struggle for human freedom which has been going on since the beginning of time. The great struggle continues in the world, as we know only too well; but in the Philippines, thank God, we are still free. In spite of considerable rant and ill humor, usually around election time, we are a free people. We grumble a great deal and no doubt we have things to grumble about—grumbling is one of our privileges—but we are better off than many other national groups that it is possible to name. It is our right as a free people to demand a change—and, when enough of us want it, to get it. No concentration camp or firing squad awaits us if we happen to be of the minority.

These rights and privileges Communism would utilize now, only to suppress if we relay our vigilance and relent in our determination to keep it out of our national life. Now, more than ever, we must maintain and strengthen that vigilance and renew that determination. We must not allow insidious proposals of economic pananceas to alienate us from our traditional allies in the free world. Let us not delude ourselves that credit arrangements with the enemies of our way of life will solve the economic problems which afflict our land.

We must recognize that no “pie-in-the-sky” formula will cure all our ills; and that we face a continuing demand for calm thinking, sound reason, impassionate and undramatic hard work. A large part of this work must be done by you, my friends, who represent such a vital part of our human resources upon which everything else depends. It is a work which requires the highest kind of confidence and courage, imagination and enthusiasm, dedication and a degree of humbleness growing out of the knowledge that our very survival depends upon it.

It is my hope that with the training you have received from this University—you will be equal to the task.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). Speech of President Magsaysay at the Commencement Exercises of the Southwestern Colleges, 6:00 p.m., Saturday, March 16, Cebu City. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (6) , 1743-1745.