Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines On the occasion of Labor Day

[Released on May 1, 1955]

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, FELLOW WORKERS:

I am happy to join in this traditional celebration of Labor Day, and to extend to you and to all the working men and women of our land my warmest greetings and congratulations. I congratulate you because of the impressive progress achieved by labor during the past year in its steady march toward its rightful position in our society. Your progress is a matter of greatest interest to me because of my conviction that a strong, democratic, and responsible labor movement can be an important stabilizing force in our social and economic life.

As your growth continues and as you gain more and more of the benefits of social justice, you may be sure that your government under this administration will give the fullest measure of support and protection to your rights under the nation’s laws. I am fully aware that the mechanisms which exist to implement and enforce the laws designed for your protection are frequently inadequate and slow. In some cases they must be completely overhauled and brought up-to-date. We are moving in this direction as rapidly as possible.

My understanding of your problems and of mechanisms, after all, is no accident. My past experience as a mechanic explains both. But if any of you mechanics look upon me as an example to follow, let me warn you: In my present employment I am not protected by the eight-hour law and there is no severance pay.

There may be some of you who feel that this administration has overlooked the industrial worker in concentrating on the barrio and rural development. Let me point out that this effort affects you most directly and significantly. To increase our agricultural efficiency and production is the only practical means of securing for you what I consider your right, a decent minimum living standard.

No matter what your wages may be in pesos, what really counts is your real wage, what your peso will buy in terms of food, clothing, and shelter. A prime objective of this administration is to raise the purchasing power of your pesos by modernizing and developing our basic agricultural economy.

There is another objective of this administration in which you have perhaps the heaviest stake. I refer to our efforts to encourage and attract domestic and foreign investment for the development of our resources and for industrialization. Here again is the only practical way to translate some of your theoretical gains into reality.

Organized labor here has expanded and improved its collective bargaining techniques but this advantage cannot yet be fully realized. The problem is simply that there are too many candidates for too few jobs; there is fierce competition among our workers themselves for the limited number of jobs available. The only solution is the encouragement of more enterprises, more development of our natural resources, more industrial ventures—in short, more job opportunities. Our labor force and our job availabilities must be brought into closer balance if collective bargaining is to function effectively.

This, in brief, is the administration’s program for labor. First, to maintain a free social and political climate in which labor can find unity by democratic organization and learn to use effectively the democratic means of protecting its rights and advancing its interests. Second, to increase national production, reducing the price of essential commodities and giving greater purchasing power to the worker’s peso. Third, to extend the national economy, bring about full employment, and put the law of supply and demand on the side of the worker. This is our program for your benefit and I ask your understanding and cooperation in speeding its accomplishment.

As we celebrate this Labor Day, we should take note and think soberly about a strange twist of history. For many years, in Europe and elsewhere, the rallying of labor on May First has always been associated with the followers of Karl Marx. Today we find that in those countries where Marx has taken the place of God, labor organization has become little more than organized slavery. In Communist countries only one union is permitted and that is run by the State. To criticize or oppose this union is considered a crime against the state, punishable by forced labor or worse. Strikes are forbidden. Heartbreaking speed-up and overtime assignments are imposed without extra compensation and called “patriotic contributions”. The worker has no choice in his employment. He must do what he is told and go where he is sent—even if it is thousands of miles from his home and loved ones. This is the “worker’s paradise” that Communists have in store for labor.

It is important that you think about this and remember it as your organization strengthens and expands. Labor unions are a priority target for Communist infiltration and seizure of control. You must exercise constant vigilance in spotting these enemy agents and expelling them from your free organization. You must learn to recognize their tactics and frustrate their plans to capture you.

A survey of labor throughout the world today shows one unchallenged fact: Labor has achieved its greatest strength, its greatest freedom, and its highest living standards in the free democracies.

Your nation and mine is a free democracy and, with the help of God, will continue to be a free democracy. Everything we need to achieve a better life is here or within our reach. It is up to us to develop the intelligence and skill to make use of those means. It is up to us to marshal our human resources, to unlock our material resources, and,—by combining the two—to enjoy the bounty of our Creator as free Filipinos in a free Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Speech of President Magsaysay on the occasion of Labor Day, May 1, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (5) , 2350-2351.