Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines During the 48th Annual Meeting of the Philippine Medical Association

[Delivered in Baguio City, April 27, 1955]

I am very happy to be with the members of the Philippine Medical Association who are gathered here today for their 48th annual meeting. Coming from all over the country as delegates of their local medical societies, they are here to represent the physician in the different spheres of his activity. Here among you are the private medical practitioner, the physician in the government service, the specialist in the different branches of medicine, the medical educator, and even the physician members of Congress. Altogether you represent the most effective group that promotes the health of the people which is a vital requisite to the full growth of our young Republic.

About a year and a half ago in another place but under circumstances similar to this annual meeting, I announced that the improvement of the health of our people at all levels shall be one of the main objectives of my Administration. I have vigorously pursued that objective at as rapid a pace as possible. When we took over the reins of government, the appropriation for health activities was around 14 million pesos. In the first year of this Administration 31 million pesos was allotted for health work. In the budget currently under consideration by Congress not a single centavo of the amount recommended for the Department of Health has been slashed. There can be no better indication of our sincerity to improve the health of our people, and I am deeply grateful to all the members of Congress for their full support of our health programs and activities.

Conditions obtaining in the barrios and rural areas necessitate that our health program should reach these places as early as possible. Because a great majority of our people have their homes in the rural areas, we may say that the state of their health reflects to a large extent the overall health condition of the nation. For instance, the death and infant mortality rates of the country as a whole largely depend upon the rates prevailing in the rural areas. We may expect, therefore, that the more effective the medical services we render to the barrio people, the more rapid will be the decline of the general death and infant mortality rates of the nation.

In this connection, Republic Act No. 1082, otherwise known as the Rural Health Act, establishes 1,300 rural health units, one each in all the municipalities all over the country. The rural health unit does preventive, curative, and promotional health work among all the people within its area of operation. As of last month, 1,093 of these units were already in active operation. In addition we have Republic Act No. 1136, also passed last year, which makes possible the expansion and strengthening of our campaign against tuberculosis on a nation-wide scale.

One of the major health problems confronting our rural population is generally the lack in some areas of a potable water supply particularly for domestic use. The relation of health to safe and potable water is well established. I am extremely gratified that voluntary contributions are pouring in daily to the Liberty Wells Association, not only from our own people but even from our foreign friends here and abroad.

I pointed out that we have to improve the health of our people at all levels. There is a rapidly expanding need for more hospitals. We have a hospital construction program and the hospitals when completed, aside from their service aspects, shall also be available as training institutions for all categories of health personnel who may wish to enter the government service.

There should not, however, be any fears among private medical practitioners that the government health activities would draw away from them their legitimate practice. All of the official health services are intended to arouse and maintain health consciousness among the people which will make them go to their doctors at the first sign of illness. Those doctors may very well be the private practitioners.

There is, however, one serious situation that is quite disturbing. This is the unequal or uneven distribution of our physicians in the private practice of the profession. There is a concentration of them in cities and other metropolitan areas. It is hoped that the establishment of the rural health units will relieve this situation.

The government is doing its part to encourage physicians to practice in the barrios and this is partially accomplished by Republic Act No. 1082. But the disparity is still with us. Hence, I now make an appeal to the Philippine Medical Association and to the medical schools to devise suitable measures which will encourage and promote the practice of medicine in the barrios and rural areas. Perhaps one way to do this is to allow undergraduate medical students to work with the health services in their respective localities during vacation time on a voluntary basis. It will acquaint them with the health problems in their own localities and with the services which are available to meet these problems. At the same time they may get an inkling of the possibilities for medical practice in the locality.

Governments have the major responsibility of looking after the health of their people which can only be adequately carried out through adequate health and social measures. In our country I am relying on the patriotic sense of the national medical association. I have faith that it will acquit itself creditably in its well-defined mission.

The offer of voluntary services made by some members of your profession during the recent calamities in Lanao and adjoining areas is an eloquent guarantee of your high civic spirit. I have therefore every reason to feel that the members of the Philippine Medical Association are capable of pooling their resources together in promoting a continuing health program that will develop a vigorous and healthy citizenry.

Let me say that I am grateful for this opportunity of addressing you. May you have fruitful deliberations to the end that you may successfully contribute to the health of our nation.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Philippine Medical Association at Baguio City, April 27, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (5) , 2348-2350.