Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Medical Association

[Delivered at the Far Eastern University Auditorium, April 26, 1954]

MR. PRESIDENT, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

A GREAT PHYSICIAN, Sir William Osler, once said that there are only two sorts of doctors—those who practice with their brains and those who practice with their tongues. While I have no doubt as to which category the members of this distinguished group belong, I am not at all sure that it is not a good thing for doctors—on occasions like the present seminar—to be able to practice with their tongues, too.

Some prescriptions are best prepared by sitting around a table and pooling common knowledge and resources.

The subject of your forthcoming conference is “Rural Health Program.” This is, of course, one of our most important national problems.

Last year, I had the privilege of discussing before you my own viewpoints on public health and how the government could improve its services to meet the needs of the greatest number of people. Since assuming office, I have had a first-hand view of the facts and I am, if anything, more than ever convinced that the suggestions I had made in that earlier speech should be implemented as rapidly as our means would permit.

Let me review some of those suggestions:

First, a comprehensive program directed at the eradication of the most common diseases which afflicted the rural population.

Second, the improvement of present health facilities and the extension of services to remote localities.

Third, the establishment in strategic areas of medical centers built around a corps of specialists.

And finally, the training of public health officers and the encouragement—possibly in the form of subsidies on a fixed tenure—of young general practitioners to settle in barrios and small towns where their services are most urgently needed.

Such a broad program inevitably raises its own difficulties, but I hope I am not being over-optimistic when I say that our department of health has prepared a plan which will at least meet the minimum and essential health requirements of our population.

The initial necessity is funds. Accordingly, I have recommended to Congress an additional outlay of almost three-and-a-half million pesos for the Department of Health. With this modest amount, I trust that a reasonable start in implementing the new rural health policies could be assured. While a portion of this appropriation will be diverted to the purchase of medical supplies to alleviate current critical shortages, a substantial amount will be expended on the two major aspects of public health service—namely, preventive and curative medicine.

In line with this policy, a massive, full-scale attack has been launched against preventable but widespread diseases like tuberculosis, malaria, gastroenteritis, yaws and intestinal parasites. Mass BCG inoculation service against tuberculosis is being intensified, and the campaign against intestinal parasites among school children is being pursued with vigor. Even more encouraging is the success achieved so far in the treatment of yaws—a highly debilitating disease—among farmlands, as a result of which the afflicted are enabled to return to work within a reasonable period of time.

Another aspect of public health work which has been showing encouraging progress is the elimination of health hazard in land development areas—such as those for agricultural or settlement purposes. Many of these have now been made attractive from a medical point of view.

Hand in hand with these activities, existing government hospitals are being rapidly equipped with modern and more serviceable equipment. While present facilities are being brought up to the most desirable standards, plans are also being readied for the construction of a more adequate number of hospitals, equipped with up-to-date laboratories and manned by skilled and well-trained staffs. You know that good medicine cannot be practiced without such facilities. I hope that the construction of the North General Hospital in the near future will mean the start of an increasingly successful hospital program.

Earlier in this speech, I reiterated the need for medical centers, situated at strategic locations, as a means whereby town and country patients could avail themselves of the services of specialists with the least possible waste of time and money. In view of unavoidable financial limitations, however, this project may not be immediately realized. But you will be pleased to know that the Department of Health has initiated training courses in radiology techniques and anesthesiology. The courses will eventually be expanded to cover training in other specialty services. I hope, through this means, that we can develop a sufficient potential of specialists from which we may draw as soon as finances permit the operation of the proposed medical centers.

With respect to the plan to divert medical practice to the barrios , I can only express my keenest expectation that a feasible way will be found to induce the members of your profession—especially the younger ones—to do so. I am aware that this has its drawbacks for the ambitious young doctor. But that drawback will certainly not be loss of prestige. I say this because I am convinced that in the barrios and sitios today lie the opportunities for performing one of the great humanitarian tasks of our time.

In this country, doctors—like expensive coffee—are in short supply. One expert has estimated that in a country with ideal medical services, there should be at least one doctor for every one thousand people. When we compare our own figures to this ideal estimate, the results are somewhat alarming. There are no doctors in barrios with a population of less than 2,500. And while every town has a government physician, this official often has to provide medical care to as many as 25,000 to 30,000 people. The consequence is that, among the rural population, a great majority live and die without having had the services of a physician.

This is the tragic situation which we wish to correct. There should be no further delay. We must combine all our efforts to remedy the unjust neglect into which our barrio population has fallen.

I cannot over-emphasize the importance of this task. The state of our public health has an ultimate bearing on our efforts to develop and stabilize the national economy, for a country’s most important natural resource has always been its manpower potential and the capacity of this potential for productive activity. Cripple it and you cripple the national effort at building a free and prosperous country.

I have commented before on the low productivity of our labor force. Many causes contribute to produce this condition, but we cannot safely discount the influence of health as a factor which can mitigate against low productivity, or—on the other hand—increase the productive capacity of our labor force.

The sick man does not produce enough for his needs and thereby becomes impoverished. The poor man does not get sufficient food and thereby falls prey to disease. This is the vicious circle from which our less fortunate countrymen cannot, without our direct aid, extricate themselves.

We need more doctors. We need more hospitals and laboratories. We need, finally, the fullest development of our public health services.

I have pledged my administration to the attainment of these objectives, but in a sense this is a goal which can be achieved only with the active and unselfish cooperation of all our citizens.

I know, however, that—in keeping with the spirit which guides your noble profession—you have already committed yourselves to this common venture of raising the level of the nation’s health and assuring for ourselves and our children the blessings which only health and well-being can give. We can keep on looking ahead.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay’s speech before the Philippine Medical Association at the FEU Auditorium, April 26, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(4) , 1542-1545.