Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the American Film Exchange Employees Association and the Federation of Free Workers

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, October 30, 1956]

I am honored by your invitation to this happy occasion. This affair, being a commemoration of an important event which took place more than two years ago between the Association of Film Exchange Employees affiliated with the Federation of Free Workers and those who constitute the Management of the various film exchange companies in Manila, is truly significant. I am happy that you have just renewed your working agreement, because it means a lot to you. By prolonging the life of your contract, you have virtually insured the peace, harmony, and understanding that have existed between you for more than a couple of years.

I understand that the signing of a new contract between the union and the management also brought with it increased compensation and higher separation pay. Above all, deserving workers have been granted disability and death benefits. Considering the fact that these concessions from management were obtained without your union’s resorting to a strike, much less other forms of unpleasantness which generate enmity and bitterness between employer and employee, I dare say, that yours has been a friendly partnership. I am led to believe, and I do honestly believe, that your relationship has been characterized by sincerity of purpose; that between you there has been a mutuality of interest and a desire to work along together productively.

I, therefore, congratulate you for having reached another significant milestone in your relationship. Having been an employee myself in my early years, and later, having worked as a part of management, I know that when the relationship between employer and worker is smooth, much is accomplished by both. On the other hand, when there is discord, suspicion, and mutual distrust; when neither labor nor management respects each other’s right and feelings, the inevitable outcome of such relationship or association is destructive. Neither labor nor management benefits from that kind of partnership.

In this connection, allow me, for a moment, to express the views of a man with whom I had an intimate conversation recently on the subject of labor-management relation. This individual happens to be a top man in business; he is what is often referred to as a business leader. His opinions may be somewhat biased, a little bit prejudiced, in favor of capital or management because of his position in the community; but I shall, repeat them to you for what they are worth, because I believe that they are worth analyzing.

This man told me that one reason why certain wealthy individuals in our country are hesitant to invest their money in certain businesses enterprises, is that they are afraid of labor. He said that a belligerent, negative attitude on the part of labor is enough to drive fear into the hearts of those who have been thinking of investing their fortunes in various business ventures. A wrong attitude on the part of workers in a new enterprise is sufficient to discourage any investor or investors, this businessman told me. In other words, he said, labor can kill capital if it takes an entirely wrong attitude. In substance, what this man meant was that if labor constantly hangs a sword of Damocles over the head of management, if labor continues to harass the man who puts up the money to capitalize an industry that can give employment and livelihood to hundreds or thousands of people, capital will withdraw into the background; it will be afraid and become more timid than before.

On the other hand, if right from the start, it at the inception of a new industry, labor will give capital a boost; if labor will help push forward the aims and objectives of management and gives the latter encouragement; if labor will sacrifice a few centavos and some of its amor propio , and goes out of its way to give capital a helping hand during the first years of the enterprise; if it will sincerely consider capital its partner instead of its enemy, there can be no doubt that both will realize the fruits of their combined efforts. They will not only find peace and harmony, but they will realize the maximum benefits of their cooperative toil

As I have said, the man who mentioned these things to me may be somewhat biased, but there is some truth to what he said. For if an employee will show a belligerent attitude towards the man who has given him work, the latter entertains the feeling that his employee is not really his partner and friend. Thus, management and labor cannot start the partnership auspiciously. Instead, they will begin with a feeling of mutual distrust and disharmony which can only Bring about loss of efficiency, absence of profits, and eventually loss of capital.

Today, there are many of our countrymen who are desirious of getting a job. I realize that they are truly deserving of our help. You, who are employed, have a duty to these people without work; you can help them by encouraging capital to invest its millions in productive industry. One of the things .that you can do to encourage capital to make such investment is to show that you are not only helping but encouraging your employers to invest more money in various enterprises. You can encourage your employers only by giving them more cooperation, by bolstering their business, and by working in such a way as to enable them to realize more profits out of whatever capital they have invested. When people see that business is booming as a result of harmonious and productive management-labor relations, those who have been keeping their money in the banks or in their trunks are encouraged to invest their money in business; there is an incentive to go into business. But when people see that those already in business find it difficult to continue, when they get discouraging reports from people who have invested fortunes in big commercial ventures, the prospective businessman naturally develops fear and loses confidence. He becomes timid to engage in business.

On this happy occasion, my friends, I can say nothing more than extend to you my sincere wishes for happier and fruitful years ahead. I know that with the understanding, mutual respect, and harmony that have characterized your relationship, you will continue to enjoy working side by side together as you have been doing in the past. As one truly interested in your welfare, I hope that you will carry on as you have carried on during the last two years. May your relationship continue in such a way as to benefit each and every one of you and your families; may management continue to merit your trust and confidence; and may your combined efforts bring more happiness to our country and people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay before the American Film Exchange Employees Association and the Federation of Free Workers. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (15), 6479-6480.