MY FRIENDS:

THIS is a memorable occasion. At long last, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines will have an office building of their own, after years of planning and striving to translate into a reality, a dream that has persisted for almost a generation. Significantly, this building is being dedicated to the memory of our greatest hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, on this day of his martyrdom.

You will recall that Rizal sounded one of the classic calls to the youth of our country. He placed the hopes for change in the youth. In them, he placed squarely the hope for liberation and the coming of a brighter day for our people. He said, that in the youth were to be found strength, vigor and enthusiasm, purity of spirit and ideas, the self-denying dedication, and the generous courage that submit to great sacrifices in the attainment of the country’s welfare and well-being.

In Father Florentino, one of the novel’s characters, Rizal found the spokesman for his thoughts. “Where are the youth,” said Father Florentino, “who will consecrate their golden hours, their illusions, and their enthusiasm to the welfare of their native land? Where are the youth who will generously pour out their blood to wash away so much shame, so much crime, so much abomination? Pure and spotless must the victim be so that the sacrifice may be acceptable.”

It would be most ideal thing if the men who ran the affairs of Scouting in our country can make this classic call to Filipino youth live again in the hearts of our people. It is very auspicious that the Boy Scouts of the Philippines should inaugurate their National Office building on this day when we pay tribute to the memory of Rizal and pay homage to his sacrifice. For Scouting, which builds character in the young, can have no more noble example than Rizal. Scouting, which teaches youth the virtue of service—service to God, to country and to the people—can find its highest ideal in him. Rizal sought and worked for the emancipation of the Filipino people from suffering, poverty, and indignity, even though he knew that in doing so, he would forfeit his life.

We can do no better than to make this building stand for the Filipino people’s tribute to Rizal’s faith and hope in the Filipino youth. We can do no better than to make Rizal’s classic call to Filipino youth live forever in its halls.

I thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay at the inaugural ceremonies of the National Office Building, Boy Scouts of the Philippines, Friday afternoon, December 30, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(2) , 86-87.