Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the flag ceremony sponsored by the Manila Jaycees

[Delivered in Luneta, August 28, 1955]

PRESIDENT “CHARLIE” DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE MANILA JUNIOR CHAMBER OF COMMERCE LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THE Jaycees of the Philippines have undertaken many bold and fruitful projects. Their efforts on behalf of Democracy have gone beyond the bounds of our own territory and have earned respect for the name of our country among people of neighboring lands.

Today you are inaugurating a ceremony which seeks to put reverence for our flag in its proper place in the hearts and in the daily lives of our people. You could not have chosen a more proper day nor a more fitting audience for this inauguration.

I am happy to see that you have gathered the youth here this afternoon to witness this rededication to the flag of our country. It is the youth that are always called upon to defend it. And I venture to think that in asking them to come here the Jaycees truly intended to honor them in the shadow of our flag

I would also like to think that the choice of this day, on which we honor the memory of the men who lived and died to keep our flag unfurled and glorious, was one made in harmony with the choice of an audience. Most of the patriots that the country honors today displayed their heroism at an early age, at a youthful age, at an age represented by most of you whom I see bebore me today.

It is well that you are here to be present at this reconsecration to our flag, for it is you upon whom the country depends to reenact the heroism of today’s honored patriots. And it is well that I now have the privilege of pausing with you and pondering on the significance and the impact of this great combination—a rededication to our flag on the day of our heroes by the youth of our land.

What is a flag? It is easy to wave it but it is not as easy to describe and to understand what it is.

Poets and orators have attempted to analyze its meaning for us. One poet perhaps was more successful than others. He imagines the flag coming to life and saying—

“I am not the flag; not at all. I am but its shadow.

“I am whatever you make me, nothing more.

“I am your belief in yourself, your dream of what a people may become.

“. . . always, I am all that you hope it be, and have the courage to try for.

. . . . . .

“I am what you make me, nothing more.”

What have we made of our flag? How have we fashioned it?

It is not made of compromise. The heroes that we honor today, the young heroes who tinted that flag with the red of their own blood, are deserving of our reverence because they refused to compromise with tyranny.

If we would indeed reconsecrate ourselves to our flag today, then let us pledge to do battle with the spirit of compromise. Our country, like many free lands in our world faces the threat of a new tyranny. It is the most terrible and the most despotic of all tyrannies in history, for it boasts that its strength comes from Godlessness. We would be dishonoring our flag if we did not prepare ourselves against this tyranny and if we did not stamp out its flames of subversion whenever they are discovered in our midst. We would be unworthy of the blood of our heroes if we did not ally ourselves with all free nations of the world to protect from this tyranny the liberty of all men. We would be surrendering to compromise, that stuff of which our flag is not made, were we to heed those who would want us to lie quiet and non-committal while the Godless tyrant plots to subvert our independence.

There are other things of which our flag is not made. It is not made of indolence or cynicism or of despair. If its fabric is resistant, it is because there are woven into it the strong cords of hope, of courage, and of action. It is made less of words than of work, less of argument than of sacrifice.

All this is what we see or what we should see when we look at our flag.

Let it rise, then, now and every day on this chosen spot. Let the arms that shall raise it be those of the youth, for as the poet would have it, you, my dear young men, are indeed the flag and that piece of cloth, only your shadow. It is you who must keep on making it and it shall be what you shall make it, nothing more. Weave into it then your dreams and your labors, your faith and your courage; let not your word or deed do it dishonor, for, as it is your shadow, it shall be faithful to your every thought, your every word, your every action.

As you are uncompromising, so shall it be uncompromised. As you are courageous, so shall it reflect courage. As you are patriotic, so shall it honor your country. As you are God-fearing, so shall it give glory to God.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the flag ceremony sponsored by the Manila Jaycees at the Luneta, Sunday afternoon, August 28, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(9) , 4499-4501.