Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the First National Convention of the Confederation of Citizens Labor Unions

[Delivered at the Central Hotel, September 16, 1956]

OFFICERS OF THE CONFEDERATION OF CITIZENS LABOR UNIONS, GUESTS AND FRIENDS:

I AM honored by your invitation to your first national convention. It is not a personal secret that, not so long ago, I used to be intimately associated with men who work with their hands, on the farm and in the shop. I am not, therefore, exaggerating when I say that the problems of labor are familiar to me. Having also had a hand in the management of a business long before I joined the government service, I believe I have a right to presume that I am acquainted with the varied problems of management, including its headaches.

But before I share a few thoughts with you this morning, allow me to congratulate you for what looks to me like a highly successful convention. Although it is the first of its kind held by your newly-organized confederation, I cannot but congratulate the respective officers and members of the unions that compose this big labor group. I know that this is a significant event to all of you, and for that matter, to Philippine labor as a whole. The formation of this confederation means greater unity among you, better understanding in your ranks, and a stronger determination on your part to play you role more effectively and usefully in our country’s economic program.

Less than a month ago, I addressed a labor group like this, and now I am with a similar gathering. What impresses me as I peruse your program, is that your confederation comprises labor unions whose members belong to different fields of industry, demonstrating, therefore, the affinity among working men and women. In the past, it was not easy to gather under one banner people engaged in different lines of work, but I notice that, as the years pass, our workers are growing more and more union-conscious, and the unions are becoming more and more confederation-minded. It may take sometime before our labor unions finally achieve complete unity, as even in a highly industrialized country like the United States, where labor has attained a high degree of progress and enlightenment, it took decades before the two biggest labor groups became united under a common banner. But you have the advantage of having profited from the experiences of workingmen and labor groups of other countries; you need not start from scratch in so far as wisely steering the course of your unions is concerned. The facilities and opportunities that have been made available to Filipino labor leaders, such as study grants and training abroad, seminars, and conferences in different countries, including our own, plus the counsel furnished by friendly American labor advisers who have been working side by side with you from time to time, have enabled you to learn and put into practice the know-how of labor leadership.

Judging by the readiness of our working elements to unite and form labor groups and by their determination to rid their unions of influences that tend to divide and weaken them, it is safe to say that trade unionism is here to stay. But I would like to add that if our labor groups are to be truly effective, if they are to be of utmost service to the men and women that comprise them, and, above all, if they are to be respected by management, they should conduct themselves in such a manner as to gain the respect, not only of their employers but of the community.

From time to time, my attention is attracted by disputes and strikes in certain establishments or factories which sometimes result in violence. Only a few days ago, there was a newspaper report about a free-for-all that took place between picketing workers on strike and company officials. Both sides sustained injuries. Not being acquainted with the details of the controversy which led to the strike, it is not for me to comment one way or another as to which side is right. But this much I can say: No matter who is right in this particular dispute, the fact is that it is, indeed, an unfortunate occurrence for employers and employees to be engaged, not in an intelligent, dispassionate, and peaceful arbitration of a dispute, but in fisticuffs. For no matter whatever side wins in a free-for-all, it cannot be denied that the spectacle is an indication that brute force has triumphed over reason. Resort to violence during a labor controversy is an admission of lack of strong, intelligent leadership, either on the part of labor or of management. In my opinion, there is no dispute that cannot be settled by means of conferences or arbitration. Employer and employee can get along well together if they have a will to do so.

A successful labor-management relation can be achieved only under certain conditions and circumstances. A company that accepts unionism as an institution and the collective bargaining process will find peace with its workers. An establishment that considers a strong and free labor union as an asset to management will realize the fruits of industrial peace. It has also been proven that a company that stays out of the union’s internal affairs, that is, a firm which does not intervene with matters that inherently belong to the union generally avoids disputes. To my mind, it is not good for any employer to alienate the worker’s allegiance to his union; any employer courts trouble who attempts to undermine the faith and confidence of the worker in his union officials.

There is the other side of the picture. I believe that labor-management peace can be easily attained if the union members will accept the fact that management has a right to operate its business according to its program, and that the welfare of the workers depends upon the successful operation of that business. Labor-management disputes arise when the workers, through selfish, misguided leadership, begin, to encroach upon the rights and prerogatives of the employer.

The factors that bring about labor-management peace are difficult to find. In my experience, both as a laborer in my younger days and as a part of management in later years, harmony and progress can be achieved by any establishment if mutual trust and confidence exist between the partners of industry, employer and employee. Unless there are ideological incompatibilities between the two parties, there is no reason why sound cooperation cannot be attained. That is why I suggest that instead of looking for legal loopholes which only breed hostility, instead of trying to outwit each other, union and management should have more information-sharing and consultations in order to solve common problems; instead of suspicion and doubt in each other’s motives, employer and worker should develop mutual trust and confidence.

There may be other factors of successful labor-management relations, aside from those I have briefly discussed. But I honestly believe that the single factor that sums up all that I have said is this: mutual respect for each other. It is only when employer and employee treat each other in all things as equally dignified human beings that they can get along harmoniously and achieve the objectives that they have set to accomplish together.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Speech of President Ramon Magsaysay at the First National Convention of the Confederation of Citizens Labor Unions. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (12), 5471-5474.