MY FRIENDS:

I AM deeply grateful for the opportunity that you have extended to me to say a few words on this occasion. You represent an industry that ranks as one of the top contributors to the national wealth and to the support of the government. It is therefore gratifying to us who are in the government to be able to greet you as you commence your deliberations on matters affecting your common problems.

Since you called on me last year after the conclusion of your annual convention, I have given much thought to the subject of the sugar industry—its problems, its needs, its possibilities, its magnitude, and the role that it could and should play in the huge task of developing and stabilizing our national economy. It has been my desire to better appreciate the problems affecting the industry and to weigh with proper care the merits of proposals that may be presented to the government for their solution.

Thus, I have learned of the beginnings of the industry, from the old days of the small sugar cane farms with the primitive muscovado mills until now. As a result of collective effort and the introduction of free trade between the United States and the Philippines a half century ago, these modest beginnings gradually developed into extensive economic units, through the construction of modern sugar mills to which a number of plantations were connected under a cooperative relationship that became the binding force to progressive action. I have learned of the magnitude of the investment in capital and in human effort that both sectors of the industry—the sugar cane producers and the manufacturers of sugar—have put into this huge enterprise. I have learned of the sleepless nights that must have been spent by the pioneers of the industry, not so much in the actual production of sugar cane and the manufacture of sugar, as in the evolution of human relationships of mutual understanding and helpfulness which are an essential requirement for success in every cooperative enterprise.

You have had your ups and downs in this great venture, of course. Sixteen years after the establishment of the first sugar central, during the 1933–1934 crop year, the industry reached its record crop of 1,598,000 short tons. The following year it suffered a major set-back with the passage of the Sugar Limitation Act. But the greatest blow to your hopes and your fortunes must have been the ravages of the last war, from which it took you so many years to regain your pre-war productive capacity, through large fresh outlays of capital and effort in order to rehabilitate plantations and mills. Of the 45 sugar mills in operation before the war, which were serving that same number of integrated areas of sugar lands, only 25 sugar centrals were actually rehabilitated and placed in operation. These were made to serve substantially the same aggregate area embraced by the 45 mills before the war. But again the industry has demonstrated its strength and determination by the rapid growth of its post-war production.

Starting from a crop of hardly 84,000 short tons, only eight years later it had increased production 12 times over to 1,311,841 short tons. This output exceeded the aggregate sum of the quota for domestic consumption and the exportable quotas to the United States and to the other markets of the world. However, it was not until the following crop year, 1954–1955, the ninth after liberation, that the industry reached its post-war peak production of 1,404,633 short tons of sugar, thus exceeding by over 200,000 short tons the marketable quota for the industry for that year. Through adjustments voluntarily made in your program of crop production, this huge quantity of non-marketable sugar has now been reduced to less than the reserve quota permitted by law. Even now the industry must be considering ways and means as to how to take advantage of the recent suspension of the quantitative limitations in the marketing of world sugar under the International Sugar Agreement, which has resulted in the favorable rise of prices in the free markets of the World.

With your indulgence, I have gone into all these details, although these already are more familiar to you, because I want you to feel that in considering questions pertaining to your industry, I am in a position to review the whole situation with the fullest sympathy, in justice to your admirable record as progressive farmers, businessmen, and industrialists. Through your initiative, your skill and industry, and your vision and determination, the sugar industry has attained its present noteworthy position as one of the leading industries of the country in point of organization, development, and utility to the nation. You can therefore rest assured of the continued cooperation of the Administration in your efforts to promote the best interest of the industry. Of course there may be instances where, in spite of your sympathy and belief that a certain course of action would be beneficial to the particular interest of an industry, still, because of its wide implications, we may be forced to set it aside for the sake of the larger interest of the country as a whole. In this event the government has no other recourse but to weigh the respective merits of each side of the question, and to follow that course of action which is not inimical or injurious to the general welfare and which would ultimately result in the greatest good to the largest number of our people.

Fortunately, sugar is a world commodity which always finds acceptance in all markets of the world. In the case of Philippine sugar, there is the distinct advantage of a protected market in the United States for more than three quarters of our present production. So far, Philippine sugar sold in this market has given adequate returns to the industry. However, the industry has a greater capacity for production, and in order to withstand the uncertainties of the future, it should aspire to attain its maximum productivity, and thus achieve greater returns and at the same time reduce the unit cost of production. In your efforts in this direction, you can count on the fullest sympathy and encouragement from your government. But what should we do with additional sugar so produced? Other favorable markets would be the ready answer, and I am confident that this convention will give this matter its most serious consideration.

I would like to suggest, however, that perhaps we are overlooking or are not giving enough importance to one of the most convenient and practical outlets for any increase in our sugar production. As a layman, I cannot yet understand why after all these years of supplying the United States with our share of its domestic requirement, our domestic consumption quota is still pegged to such a low figure as 220,000 short tons. This is difficult to understand, considering the number of our population which can easily absorb a much larger quantity, if such sugar were made available to them at a reasonable price. You can see that 220,000 short tons of sugar, divided among 22 million inhabitants, means a share of only 20 pounds of sugar a year for each inhabitant. Twenty pounds of sugar distributed over a period of 365 days would mean a daily consumption of less than an ounce of sugar a day for each individual. This is way below what an individual can normally consume. The only explanation for this state of affairs seems to be that the sugar that we produce does not reach the great mass of our population today. In all probability, sugar is available only to a very small fraction of our population since, if we were to give every individual his normal daily sugar requirement, we would have to more than double the quota for domestic consumption today. There must be something fundamentally wrong in the distribution of this commodity within the Philippines. I earnestly request you to give this matter your very serious consideration.

Then, too, the present statistical position of sugar in the world has now given rise to the suspension of the quantitative limitation provision in the London International Agreement, and at the same time has increased the world price of sugar. So I am truly hopeful that in your deliberations this year you will reach decisions of far-reaching effects which will redound not only to your own benefit but also to the benefit of the entire nation.

I have already announced the determination of the Administration to intensify its campaign for increased production in all sectors of our economy. I urge you to lend a helping hand to this campaign not only in the field of increased sugar production, but also in the production of other commodities, whether agricultural or industrial. Your experience and your proven ability in the promotion of the sugar industry, if applied to other enterprises, will contribute very much to the success of our campaign for increased and diversified productions. I feel that it is not asking too much of you to do this, because your investment in diversified activities will eventually result not only in your own benefit but also in the well-being of your children in the future.

I wish to congratulate you again for your getting together periodically for a full discussion of your problems, and to assure you again of my deep interest in the success of your mission and of my desire to be of as much help as it is in my power to help you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). Speech of President Magsaysay before the Fourth National Congress of the Sugar Industry, Winter Garden, Manila Hotel, February 26, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (5) , 1399-1402.