Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the induction of the officers of the Patria Recreation Club to combat juvenile delinquency

[Delivered on March 16, 1957]

I AM glad for the opportunity to commend the vision and the high purposes which have inspired my friends, the Archbishop of Cebu, and the Knights of Columbus to undertake the construction of this building. As I understand it, this project not only testifies to the vitality of your organization and the loyalty of your members. More than this, it is salutary evidence of an attitude which is the crying need of our country today. This attitude is social consciousness and the essence of it is the realization that we do not live for ourselves alone, and that we must use our talents and our acquisitions, our training and our education, to help our fellowmen, to reveal to them the lasting values of life, to brighten its meaning for them. In the administration of our government, I have unceasingly worked to imbue public life with this social attitude. I have anchored my administration to the welfare of the common man, and have exerted every effort so that our programs and our policies may improve his lot and lighten the burden of the centuries upon him.

In this tremendous work, organizations of the character of the Knights of Columbus are in a splendid position to help. Both by the patriotic motives which inspire your activities, as well as the religious force which sustains them, you are called upon to become living examples of the concern, the service, the charity which, as members of the community, we owe to our less fortunate brothers. If patriotism and religion are to withstand the attacks which today threaten to subvert their very foundations, if love of country and love of God are to survive the world-wide conspiracy to bring about their distortion and disfigurement, then we who believe in these virtues must continue to proclaim them, not only in words but in action, and action it must be, for the welfare of our fellow men. Because the project which we inaugurate tonight is an earnest of your patriotism, your love of God and fellowmen, I congratulate you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). President Magsaysay’s speech at the induction of the officers of the Patria Recreation Club to combat juvenile delinquency, delivered about 12 midnight, March 16. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (6) , 1749-1750.