Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Armed Forces testimonial parade and review

[Delivered at Camp Murphy, July 3, 1954]

TO THE MEN OF THE ARMED FORCES:

FOR some years now we have been closely tied by the common bond of serving our nation, of securing its defense against attacks from within our borders, and against outside aggression. Throughout these years I have had no reason to regret the confidence I have placed in you. I have had every reason to be proud of your courage, loyalty, and devotion to duty.

In the earliest days of our relationship, there were two enemies for us to fight. One was the enemy within your own ranks, the unscrupulous and selfish member of the Armed Forces whose behaviour smeared the entire organization with disrepute. This enemy, I am happy to say, you quickly brought under control and gradually eliminated. You restored the good name of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. You regained the confidence of the citizens whom it is your sworn duty to defend and protect. In doing so, you have won a major battle in the war of our times.

The other enemy was the world-wide Communist conspiracy. Here in the Philippines, professional Communist agents were enjoying great success in a carefully laid plot to undermine the foundations of our Republic, to destroy our democratic institutions, and to make of Malacañang merely a branch office of the Kremlin. They were assisted in this plan by post-war conditions of destruction, misery, and corruption. They became sufficiently strong to rob, murder, and terrorize the majority of our people who refused to be taken in by their false promises. Your success in checking this attack upon the Republic and destroying the military strength of the aggressor is one of the proudest pages in the history of the Armed Forces.

In the course of these years, you have engaged the Communist enemy outside of our borders as well. Responding to the call of our obligations as a member of the United Nations, you joined with the other armies of the free world in repelling Communist aggression upon the Republic of Korea. On frozen battlefields far from home you demonstrated your nation’s firm devotion to the cause of democracy and proved your right to stand shoulder to shoulder with the best fighting men of the world.

These are some of the things of which you have a right to be proud. These are some of your successes and accomplishments. But while you have won great victories over our enemies, you must not make the mistake of believing that because of such victories those enemies are completely and permanently defeated.

Within your own ranks, from time to time, you will still find those who are self-seeking or corrupt, those who place their own small ambitions above the interest of the nation. Such individuals are not a particular evil of the military. We find them—far too many of them—in every walk of our nation’s civilian life, political and economic. They must be guarded against and weeded out, and, when guilty of crimes, they must be punished.

Though he has been badly beaten and weakened, the internal Communist enemy is also still with us, and still presents a threat to our security. Having failed in his military strategy, he will make every effort to infiltrate our national life and sabotage our progress. He will make every effort to plant seeds of dissension among us, dividing us as a people and destroying our relations with foreign friends and allies. Against this enemy our vigilance must be sharpened, because his new tactics are more difficult to detect and because our democratic freedoms are in themselves a protective cover for his treachery.

Unfortunately, it is not possible to report any improvement in the situation regarding external threats to the national security. On the contrary, the Communist program of subversion and imperialist aggression has crept even closer to our shores. This threat to our sovereignty and integrity as a nation is the most serious challenge we have yet been called upon to face. It is a total threat and it calls for total defense.

Our people must be united and alert. Our social, political, and economic institutions must be made to operate at the peak of their efficiency. You, holding the first line of our defense, must be prepared to face the enemy with high confidence, inspired by the determination to preserve our Republic and its institutions.

We find comfort and strength in the fact that we do not face the enemy alone. Our defenses are re-inforced by the defenses of all the free nations of the world, of such friends and allies as the United States and the other democracies. Our military strength is not designed for conquest but, rather, for the preservation of peace. Our collective strength is not to be used to impose our will on others but, rather, to defend their right—the right of all men—to live their lives in freedom and security. We, who have known the horrors of war, certainly do not seek any objectives which require the making of war. But we, who have known freedom, are determined to defend that freedom with our lives, if necessary.

In your traditions and in the history of your accomplishments, one thing stands out clearly. You are a citizens’ army. Your interests are identical with the interests of your civilian brothers. It is not your function to impose upon our citizenry a way of life, but, rather, to serve as their instrument in protecting a way of life of their own choosing. Your loyalty is not to any one man, but to every Filipino, to every citizen of the Republic. Your loyalty is not to any political party nor to any social or economic class. Your loyalty belongs, and must continue to belong, to the principles and ideals which make up our way of life.

By the grace of God and the will of our people, I speak to you today as your Commander-in-Chief. But in receiving your pledge of loyalty, I do so with the sober understanding that it is not given to me as an individual. It is a pledge entrusted to my custody as the representative of the people of this nation, selected and elevated to that position by democratic process. By the very nature of your identity as the armed force of a democracy, that is the only pledge you can give. As the chief of a democratic state, that is the only kind of pledge I can receive.

However, there is one pledge which we can and should make jointly. I call upon you to join me in pledging loyalty to the principles of freedom and justice which are the foundation of our national culture and our national existence. You and your brothers and your fathers have staked your lives to secure our existence as a free people. Let us serve notice to our enemies that they will have to take our lives before they can rob us of our freedom.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Magsaysay at the Armed Forces testimonial parade and review. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(7) , 3019-3021.