Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the United Nations Day luncheon

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, October 24, 1954]

MY FRIENDS:

UNITED NATIONS DAY is the closest the world has ever come to a truly international holiday. Embracing the many and different races, nationalities, and creeds of the earth, its celebration is dominated by the highest ideals of each of them. Christians and Moslems, Buddhists and the followers of the great faiths—all, we know, contribute their common hopes and aspirations—peace, justice, freedom, a life of plenty, and the brotherhood of man. Unfortunately, since the communist members worship no God, it is difficult to name their aspirators, but there is all too much reason to believe that power is their highest goal.

This is the ninth birthday of the United Nations. Next year at this time, the member states will undertake a thorough overhaul of the Charter with a view to eliminating its defects, strengthening its weak points, expanding its scope to serve the needs of a swiftly moving atomic age. During the year ahead, the member nations would do well to give long and careful thought to the record of the years gone by. It is well to take pride and comfort from the successes and constructive achievements of the organization. But it is far more important and urgent today to examine the failures, to seek the reasons for those failures, and appraise their cost to mankind.

I think it will be found that only part of the fault lies in the mechanism of the United Nations. I think it will be found that the flaw has been in the minds of men—in the lack of firm purpose, in the fear of facing realities, in hesitancy to sacrifice short range advantage for permanent achievement. And I know that an honest appraisal of the cost will show a staggering set-back to the progress of mankind.

The United Nations and its many agencies have done a tremendous amount of good constructive work towards plans and means of bringing new high levels of health, education, and productivity to the newly developing nations of Asia, for example. All members of the free world have contributed generously to this cooperative effort. Some of the free powers, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, have carried on ambitious programs independently, aimed at the same goal of speeding the rising standard of living which has characterized free societies throughout history.

Much has been accomplished by these efforts, but only a small fraction of what could have been accomplished. Too many of the urgently needed projects are still in the blue-print stage, too many are delayed by limited resources. Why? Why is the free world, which has among its members the greatest combined strength in the world today in terms of human and material resources, delayed in repairing the ravages of the last war and in building a happier future?

There is one major reason for this delay, and our progress will continue to be retarded—perhaps even diminished—until we face that reason squarely, identify it courageously, and determine to eliminate it.

For years now the free world has been harassed and led by a new kind of war. Some call it “cold war,” implying that it is less serious than “hot war.” I disagree. It has already conquered too many millions of free people, dragging them behind an iron curtain into slavery. It has already spread a new light of imperialism over people who had long struggled for and finally won their independence. The free world must recognize this devious aggression as a real war for survival. It must unmask its perpetrators as ruthless imperialists who try to hide their lust for power behind hypocritical slogans of social reform.

As every school child knows, this aggressor—this wrecker of world peace—is international Communism. Its agents are the members of so-called Communist parties which exist wherever they are tolerated in the free nations of the world. Its objectives are world domination. Its shifting tactics of advance and retreat, of brute force and smiling conciliation, are skilfully designed to achieve that domination. These are facts admitted and boasted about by Communist leaders from Lenin to Malenkov and their satelites. How anyone today can still be deceived by Communist changes of tactic is the great mystery of our time.

What concerns us now, however, particularly as members of the United Nations, is that these tactics of subversion, sabotage, and disguised aggression are making a mockery of the very principles upon which the organization was founded. Instead of a world community living in harmony and cooperation based upon the fundamental human rights, we see a large peace-loving community terrorized and disrupted by coercion, fraud, and the threat of war. We see the common constructive effort of the United Nations undermined, blocked, and destroyed. The attention we owe to the needs of our people is distracted by the calculated sneak attacks of an openly declared enemy. The resources we could expand upon the development of a better life for the peoples of the world are diverted to arms we need for defense against growing aggressive military power. The cooperation upon which hope of the world rests is being methodically disrupted as friends are alienated from each other to make easier prey for the enemy.

This is the real problem of the United Nations. The rest we know can be overcome.

We are told that we have only two choices: co-existence with Communism or a war of mutual destruction. I disagree on two counts.

The plea for co-existence should not be addressed to the free world. We have shown, and continue to show, that this is our normal way of life. Peaceful co-existence is what characterizes the friendly relationship between the many different political, cultural, and economic systems represented in the free world. It is the Communist world which has shown again and again its unwillingness to accept peaceful co-existence. Whenever Communists have extended their hands in friendship, behind their back the other hand held a club and chains for the victim of their overtures. Only when they have demonstrated by deeds their permanent abandonment of such criminal intent can the free world afford to extend its hospitality and let down its guard.

As for war being the only other alternative, I think we underestimate the moral strength of man’s desire for peace as well as the practical common sense of the enemy. Communists are shrewd professional war-makers. They will not undertake an attack unless reasonably sure of success. Free world strength is much greater than their own, as they well know. Their appreciation of this fact is shown by their strategy of driving wedges between free world nations by every means from bribery to coercion. Let all the free nations stand in unity, firmly opposed to their methods and the Communists will not risk defeat. Let that unity remain solid while the strength of the free world grows and Communism may yet abandon brigandage as unprofitable, turning to a society of laws for its own survival.

That is the challenge that lies before the United Nations. Can narrow short range interests be put aside to meet a common threat, to back UN principles and ideals with unity and firm determination? If we yield to fear, we can hope only for the peace that goes with surrender. If we recognize and use our true strength, peace with freedom will be our reward.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Speech of President Magsaysay at the United Nations Day luncheon, Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, October 24, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50 (10), 4752-4755.