Mga opisyal at miyembro ng National Press Club, mga minamahal na panauhin, mga kaibigan:

THERE are few events over which I would much rather preside than this one. This triumphant occasion is a tribute to the courage and vision, the resourcefulness and determination of the members of the Philippine press. I am happy to acknowledge the assistance that this and the past administration gave to make this event possible. I am happy to know that other elements of the community have been no less helpful. But I must emphasize that the major credit for this achievement must go to the newspapermen themselves.

Five years ago, the idea of a handsome four-story building for the members of the Philippines press must have sounded audacious. Last year, when I had the privilege of laying the corner-stone for this edifice, I know there were still many unbelievers who scoffed and predicted that that would be the end of it. But you never lost faith—and, I am proud to say, I never lost faith. This building, this event, is a vindication of that faith, and every one in the Philippine press may hold his head high in pride over this magnificent achievement.

It is proper that the newspapermen of today should remember and honor, on this, their shining hour, their comrades of yesteryears. The freedom that the press enjoys today, the material advances that the profession has made, the prestige of which this building is a fitting symbol—all these have been made possible by the traditions of fierce independence, dignity, and courage which they have passed on to their heirs. A Tagalog proverb wisely counsels— Ang hindi marunong lumingon sa pinanggalingan, di makararating sa paruruonan . The presence here of men who have written some of the brightest chapters in the history of Philippine journalism offers reassuring proof that those who have followed them will keep referring back to those pages for inspiration and strength in carrying out their own tasks.

With every gain in recognition and prestige made by the Philippine press have come new and heavier responsibilities. It must be abundantly clear by now, two years after it has assumed office, that the present administration yields to none in judicious sensitivity to public opinion, in its responsiveness to the challenges and opportunities of the times as reflected and reported in our press. This attitude, based on the conviction that government cannot build anything of permanent value except with the full understanding and support of the people, has increased beyond measure, the responsibilities of the present-day press.

We have carried out many reforms along lines charted by and through the press, initiated investigations and house-cleaning measures on “leads” offered by the press, depended heavily on it to learn the trend and direction of public thinking, considered all of its suggestions and heeded many of them. We have done this not in blind belief that the press is infallible and all-knowing but in the sober conviction that it is a dependable, responsible, and earnest institution engaged like the government, in upholding the good and the true. We shall continue to so consider the press, whatever its detractors may say. We shall revise our course and attitude only if and when the press itself, by its own irresponsibility or other sins, proves itself unworthy of respect and confidence. Knowing the Philippine press as I do, I am almost certain, that day will never come.

I am of course aware that the press can perform its mission well only in an atmosphere of freedom. I wish to reiterate that it is a basic policy of this administration to promote and enhance the freedom of the press. You can count on its support in any endeavor to correct any situation which endangers that freedom. I am happy to renew this pledge not only on this auspicious occasion for the Philippine press but on this day commemorating the great sacrifice of one who loved freedom more dearly than life itself.

Thank you, and I wish you all a very Happy New Year.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Speech of President Magsaysay at the inauguration of the National Press Club building. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52(1) , 87-89.