Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Testimonial Parade and Review

[Delivered at Camp Murphy, July 1, 1955]

OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE ARMED FORCES, MY FRIENDS:

IT always makes me proud to watch your military formations—to note the precision of your marching and the smartness of your bearing and appearance. It makes me even prouder to feel anew the high purpose of the organization that you represent. I speak not only of those who are here. I am thinking also of your comrades-in-arms who are in the mountain fastnesses of the Sierra Madres, in the Candaba Swamps, in isolated detachments everywhere, performing their noble task of defending and preserving our young and growing Republic. My heart goes out to all of you who stand guard under rain and sun that our people may enjoy the blessings of peace and our institutions may remain free.

And to those who are no longer with us, those who have given all in the line of duty, I offer the solemn pledge that we shall not squander away the gains that they have bought so dearly.

I wish I could tell you here and now that the fight is over, that the enemy has been utterly destroyed, and that the battle has been won. I wish I could tell you that now you may lay down your arms and address yourselves to tranquil pursuits. In truth, however, we have yet to attain this cherished goal.

It is true we have successfully checked the armed rebellion which only a few years ago had threatened to engulf all of us. Now, the enemy is dispersed and disorganized. However, he still roams the hills and countrysides in small, vicious bands, and he has become more cruel, more ruthless with despair. These bands have to be mopped up. Every last town, every last barrio, must be made safe from them. The fight must go on.

Nor has the enemy really abandoned his plan for seizure of national power. He has merely changed tactics, not the objective. With the same objective, the enemy is now implementing a more vicious plot to weaken the foundations of our Republic and undermine the faith of our people in their democratic institutions. His main effort is now directed towards weakening the political, economic, social, and cultural structures of the nation. He seeks to do this by infiltration, by subversion, by boring from within

Aware of this threat to our national integrity and security, I have instituted a program of government designed to strengthen the faith of our people, particularly those in the rural areas, in their government. It is a program designed to give meaning and substance to our freedom and independence. This program, however, cannot be completed within a short period of time. It will require our combined energies as a people for many years to come.

The Armed Forces have been contributing, with vigor and enthusiasm, to this program. I am particularly proud of what they have done. I know that such projects as the construction of pre-fabricated school-houses, the opening up of settlement farms, and the campaign of information to bring the government closer to the people, are normally beyond the scope of the Armed Forces. And yet, these projects have been prosecuted with such efficiency and dispatch that they have at least doubled the pace of our progress. More, they have served as a pattern of service to the country for other agencies and offices to emulate.

Notwithstanding all this, the territory we have to cover is so large that our job is far from done. You must not forget that this is the first time that any kind of attention and concern has been devoted to our rural areas which have been neglected for so long. We must double, treble, quadruple our pace and output. Only thus can we keep ahead of the enemy who is ever ready to exploit every case of neglect and every sign of indifference by the government.

We must also remain alert, for the methods of infiltration are difficult to detect and neutralize.

It is well that the Armed Forces each year meet in a ceremony such as this to re-dedicate themselves to the service of their country and people. It is not only on my own behalf as President of this Republic or as your commander-in-chief that I accept this testimonial of your loyalty. I accept it on behalf of our more than 20 million people who have entrusted the defense of their freedom and way of life to you. They expect you to remain true and firm in your devotion to duty. They expect you, especially during these uncertain times, to be ever alert lest they lose their freedom through your neglect or indifference.

I know our Armed Forces as well as, if not better than, any man I know you will not let these expectations down.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the testimonial parade and review, Friday morning, July 1, 1955, at Camp Murphy. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (7) , 3242-3425.