Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the unveiling of the Roxas Marker at Clark Air Force Base

[Delivered at the Clark Air Force Base, November 30, 1955]

IT is most fitting that Americans should join us here today in dedicating this memorial to a great Filipino, the late Manuel Acuña Roxas, first President of the Republic of the Philippines. It is fitting because Fate seems to have decreed that Manuel Roxas represent during his lifetime the essence of Filipinism in each great phase of the relationship between our nation and America.

Though justly honored as a scholar and a statesman, Manuel Roxas held the admiration and devotion of his countrymen chiefly as a great nationalist. It was his eloquence and fighting spirit that expressed the will and determination of our people to achieve independent nationhood. The vigor and brilliance of his campaign won respect and sympathy in Washington. Here, at home, it assured him of an enduring place in the company of our patriots and heroes.

During the war, Manuel Roxas again showed America the true nature of Philippine nationalism. In the man who refused to be an involuntary subject, they found a courageous and loyal ally when it came to fighting for common principles and ideals, for freedom and justice.

The grand design was completed when America fulfilled its pledge to yield sovereignty of this land to the Filipino people and the Filipino people exercised their democratic rights to choose Manuel Roxas as first President of the new Republic. The man who had fought for the end of American rule, who had later fought alongside Americans against a common enemy—that same man at last found himself in a position to determine the relations between the two countries.

One of the tragic dates of Philippine history is April 15, 1948, the day that saw the untimely end of the brilliant career of Manuel Roxas, who uttered his last words here at Clark Air Base. Those last words are perhaps the best measure of our nation’s loss, the best measure of the wisdom and foresight with which our first President appraised the major problem of our times. Let me quote portions of that last address.

Said President Roxas: “The rapid progress in the development of this base attests not only to the friendship, the enduring friendship, that exists between Americans and Filipinos, but likewise it attests to the indestructible faith that Americans and Filipinos have for one another . . . . The establishment of American bases in the Philippines was the result of the voluntary and free choice of Americans and Filipinos . . . .”

“World peace cannot be maintained if each nation acting separately should merely wait for the aggressor at its border. There must be a complete and final agreement on the part of peace-and liberty-loving peoples of the world to stop, and if necessary, to fight any aggressor that may want to trample upon the liberties of other peoples or to interfere in the free exercise of their sovereignties . . . .”

“The democracies of the world have to take a stand and they must make that stand unitedly. Conversations and every effort should certainly be made to avoid war . . . . The freedom-loving peoples of the world do not want war. I know the United States hates war and I know the United States does not want war now or ever . . . (but) I am very happy that the President of the United States, supported by the American Congress, has at last shown an indication that it is going to prepare for war, that America is going to make a stand and say to the aggressor that ‘you can go this far but no further or we will fight.’ That attitude of the United States of America, the greatest, the noblest, and the most altruistic nation in the world today, has inspired all the peoples of the earth with a new faith, with a new confidence, that war may be averted. But if war should come, if God in His supreme wisdom shall will it that the scourge of war again visit the bewildered peoples of this earth, I am certain of one thing—probably the only thing about which I can be certain—and it is this, that in case of a new war waged by the aggressor against the forces of freedom and liberty, American and Filipino soldiers will again fight side by side in the same trenches or in the air, in defense of justice, freedom, and the other principles which we both love and cherish . . . . “

Those, my friends, were the words spoken by our great nationalist, the late President Roxas, more than seven years ago. Who can deny that they are still a sound estimate of the world’s peace problem? Who can deny that they still ring true as a reflection of Filipino thinking and character?

I am happy to join in this tribute to the memory of one of our truly great leaders. But I feel that Manuel Roxas has an even more enduring memorial in the hearts of his people, in the pages of our nation’s history. The record of his service and of his wisdom is a memorial to which we can and should turn for generations to come, a memorial from which we can derive inspiration and guidance.

Manuel Roxas during his lifetime realized to the fullest his dreams and destiny as a Filipino. Let us pray that we who carry on after him can fulfill his hopes and maintain his standards.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech at the unveiling of the Roxas Marker at Clark Air Force Base, Wednesday noon, November 30, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(12) , 6104-6105.