Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the Pacific Regional Seminar of the UNESCO

[Read by Assistant Executive Secretary Mariano Yenko, Jr., at the Malacañang Park, April 4, 1954]

MR. CHAIRMAN, LADIES, AND GENTLEMEN:

ON behalf of my countrymen, allow me to greet and welcome the distinguished guests who have come from over the seas to attend this important gathering.

To my mind, nothing points more clearly towards the achievement of the aims of the United Nations than this collective effort among men of different races and convictions to thresh out common problems, to the end that greater understanding shall prevail among the peoples of the world.

At the same time, permit me to express the hope that the purposes for which this conference was called will be realized and that significant results will follow.

In common with the rest of the free world, we adhere firmly to the ideals of the UNESCO.

We believe in international cooperation.

We believe that one way of achieving this cooperation is through the reciprocal exchange of cultural and scientific knowledge.

We believe in the value of education as a tool for the elimination of mutual suspicions and antagonisms among men of varying creeds and color.

We believe, finally, that all efforts along this direction will contribute in a significant degree to the attainment of peace and security which we all desire.

The subject of your seminar is “Education for International Understanding.” I am aware of the difficulties to be encountered in projects of such broad aims and scope. But it is a task that must be done, for ultimately, this kind of education may be the test of a nation’s fitness to survive in the modern world.

Only through education—and the tools which provides—can we hope to deal intelligently with the confusing issues posed by the times in which we live.

In a world as divided as ours, we are faced at every turn with a choice and a decision—and each decision may affect the lives and fortunes of men for generations to come.

It is necessary that we should be able to deal adequately with such issues; to see through half-truths and evasions; to recognize the deliberate lies and falsehoods by men of ill-will and little faith. Education must provide the answer.

To be completely effective, however, this kind of education must start at the grass roots. It must start with the little people who form the bone and muscle of any democratic community.

I am concerned particularly with the problem of basic education—or what you would call fundamental education. In 1949, the Joint Congressional Committee on Education issued a report on the status of elementary education in the Philippines. The facts provided by this congressional committee were, to say the least, shocking, and it was mitigated only by the fact that the same unfortunate situation existed in such countries as Mexico, Peru, Bolivia, and Puerto Rico, among others.

The committee estimated that out of every 100 pupils who started out in Grade I before 1939, only six reached first year high school. Of the 94 who never stepped out of elementary school, 14 reached Grade VII, 18 reached Grade VI, 26 reached Grade V, 45 reached Grade IV, 58 reached Grade III, and 72 reached Grade II.

In other words, only a negligible number of children who start school manage to acquire the minimum requirements for a basic education.

I believe that a complete elementary education is a necessity for literacy—that is to say, not just the ability to read and write but the capacity to participate fully in the life of the community.

In my country, this problem is complicated by the fact that instruction in the lower grades is carried on in a tongue not native to us. This means that the student who does not get beyond Grade IV has spent all of his time wrestling with the complexities of English grammar, instead of studying the facts of his own environment and learning to adapt himself to it.

I do not mean to criticize a system of education which—whatever its shortcomings—has succeeded well in teaching us the principles of democracy. But I believe that this learning process could be made more pervasive, such that the common people shall be more fully prepared to absorb and practice the ways of a truly democratic life.

No nation can exist half-slave and half-free. It is just as true to say that no nation can exist half-literate and half-ignorant, for today’s potential slaves are those who, by lack of training in the democratic practices, become easy victims to the blandishments of corrupt ideologies.

We have made a fair start in correcting those shortcomings—though not as quickly as we would wish—and by other means have sought to fill the gaps left by the defects in our educational system. Through these efforts, I may say that at no time have our people had a greater sense of “belonging.” Today they are direct participants in the great task of building a strong and prosperous nation.

I cannot end without expressing my gratitude to the great body to which this gathering belongs. For it is largely through the help of the UNESCO that we found the indicated solutions to our most important educational problem. It has also given us a lesson on the value of international cooperation.

I wish you success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). President Magsaysay’s speech read by Assistant Executive Secretary Mariano Yenko, Jr., at the Pacific Regional Seminar of the UNESCO, Malacañang Park, April 4, 1954. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 50(4) , 1531-1533.