Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of the International Students’ Festival

[Delivered at the University of the Philippines, January 1, 1957]

PRESIDENT VIRATA, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

IT is a pleasure for me to declare open this International Students’ Festival.

In wishing its organizers and participants all the success their worthy project deserves, I am aware that this festival has in itself already one basic ingredient for success.

I understand that this event is essentially a festival of culture, where the students may absorb from the various exhibits, dances, films, and musical presentations some of the elements of the civilizations that exist beyond our shores.

Therein lies the festival’s promise of success, for we are gathered here not to speak of the things that divide the minds of men but to contemplate the things that unite the spirits of men. Nothing binds men more securely than an understanding of each other’s culture. Nothing opens the way more quickly to peace and world unity than the realization that all national cultures are based on universal foundations common to every civilization—faith in a Supreme Being and concepts of goodness, of truth, and of beauty based on this faith.

It is, therefore, a pleasure to note the truly international character of this festival. For if it is meant to broaden our views and widen the scope of our understanding of other peoples, then it is important that there should be represented here as many cultures of the world as possible.

This is of particular importance considering the fact that this is primarily a students’ festival. Today when our people, particularly the young, are being offered varied interpretations of such concepts as love of country and independence, it is well that students themselves should organize a festival of this breadth and apply to their own concepts the broadness of view which is gained from understanding the cultures of other peoples.

For my countrymen who will reap the benefits of this festival, I have but one thought to add. I believe we in this country should be thankful that when we have a festival of this kind we need be motivated only by a desire to learn, to understand, and to be friendly. That is because we have here an atmosphere of freedom which is essential for an event of this nature to achieve its worthy ends. We need not submit our plans to some “Commissar of Culture” who would make sure that the aims and details of the festival would conform to the objectives of an exclusive political party. There is no party line to follow here. There is only the objective of peace and international cooperation.

May I therefore extend my congratulations to President Virata and to Dean Alejo and his committee of organizers, and my appreciation for the cooperation of the foreign missions and individuals towards the success of this festival.

In our search for world unity and peace, may we make use, more and more, of these tested avenues of cultural understanding through student initiative.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). Speech of President Magsaysay at the opening ceremonies of the International Students’ Festival, University of the Philippines, Monday, January 1, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (1) , 61-62.