Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Coconut Producers Federation Convention

[Delivered at the Malacañang Park Recreation Hall, March 15, 1957]

MY FRIENDS IN THE COCONUT INDUSTRY, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THIS CONVENTION:

I AM happy to great you on the opening day of your fifth convention. And I am heartened by your display of unity which augurs well for the whole coconut industry.

I want to discuss with you today our joint responsibility—yours as well as mine—in the promotion of our people’s welfare. Likewise I also want to report to you the actions we have taken on the complaints you have brought to my attention during the last year.

Because of the phenomenal growth of the coconut industry which you represent, you have now assumed a greater share of the burden of charting our economic destiny. As industry that has 165 million coconut trees planted in one fifth of our cultivated land area, earning $100 million a year or 40 per cent of our dollar reserves, employing or sustaining eight million Filipinos in 33 primary producing provinces, must indeed play a vital and decisive role in any program of economic development.

Today, as a result of your combined efforts, the Philippines is the world’s biggest producer of coconuts and coconut products. We should be spurred to even better this record because of the increased demands for coconut products here and abroad.

The more I think of your potentialities and the tremendous force that you wield toward the formation of sound and viable economy, the more I consider this convention of coconut producers of utmost importance.

You cannot afford to slide back. Our population is increasing daily and as a result our economic problems are becoming more acute and varied each day. You must therefore work with renewed vigor.

For my part, I pledge that the Administration will continue to give every available assistance to the coconut industry that it may consolidate its position in the overall national economic scheme. We shall continue to approve steps recommended by Congress to organize the promotion of the industry.

The Philippine Coconut Administration was established in 1954. Two laws have already been passed; namely, Republic Act 1369 which authorized a P30-million bond issue for coconut industrialization and Republic Act 1365, which is intended to curb unfair trading practices.

These are but the first measures designed to place the industry in a position of stability and improve product standardization, marketing, development, and research.

Late last year, to implement the industrialization program envisioned by Republic Act 1369, PHILCOA presented a plan which called for the construction of small copra centrals in rural areas primarily to manufacture high quality copra.

The plan appeared feasible and I endorsed it to the National Economic Council. However, when I was informed of the Hiller process for extracting oil and flour directly from fresh coconut meat, I ordered the suspension of the initial release of the bond issue.

I thought then, as I am convinced now after the successful trial runs in San Pablo City, the Hiller process and machine would be an effective tool in making our country a major supplier of finished coconut products instead of raw materials. This decision has now been justified by the initial experiments which have placed our country far ahead of our competitors in this line.

Upon the successful completion of the research and the perfection of the Hiller machine, there is every reason to expect that in due time we will have more material returns from our coconut and our people will be assured of more labor opportunities.

We have definitely broken away from the antiquated methods of production in oil extraction.

Lack of credit facilities for our agricultural enterprises has also been mentioned as a major stumbling block in our economic progress. This is more evident in the coconut producing areas which are composed of scattered small holdings throughout the country.

Inasmuch as the coconut industry has been suffering from a deplorable lack of credit facilities, which has placed the financing system in the hands of the middlemen themselves to the detriment of the producers, I am endorsing the Laurel-Guinto bill which would provide rural banks for the coconut industry. I strongly feel that more credit facilities for the industry are indeed imperative for increased production and for easing the burdens of long-range planning.

I have been keeping a keen eye on your industry and its problems. Last year after your convention, you complained that no one from the coconut industry was ever appointed to the governing bodies of our credit institutions despite your repeated petitions to previous administrations.

That was a year ago. Today, I am happy to inform you that upon the recommendation of your Federation directorate, your vice-president for Mindanao, Atty. Benjamin V. Guiang, has just been elected to the Board of Directors of the Philippine National Bank.

Last month, your Board of Directors also presented to me your complaint that the 7 per cent processing tax would result in hardships particularly to the small planter. As it is not within my power to suspend the effectivity of this levy on agricultural products, I have instructed the Secretary of Finance to prepare an amendment to repeal this particular provision of the law to enable those engaged in agriculture to dedicate themselves to production without the burden of high taxes.

I am glad to know that there has been close collaboration between your Federation and the Philippine Coconut Administration. This government arm for promoting the industry was established a little over two years ago to solve the problems of the industry on a permanent basis. Necessarily the solution of these problems is mostly long range in character. The mandate of the PHILCOA charter does not permit it to engage in trading, and most of its work as a service agency— like the improvement of our copra, price stabilization, and research work—are intangible and cannot be fully appraised as visible, physical achievements.

The problems of such vast industry like the coconut demand consideration of all its inter-locking problems to benefit all sections of the industry throughout the islands for its steady and permanent growth. I am glad to note that the present management of the PHILCOA has pursued this policy as ordained by law.

As a result of the work of your Federation, the organization of the coconut industry is now becoming an accomplished fact. The realization of coconut men that they can do things effectively only when they do it together is the most salutary development that has occurred in this enterprise. It was for this reason that I did not hesitate in approving a resolution of the board of administrators of PHILCOA in releasing the sum of P100,000 to help the Federation in forming coconut cooperatives.

Under these auspicious days, gentlemen, I fully share your hopes on the future of the coconut industry and the role it can play in our economic planning. We have here an enterprise that is flexible enough to lend itself to the demands of both our domestic and the foreign markets. Increased uses of coconut by-products offer new horizons for our people. In an old and established industry like the coconut we have the nucleus for developing many new side enterprises that will be a boon to our people in the rural areas.

My friends, I trust that after your consultations and deliberations you can guide me further in working toward the realization of our desire to make our coconut industry continue to grow and prosper for the good of all Filipinos.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1957). President Magsaysay’s speech before the Philippine Coconut Producers Federation Convention at the Malacañang Park Recreation Hall, Friday morning, March 15, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(6) , 1739-1742.