Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines At the opening of the World Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession Assembly

[Delivered at the Session Hall, House of Representatives, August 1, 1956]

LET me begin by congratulating you on your choice of themes. Your Conference, I understand, will consider the role of the teacher in the well-being of society. The teacher has been cast in this role throughout all history, but I agree that it is vital for you at this time to re-examine it so that you can fit into the context of the present day.

You are, of course, excellently placed to consider this problem, You are an international body of teachers brought together in Manila by the same ideals of service to mankind. You represent 74 national organizations of teachers from 33 countries and reflect the aggregate of their educational planning and experience. You are therefore in a position to formulate solutions. I have no doubt that your conference will be fruitful.

One of the problems that will come up before you is the problem of democracy. We are told by some people that democracy is inferior to dictatorship because it is so ponderous and slow. We are assured that dictatorship is more responsive to the well-being of society because it can act with speed on problems as they arise.

I shall not belabor you with distinctions between democracy and dictatorship. Neither shall I emphasize the great cost in human freedom that has to be paid for the ruthless efficiency of dictatorship. All these you know. Btu I do want to tell you that democracy need not be ponderous and slow.

I grant that democracy is the more difficult philosophy to achieve. Democracy is the exercise of just power with the consent of the governed. It demands of every citizen to participate in the solution of community problems, not merely to do as he is told. This requires alertness, initiative, enterprise, and readiness to engage in common action on common problems. As you know, these qualities are not needed and in fact are discouraged in dictatorships. Your responsibility here, if I may be allowed an observation, is to sharpen the minds of the young to the obligations and not merely to the rights of democratic citizenship.

You might also consider the economic problem. This is one of the most important problems facing most of the world today. Economic strength, in the final analysis, means national security. Economic strength includes the military sinew by which aggression is repelled and the contentment in which subversion cannot thrive. That is why most nations want enough food and enough jobs for all their people, as well as enough of the things that would give them richer, fuller lives.

For us in Philippines, democracy and economic strength represent two basic, related problems. This is perhaps also true of other nations. We want to grow strong economically with the help of friends but primarily through our own collective efforts. This involves a process common to all democracies—citizen participation in community development.

The teachers of the Philippines are catalysts in such a process. In this role they are succeeding remarkably. That is why our government is giving more and more benefits to the teacher—greater financial rewards for their work, greater security for their families, greater chances of building for the future.

Today I report with pride that our teachers are at the very base of our rural development program. We are, as you probably know, evolving an approach which we call the community school. This system seeks to project the school as a center of community development. The school demonstrates a workable idea—perhaps the manufacture of some handicraft out of locally available raw materials—which the entire community can use. People are encourage to discuss common problems at the schoolhouse and to apply collective solutions. The teachers provide guidance in these meetings and offer technical assistance where needed. The emphasis is on common action and self-help.

To be sure, the Philippine public school system is merely one of the government agencies engaged in this great undertaking. But we consider the work of our teachers basic in this field because they are in touch at all times with our rural folks. We depend on our teachers to help develop leadership in the rural communities, where 80 per cent of our population live. Without this leadership we cannot advance substantially as a nation.

I invite you to examine the Philippine community school in considering the teacher’s role in the well-being of society. Please discuss it frankly. Tear it apart. Let its defects be exposed. If improvements can be made on the system, let it be done. You will, I assure you, be doing the Philippines a great service. More than that, you may be able, by pooling your collective judgment and experience, to evolve an entirely new system that would benefit all mankind.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). President Magsaysay’s speech at the opening of the World Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession Assembly at the Session Hall, House of Representatives, Wednesday afternoon, August 1, 1956. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (9) , 4225-4227.