Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Before the National Radio and TV Newsmen’s Club

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, August 18, 1955]

MY FRIENDS:

IT is a real pleasure to greet the newsmen of radio and TV. In a sense it is a reunion with old friends and fellow workers, for we have worked together in one of the tasks that is closest to my heart—the preservation of freedom. When I was secretary of national defense, you were an important element in the fight against communism, bringing, as you did, to all our people, an understanding of the evils of that world conspiracy and the falsity of the promises being made by their local agents to our people.

You contributed again to the preservation of freedom when you kept the nation alert and informed on the issues and problems involving free elections. In 1951 and again in 1953, your thorough coverage of these events right up to the very counting of returns was a very strong factor in keeping those elections clean and fair. I still remember with great satisfaction how many of our citizens spontaneously recognized the great value of your services by sending you food and refreshment as you worked uncomplainingly hour after hour until the last vote was in and counted.

Unquestionably one of the most important keystones in the structure of a free society is freedom of information. It is from this freedom that democracy draws its greatest strength. It is this freedom that is most feared by those who seek to impose dictatorship and tyranny upon mankind.

Freedom of information does not exist in the communist world. It is only by keeping this powerful instrument of truth suppressed that dictatorships can continue to rest safely upon the foundation of lies and fraud which keep their people in meek submission. At the same time this suppression of freedom of information is a great weakness of the communist world, for the truth sooner or later must leak through, and when it does their people will be all the more embittered by the fraud that has been perpetrated upon them.

Your work has been important but it is becoming even more important. The world of today is complex, and the forces which influence the lives of our people move at a faster pace. Our decisions must be made more quickly and must be based on facts rather than emotion. It becomes your task, therefore, to take the problems, and the issues, and the disputes of our day and reduce them to their simplest and most accurate terms. From the million of words that are spoken and printed on any given subject it becomes your responsibility to boil down the basic issues and the basic facts. These our people must understand if they are to function properly as citizens of a democracy directing their own destinies and demanding of their public servants that they observe those directions.

I know that the great majority of you have been aware of this responsibility and have given your best in living up to it. You may be sure that not only the people appreciate your efforts but also each public servant who takes seriously his commitments to those who have entrusted him with public office.

Both as a citizen of the Republic and as a public servant, I thank you and salute you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s speech before the National Radio and TV Newsmen’s Club at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, Thursday evening, August 18, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51 (8) , 3991-3992.