United Nations Speech of His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay President of the Philippines Read by Vice-President Carlos P. Garcia

[Read at the Manila Hotel, October 24, 1955]

ON the first day of Philippine independence, President Roxas declared “A new era has come to the Orient. From this day forward our international responsibility is absolute.”

We lost no time in assuming that responsibility. Our independence was declared just in time for the Philippines to join the world community of nations in signing the United Nations charter. And the Philippines immediately gave vigorous and active support to the principles embodied in the United Nations.

We raised clear and strong voices in support of the democratic principles which have meant so much to us. We defended the rights of all exploited and oppressed peoples. We rallied with other freedom-loving peoples to halt aggression, to raise the dignity of man, to promote exchanges of information and peoples, and to establish and maintain peace on earth.

Individual Filipinos have represented us in serving the United Nations in several dedicated and distinguished ways. We have been represented on major panels dealing with Korean and Palestine problems. Filipinos have been chairmen of international conferences of freedom of information. A Filipino has served as president of the General Assembly. Filipinos have fought with UN forces on the battlefields of freedom.

And to us the United Nations is more than a remote international organization. We have seen and felt the United Nations right here in the Philippines. We have been hosts to conferences and to headquarters of its regional and specialized agencies. We have felt the United Nations goodwill and brotherhood in our barrios where UN programs to help our people are being conducted.

Some observers state that the Philippine role in the United Nations is out of proportion to our size and our population. I submit that our active role in support of the UN is in direct proportion to our belief in its ideals and principles.

We subscribe to justice and decency in the conduct of human affairs; to liberty, individual rights, and human dignity; to the freedoms of speech, religion and from want. We dedicate our efforts toward the preservation of peace. We hold firm to the principles of democracy and resist the threats of dictatorship and subversion.

It is for these reasons that we have such faith in the United Nations and have been eager to do perhaps a little more than our share to make it successful. The basic principles of the UN are the basic principles of the Philippine Republic and of our people.

In the same way that it has made nations united, adherence to these principles has made us a people united. And in such unity there is strength. We have demonstrated that in our homes, in our nation and in the United Nations. Strength through unity is the cornerstone of the United Nations.

The United Nations is ten years old. During these years it has been confronted with more obstacles than we care to recall. Like in every worthwhile effort there are prophets of doubts, discouragement and fear lurking around it. And these counsels of fear have not prevailed, however, whenever and wherever confronted with resolution and strength.

This is the essence of the so-called Geneva Look, which holds promise of giving the world greater insurance for peace. The Geneva Look was a direct result of free world strength through unity. It provides positive approaches to the cause of peace as well as firm resistance to aggression and oppression.

The preservation of peace depends upon the effective application of collective security measures. We intend to fulfill our international responsibility by taking an active part in collective security programs. The SEATO is but one example. We intend to build collective security on even stronger foundations, such as mutual respect and understanding, exchange programs and sharing efforts to solve common problems. We want to know our neighbors in Free Vietnam, in Indonesia, in Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos—we want to become friends not just with their government officials but with their peoples.

And here again our personal hopes and desires are a direct demonstration of the same principles which created and built the United Nations. Friendship, understanding and respect are weapons of peace. We aim to fulfill our obligations to the UN charter by employing such weapons.

But to carry out effective programs for peace with our neighbors we must be strong at home. We know better than many other peoples the horror and waste of war. We know also the dangers and destruction of Communist-inspired programs of terrorism and sabotage. We have had a bitter taste of each.

Today we may be faced with an even greater threat—the subtle maneuverings of Communist infiltration of our democratic processes of government. They attack those who are dedicated to the welfare of the people. They detract from logic with waves of emotion. They make promises which they never intend to fulfill. They make offers so sweet to the taste yet so bitter to the stomach after they are swallowed.

Peace and unity like charity begin at home. We must demonstrate strength and unity. We must preserve and insure freedom and democracy at home—in our own country. Then, and only then, can we contribute to collective security and to the United Nations in fulfillment of our international responsibilities.

The road we travel may be dark. But it is the only road. We take it with confidence, with strength. We take it hand in hand with the United Nations. We take it hand in hand with God. We knew the road leads to peace.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). President Magsaysay’s United Nations speech read by Vice-President Carlos P. Garcia at the Manila Hotel Monday evening, October 24, 1955. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 51(10) , 5052-5054.