MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 356

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF KUMALARANG IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, and upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Sur, the barrios and sitios of Kumalarang, Gitaan Dagat, Dumagoc, Balao, Magusan, Baiisong, and Gatub, all of the municipality of Lapuyan, and the barrios and sitios of Gusom, Manago, Lower Buyugan, Cabasi, Diplo, and Cabog Island, all of the municipality of Malangas, both of the province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from the said municipalities and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Kumalarang with the seat of government at barrio Kumalarang.

The municipality of Kumalarang shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at point 1, the intersection of Malangas-Lapuyan municipal boundary and the shore line, at barrio Manago; thence northeasterly in a straight imaginary line touching the eastern tip of Cabog Island to a point midway between said point 1 and the opposite shore, thence northwesterly in an imaginary line touching the northern share of the unnamed peninsula immediately northeast of the poblacion of Kumalarang to point 2 at barrio Bualan; thence to a 30 degrees northwesterly direction until it intersects the bank of Kumalarang River at point 3; thence to a line following the river course upstream to a distance of 12,200 meters at point 4; thence due south in a straight line passing through Lake Wood until it intersects Malangas-Lapuyan municipal boundary at point 5, with a distance of 15,450 meters; thence back to point 1, the point of beginning. (This description is based upon the map of the proposed municipality of Kumalarang furnished by the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur.)

The Municipalities of Lapuyan and Malangas shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Kumalarang as delimited above.

The municipality of Kumalarang shall begin to exist after November 10, 1959, upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Lapuyan and Malangas after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Kumalarang can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for their essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1959). [Executive Order Nos. : 328-461]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.