MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 389

CREATING THE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF MAGSAYSAY IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, and section 2630 of the same Code, as amended by Republic Act No. 1515, there is hereby created in the province of Lanao del Norte a municipal district to be known as the municipal district of Magsaysay to consist of the following barrios and sitios;

From the Municipality of Kolambugan

From the Municipal District of Tubod

1. Baguiguicon

From the MunicipalDistrict of Tangcal

3. Labo

4. Malabaogan

with the seat of government at the barrio of Bago-Ingud.

The municipal district of Magsaysay as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at Point 1, at the abandoned tunnel passage of the railway of the Finlay Miller Timber Company on the Titunod River; thence, following the Titunod River upstream to its source at Lobo, Point 2; thence, in an imaginary straight line to the source of the Bulot River at Matungao water falls, Point 3; thence, following the Bulod River downstream till it intersects the municipal boundaries of Kolambugan and the municipal district of Tangcal, Point 4; thence, following said municipal boundary to the intersection of the boundaries of the municipalities of Kolambugan and Tubod and the municipal district of Tangcal, Point 5; thence, following the municipal boundaries of Kolambugan and Tubod till it intersects the Bulod River, point 6; thence, following the Bulod River down stream to the metting point of the Baguiguicon and Bulod Rivers, Point 7; thence, in an imaginary straight line passing thru the peak of Mt. Taguitingon to the point of beginning at the abandoned tunnel passage of the railway of the Finlay Miller Timber Company on the Titunod River, Point 1. (Based on the data shown on the map of the municipality of Kolambugan showing the boundaries of the proposed municipal district of Magsaysay, prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Lanao del Norte, submitted and on file in this Office.)

The municipalities of Kolambugan and Tubod and the municipal district of Tangcai shall have their respective territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipal district of Magsaysay, as delimited above.

The municipal district of Magsaysay shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 389 : Creating the Municipal District of Magsaysay in the Province of Lanao del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (13), 2779-2780.