MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 283

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF DUMINGAG IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Lower Timonan, Colictop, Ecuan, Upper Timonan, Pogwan, Tungawan, Maralag, Bocayan, Dumingag, Doniao, Licama, Dapiwak, Guitran, Dilod, Yabu. Gonain, Manlabay, Marangan, Doray, Calomanggi, Palili, Guintananan, Baculon, Gumpingan, Bitian, Malaciawa, Ditolan, Dela, Gapasan, Tubay, Baquiran, Linay, Dipala, Batan, and Disered, all of the municipality of Molave, province of Zamboanga del Sur,are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Dumingag with the seat of government at the barrio of Dumingag.

The boundary line between the municipality of Dumingag as herein organized and the municipality of Molave shall be as indicated and described in the sketch map of the “Remaining mother municipality of Molave and the proposed municipality of Dumingag”, prepared and submitted by Assistant Civil Engineer Ernesto L. Renes of Zamboanga del Sur, filed in this Office.

The municipality of Molave shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Dumingag, as delimited above.

The municipality of Dumingag shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, Vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Molave, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Dumingag, can still maintain creditably its municipal government and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 283 :  Creating the municipality of Dumingag in the province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (1), 3.