MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 249

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ANAO-AON IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios, which shall all hereafter be considered independent barrios of Anao-aon, Bambanon, Balite, Amontay, Jubgan, Linungganan, and Macopa—all of the municipality of Surigao, province of Surigao, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality of Anao-aon with the seat of government at the barrio of Anao-aon.

The municipality of Anao-aon as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from a point at the mouth of Anao-aon River and marked (A) on. the plan; thence, following the course of said river upstreams to the point, marked (B), at its intersection with an imaginary straight line extending from the mountain peak marked (X) down in a southerly direction to the point marked (C) at the highest peak of Mt. Tenido; thence, due south to the point marked (C), at its intersection with the existing boundary line which separates the municipality of Surigao from other municipalities; thence, follow a westerly direction along the said existing boundary line to the point marked (E); and thence, follow the boundary of the marine waters, which this new municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to the point of beginning.” (This description is based on the data shown in the sketch of the municipality of Surigao with the proposed municipality of Anao-aon, prepared and submitted by the office of the Highway District Engineer of the province of Surigao.)

The municipality of Surigao shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Anao-aon, as delimited above.

The municipality of Anao-aon shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Surigao, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Anao-aon, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 249 : Creating the municipality of Anao-Aon in the province of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (11), 3414-3415.