MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 282

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TAMBULIG IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as the municipality of Tambulig to consist of the following barrios and sitios:

From the Municipality of Molave

From the Municipality of Aurora

with the seat of government at the barrio of Tambulig.

The municipality of Tambulig as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Point 1, intersection of Dipolo River and the National Highway at Dipolo Bridge to Point 2, intersection of Gabonon Creek and National Highway following a northeasterly direction to a distance of 4,400 meters; thence to Point 3, due north until it intersects the provincial boundary line between Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte to a distance of 26,000 meters; thence to Point 4, due east following the said provincial boundary until it intersects the provincial .boundary line to the province of Zamboanga del Sur and Misamis Occidental to a distance of 4,800 meters; thence to Point 5, due south following the said provincial boundary line until it intersects the National Highway to a distance of 29,400 meters; thence to Point 6, on Pangil Bay following a southeasterly direction to a distance of 10,000 meters; thence to Point 7, on the mouth of Dipolo River following the shore, line to a distance of 12,000 meters; thence following the course of Dipolo River, a distance of 24,000 meters to Point 1.” (This technical description is furnished by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of the Province of Zamboanga del Sur based on the sketch of the map prepared and submitted by said Office.)

The municipalities of Molave and Aurora shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are 5 included in the territory of the municipality of Tambulig, as delimited above:

The municipality of Tambulig shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipalities of Molave and Aurora, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Tambulig, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 282 :  Creating the municipality of Tambulig in the province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (1), 1-2.