MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 277

PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REORGANIZATION PLAN NO. 1-A RELATIVE TO POSITION CLASSIFICATION

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Nine hundred and ninety-seven, as amended by Republic Act Numbered One-thousand two hundred and forty-one, and upon the recommendation of the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission, the following Implementing Details of Reorganization Plan No. 1-A which relate to position classification are hereby promulgated:

SECTION 1. The authorized class titles of a position covered by the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 1-A shall be that appearing in the official allocation list prepared for each department and independent entity by the Wage and Position Classification Office, hereinafter referred to as “WAPCO.” Such class title shall be used for all official purposes and shall be binding on all administrative, certifying, payroll, disbursing, accounting, and auditing officers of the government.

SEC 2. A position covered by the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 1-A but not yet classified by the WAPCO shall be described on the officially prescribed form and submitted to WAPCO for classification action.

SEC. 3. A full-time regular position created in the future and covered by the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 1-A shall be described on the officially prescribed form and submitted to WAPCO for classification action. Such a position shall not be filled until receipt of notification of WAPCO classification action.

SEC. 4. Each department and independent entity shall” reflect the WAPCO class title beneath the current title of each item appearing in its July 1, 1956, staffing pattern in the column “Designation of Position,” and shall then furnish WAPCO a copy of such staffing pattern. On subsequent staffing pattern, only the WAPCO class title shall appear in the column “Designation of Position.”

SEC. 5. Actions required by Reorganization Plan No. 1-A and these Implementing Details shall be effected within sixty days.

SEC. 6. This Order shall take effect as of July 1, 1957.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 277 :  Providing for the implementing details for Reorganization plan no. 1-a relative to position classification. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (22), 8007-8008.