MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 386

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BALABAGAN IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Barorao, Baguiangan, Kalilangan, Balabagan, Itil, Banago, Budas, Igabay, Magolalong, Dagoan, Matimus, Bongabon, and Lusain, all of the municipality of Malabang, province of Lanao del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Balabagan, with the seat of government at barrio Itil.

The municipality of Balabagan as herein organized shall be separated from the municipality of Malabang by the following line:

From a point at the mouth of Lalabuan River in Illana Bay somewhere near the Salauang Point, running northeasterly in an imaginary straight line to M.B.M. No. 3 on the Malabang-Tubaran Municipal Boundary. (This description is based on a map attached to Resolution No. 111, c.s. of the provincial board of Lanao del Sur)

The municipality of Malabang shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Balabagan as delimited above.

The municipality of Balabagan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof, and upon certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Malabang, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Balabagan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for its essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 386 : Creating the Municipality of Balabagan in the Province of Lanao del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (12), 2602-2603.