MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 288

PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REORGANIZATION PLANS NOS. 12-A, 13-A, AND 14-A RELATIVE TO HEALTH

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Nine hundred and ninety-seven, as amended by Republic Act Numbered One thousand two hundred and forty-one, and upon the recommendation of the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission, the following Implementing Details of Reorganization Plans Nos. 12-A, 13-A, and 14-A which relate to Health, are hereby promulgated to govern the organization, powers, duties, and functions of the Department of Health.

ORGANIZATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

SECTION 1. The organization, functions, and operation of the Department of Health, hereinafter referred to as the “Department,” shall be in accordance with the provisions of Reorganization Plans Nos. 12-A, 13-A, and 14-A, hereinafter referred to as the “Plans,” and these Implementing Details.

SEC. 2. The organization of the Department, as graphically depicted in the following organization chart’s, shall consist of the Office of the Secretary, Advisory Councils and Boards to the Secretary of Health, Office of Administrative Services, Office of Health Education and Personnel Training, Office of the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services, Office of the Undersecretary for Special Health Services, Bureau of Health, Services, Bureau of Disease Control, Bureau of Medical Services, Bureau of Research and Laboratories, and Bureau of Quarantine, all hereinafter referred to as the “central entities” only for brevity, and eight Regional Offices with their corresponding provincial and local offices.

SEC. 3. The Secretary of Health, hereinafter referred to as the “Secretary,” is authorized to make such changes in organization, definition of functions, and distribution of work among entities in the Department as may be necessary to reflect changes in legislation, conditions, needs, or workloads: Provided , That no such changes may be made during the fiscal year 1957 without specific approval of the President: And provided, further , That any such changes must be in conformity with the general pattern of organization set forth in the Plans and these Implementing Details.

FUNCTIONAL STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

Functions of the Office of the Secretary

SEC. 4. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Secretary shall consist of those provided in pertinent provisions of the Revised Administrative Code, other laws, orders, rules, and regulations in so far as they are not inconsistent with those provided in the Plan and these Implementing Details. The Secretary shall be responsible for health activities which shall include public health, disease preventive, curative, and rehabilitative programs; health, and medical education services. He shall have the following functions, among others:

a . advise and recommend to the President matters relating to the formulation and execution of health policies;

b . administer, coordinate, direct, and implement health activities and services.; and

c. delegate authority for the performance of any functions or set of functions to officers and employees under his supervision and direction.

Functions of the office of Administrative Services

SEC. 5. There shall be an Office of Administrative Services which shall have the following functions, among others: advise and recommend to the Secretary matters relating to administrative services; establish administrative standards, regulations, and administrative procedures; give consultative and technical services in administrative and legal matters to the Regional Offices for organization and procedures improvement; plan a coordinated control program for the Department, designed to provide top management with information necessary to evaluate progress of the agency to meet its program objectives; evaluate administrative performance; and provide effective internal controls to prevent error, waste, extravagance, and irregularity.

SEC. 6. The Office of Administrative Service shall have four (4) division; namely, a Personnel and Record Division, a Budget and Finance Division, a General Services Division, and a Legal Division.

SEC. 7. A Reports Control Group as established in the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services for the specific purpose of limiting the volume of reports in the Department, and shall have the following functions, among others:

a . survey all existing recurring reports and instructions thereto;

b . develop a reports control system;

c . issue reports control numbers for approved reports;

d . make recommendations on the elimination of superfluous or duplicate reports; and

e . perform such other duties as are necessary to limit reports to those which are useful and essential.

SEC. 8. The Secretary or his designate shall determine a date after which time an employee may not be required to prepare a report requested by other than his organizational superior unless such report contains an approved reports control number.

SEC. 9. An Organization and Methods Group is established in the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services and shall have the following functions, among others:

a . develop the Department’s Management Improvement program;

b . conduct such organizational and procedures surveys and analyses as are necessary to promote, greater efficiency and economy; and

c . prepare reports on the progress and evaluation of the Department’s decentralization program.

Functions of the Personnel and Records Division

SEC. 10. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Personnel and Records Division, among others, shall be to establish policy standards, rules and regulations pertaining to personnel, and records management for use in all entities of the Department; establish and direct a sound personnel management program which shall include policies and procedures for recruitment, selection, training, and promotion of personnel; process personnel transactions for the personnel of the central offices; establish and direct a records management program which shall include records creation, selective records preservation, records disposal, and maintenance of a records center for the central offices.

SEC. 11. The Personnel and Records Division shall have a Personnel Transactions Section, a Personnel Services Section, and a Records Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a . The Personnel Transactions Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) process appointments, separations, promotions, reinstatements, leaves, retirements, and life insurance benefits; and

(2) arrange for permits to employees to engage in business, acquire public lands, teach outside of office hours, etc.

b . The Personnel Services Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) assist other entities in the development of practical recruitment, selection, and in-service training programs;

(2) exercise general supervision on efficiency rating systems and employee performance standards; and

(3) administer employee welfare services, including merit and award programs.

c . The Records Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) create, maintain, and retire records for the Department;

(2) maintain an up-to-date personnel records file; and

(3) maintain a records center for the central offices.

Functions of the Budget and Finance Division

SEC. 12. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Budget and Finance Division, among others, shall be to establish policy standards, rules and regulations pertaining to budgetary and financial matters, such as budget preparation, review, adjustments, and consolidating; collect and. disburse funds; perform other financial transactions for use of all entities in the Department; direct and exercise technical supervision over the preparation of the annual budget of the Department and any required suplemental estimates; establish and maintain accounting, examining, disbursing, and other financial controls.

SEC. 13. The Budget and Finance Division shall have a Budget Section and a Finance Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a . The Budget Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) prepare, review, adjust, and consolidate budget estimates for all the central offices and Regional Offices and other entities of the Department;

(2) prepare the annual Department budget;

(3) provide financial analysis; and

(4) establish and maintain allotment controls for all expenditures.

b . The Finance Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) take charge of all collections and disbursements for the central offices; and

(2) prepare payrolls and pay salaries for all personnel in the central offices.

Functions of the General Services Division

SEC. 14. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the General Services Division, among others, shall be to direct, in accordance with the applicable policies, regulations, and standards established by the Department of General Services, the “housekeeping” functions of the Department, including the establishment of policies, procedures, and standards covering the following:

Security services which include preventive measures against theft, fire, damage, accident, unlawfuly entry, and similar hazards to buildings and other properties; routine watching and guarding of the premises; janitorial and other utility services, including cleaning the offices, toilets, store-rooms, office equipment, furniture, buildings, and grounds; collecting and disposing of waste and related activities; maintenance services for real property, office equipment, and such other equipment as is appropriate, including carpentry, plumbing, and electrical work; procurement and distribution of supplies; maintenance of motor pool; and mail and messenger services.

The Division shall provide the above-mentioned services for the Department Headquarters Office.

SEC. 15. The General Services Division shall have a Supplies Section, a Building and Grounds Management Section, and a Motor Pool Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Supplies Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) direct the procurement, distribution, and inspection of supplies and equipment for the central offices; and

(2) procure, distribute, and inspect supplies and equipment for Regional Offices whenever necessary.

b . The Building and Grounds Management Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) maintain and repair buildings;

(2) control building space allotment;

(3) administer routine building services, such as janitorial, security, mail, and messenger services; and

(4) maintain the grounds around the buildings.

c . The Motor Pool Section shall, among others, operate and maintain a motor pool for the headquarters offices.

Functions of the Legal Division

SEC. 16. The Legal Division shall have the following functions, among others:

a . provide policy standards, rules, and regulations pertaining to legal matters;

b . advise and give opinion on legal matters affecting the Department;

c . prepare legal forms and other documents relative to court actions or legal investigations;

d . conduct such investigations of offices and employees as may be directed by the Secretary; and

e . perform legal research and analyses for legal matters, and assist the Solicitor General in representing the Department in court.

Functions of the Office of Health Education and Personnel Training

SEC. 17. The Office of Health Education and Personnel Training shall be responsible, among other things, for planning and directing programs for public health education and information. It shall develop and coordinate training programs for all health personnel; disseminate health information materials; collect, process, tabulate, and analyze vital and other health statistics for the Department.

SEC. 18. The Office of Health Education and Personnel Training shall have three divisions under it: namely, Health Education Division, Personnel Training Division, and Statistics Division.

Functions of the Health Education Division

SEC. 19. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Health Education Division shall, among others, include developing policies, programs, plans, operating techniques, and other matters related to health education; providing consultant services on health education programs in the regions; publishing health information materials for health education; and publishing magazines, brochures, pamphlets, and leaflets for other entities in the Department.

SEC. 20. The Health Education Division shall have a Program Section and a Publications and Information Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a . The Program Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) develop health education programs for use in the field;

(2) coordinate health education programs of the Department;

(3) provide consultant services on health education whenever needed in the regions;

(4) operate demonstration programs as directed; and

(5) provide facilities for audio-visual aids for use in the regions.

b. The Publications and Information Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) publish health education materials;

(2) print health publications, such as magazines, pamphlets brochures, leaflets, etc., for other entities of the Department;

(3) operate and maintain a central library for the Department;

(4) aid in the distribution of health information materials; and

(5) provide duplicating services for the Central Office.

Functions of the Personnel Training Division

SEC. 21. The Personnel Training Division, in collaboration with the Personnel and Records Division of the Office of Administrative Services, shall, among other things, develop policies, programs, plans, standards of operation, and evaluation of training Health Department personnel; prepare materials necessary for training purposes; provide liaison with other entities in the Department or other institutions for the training of personnel; provide consultant services for personnel training in the regions; and coordinate training programs conducted in the Department or the Regional Offices.

SEC. 22. The training programs to be conducted by the Personnel Training Division may be open to employees of other nations, national, provincial, or local entities at the discretion of the Secretary or his designate.

SEC. 23. The Personnel Training Division shall have a Medical Services Training Section and a Public Health Services Training Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a . The Medical Services Training Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) develop the medical training program in collaboration with other entities for training hospital and clinic personnel; and

(2) coordinate training programs conducted in the regions.

b. The Public Health Training Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) develop the training program for personnel in the preventive aspects of the public health program; and

(2) coordinate training programs conducted in the regions.

Functions of the Statistics Division

SEC. 24. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Statistics Division shall, among others, include the development and maintenance of a coordinated health statistics system.

SEC. 25. The Statistics Division shall have a Research Section and a Vital Statistics Section, provided, that the Vital Statistics Section shall be established through collaboration with the office of Statistical Coordination and Standards of the National Economic Council, on or about July 1, 1958, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a . The Vital Statistics Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) develop and maintain the program for compilation, tabulation, analysis, interpretation, and publication of related health and morbidity statistics;

(2) train personnel in statistical work; and

(3) provide statistical information for purposes of evaluating program effectiveness.

b . The Research Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) develop technique for departmental statistical surveys and such other statistical programs as may be required, subject to the authority of the Office of Statistical Coordination and Standards of the National Economic Council, to allocate statistical activities, including statistical methodology and standards covering statistical entities of the government; and

(2) provide technical supervision over research studies.

Office of the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services

SEC. 26. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services shall consist of those provided in section 11 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A, which shall be interpreted to include, among others, the development of preventive, curative, and rehabilitative services and activities related to public health diseases through the exercise of direct supervision over the Bureau of Health Services, the Bureau of Medical Services, and the Bureau of Diseases Control; and the executive direction, supervision, and coordination of all operating services and activities of the Department through the exorcise of direct line authority over the Regional Health Offices.

SEC. 27. Pursuant to section 10 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A, the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services shall be delegated such powers and authority necessary to enable him to discharge his functions, duties, and responsibilities as the Secretary may determine.

Functions of the Bureau of Health Services

SEC. 28. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Bureau of Health Services shall consist of those transferred to it. under section 12 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A which shall be interpreted to include, among others, the development of plans, programs, operating standards, administrative and management techniques in the field of health services.

SEC. 29. The Bureau of Health Services shall have four divisions; namely ,the Division of Environmental Sanitation, the Division of Preventable Diseases, the Division of Industrial Hygiene, and the Division of Maternal and Child Health.

Functions of the Division of Preventable Diseases

SEC. 30. The Division of Preventable Diseases shall have the following functions,. among others:

a . provide consultative and advisory services in the following fields:

(1) preventable diseases;

(2) chronic diseases; and

(3) effectuation of systematic vaccination and inoculation of the population;

b . prepare plans, programs, policies, and regulations on the control of preventable diseases for the guidance and compliance of operating entities; and

c . prepare guiding principles. for a systematic physical examination of government personnel for the guidance of operating entities.

Functions of the Division of Environmental Sanitation

SEC. 31. The Division of Environmental Sanitation shall have the following functions, among others:

a. provide consultative and advisory services in all phases of environment sanitation; such as,

(1) provision of safe and potable water supply,

(2) garbage, sewage, and refuse disposal,

(3) food and drug inspection,

(4) abatement of nuisances,

(5) elimination of insect vectors, and

(6) sanitation in public and private premises, parks, and playgrounds;

b . prepare plans, programs, regulations and criteria on environmental sanitation for implementation of the operating entities; and

c . perform other allied functions relative to environmental sanitation.

Functions of the Division of Maternal and Child Health

SEC. 32. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Maternal and Child Health, among others, shall be to provide consultative and advisory services in the organization and operation of puericulture centers, other health clinics, and school health services; and prepare plans, programs, and regulations in all aspects of maternal and child health for the guidance and Compliance of the operating entities.

Functions of the Division of Industrial Hygiene

SEC. 33. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Industrial Hygiene, among others, shall be to: provide consultative arid advisory services on matters pertaining to sanitation in industrial and commercial establishment, industrial health hazards, and occupational health hazards; set up policies, plans, standards, and instructions with regard to hygiene in industrial and commercial establishments; stimulate the interest of industrial management in the value of in-plant health services in industries; and promote educational and informational activities through talks and lectures to workers, plant supervisors, and nurses.

Functions of the Bureau of Disease Control

SEC. 34. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Bureau of Disease Control shall consist of those transferred to it under section 29 of Reorganization Plan No. 12—A which shall be interpreted to include, among others, such staff activities as the development of plans, programs, operational standards, and administrative and management techniques in the control of certain special diseases.

SEC. 35. The Bureau of Disease Control shall have a Division of Malaria, a Division of Tuberculosis, a Division of Sanitaria, a Division of Social Hygiene, a Division of Cancer Control, and a Division of Mental Hygiene.

Functions of the Division of Malaria

SEC. 36. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Malaria, among others, shall be to give consultative and advisory services in matters pertaining to the control of malaria and other insect-borne diseases; establish plans, programs, policies, regulations, and criteria for the control of malaria and other insect-borne diseases for the guidance and compliance of operating entities; assist in the pre-service and in-service training of physicians, engineers, and technicians undertaking malaria control activities.

Functions of the Division of Tuberculosis

SEC. 37. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Tuberculosis, among others, shall be to give consultative and recommendatory services to the operating entities in matters pertaining to tuberculosis and its control; formulate policies, plans, programs, regulations, and criteria on tuberculosis control for the guidance and compliance of the operating entities; assist in the pre-service and in-service training of physicians, nurses, and other personnel undertaking tuberculosis control activities; conduct investigations as well as gather and evaluate all information on the clinical, epidemiological, laboratory, administrative, and special health aspects of tuberculosis, and exchange such information with other countries; recommend policies for the operation of a National Tuberculosis Center for the direction of public health tuberculosis work throughout the country; and recommend policies for the promotion, organization, coordination, inspection, and regulation of all activities in the country relating to tuberculosis as well as for the establishment and maintenance of institutions for the prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation of tuberculosis patients.

Functions of the Division of Sanitaria

SEC. 38. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Sanitaria shall, among others, include the development of policies, plans, programs, operational procedures, and other technical aspects relating to leprosy control; conduct continuous researches for purposes of determining the most effective means of eradicating or decreasing the incidence of this disease in the country; and assume technical supervision over field units.

SEC. 39. The Division of Sanitaria shall have a Sanitaria Services Section and a Skin Clinics Section, with the corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a . The Sanitaria Services Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) supervise all sanitaria which are responsible for the segregation, treatment, and rehabilitation of leprous patients; and

(2) conduct periodic inspections of sanitaria for purposes of examining patients ready tc . be released.

b . The Skin Clinics Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) supervise stationary leprosy clinics and mobile leprosy clinics in the field; and

(2) conduct periodic visits to skin clinics to determine the progress of mass examinations and follow-up treatments.

Functions of the Division of Social Hygiene

SEC. 40. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Social Hygiene, among others, shall be to develop plans, programs, policies, operational procedures, and other technical aspects related to the prevention and control of venereal diseases; provide consultative and recommendatory services for the guidance of operating entities in: (1) the control of venereal diseases, particularly syphilis and gonorrhea, (2) management of clinical and laboratory facilities for venereal diseases, (3) operation of all provincial social hygiene clinics, (4) diagnosis and treatment of patients and follow-up of contacts, (5) examination and treatment of pre-natal VD cases, and (6) gathering, compilation, and analysis of data regarding VD and skin diseases.

Functions of the Division of Cancer Control

SEC. 41. The functions duties and responsibilities of the Division of Cancer Control, among others, shall be to develop policies, plans programs, operational procedures, and other technical aspects related to the prevention and control of cancer.

Functions of the Division of Mental Hygiene

SEC. 42. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Mental Hygiene, among others, shall be to develop policies, plans, programs, operating standards for field studies, surveys, and other activities germane to mental hygiene.

Functions of the Bureau of Medical Services

SEC. 43. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Bureau of Medical Services shall consist of those transferred to, it under section 20 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A, which shall be interpreted to include, but must not be limited to, the development of plans, programs, operating standards, administrative and management techniques germane to the field of medical services, collection, evaluation, tabulation, analysis and interpretation of related data, facts and information; formulation of recommendations in relation to all phases of hospitals, to include criteria for establishing need, type, plan, construction, location, site selection, technical equipment, staff, etc., and field surveys in areas.

Functions of the Division of Hospitals

SEC. 44. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Hospitals, among others, shall be to develop plans, programs, and policies for hospital programs; provide consultative and advisory services to all hospitals, government and private, in the following specialities: Hospital administration, Orthopedics, Psychiatry and Mental Health, Obstetrics, Gynecology, Pediatrics, Infectious diseases, General Surgery, Internal Medicine,. Geriatrics, Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat, Anesthesiology, Radiology, Clinical Pathology, Microbiology, Dental Medicine, Hospital Nursing, Hospital pharmacy, and other medical and surgical specialties; recommend rules and regulations for the improvement of hospital services; collaborate with the office of Administrative Services in the development of qualification standards for hospital personnel; recommend standards for services, facilities, equipment, budgeting, building, etc, for hospitals, clinics, and sanitaria; recommend disposition of the application and issuance of permits for the construction of new hospitals; recommend plans for standardizing construction of hospitals and allied buildings; design and draft plans for the construction of government hospitals; and develop technical guides for medical and nurse supervisors.

SEC. 45. The Division of Hospitals shall have a Hospital Organization and Management Section and a Hospital Standardization Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a . The Hospital Organization and Management Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) provide consultative and recommendatory services in hospital administration and management which include:

( a ) study and preparation of plans and programs in order to improve administrative and management techniques of our hospitals;

( b ) study and preparation of rules and regulations affecting hospital services from time to time in order to safeguard the public against malpractices and inadequate equipment and services in government and private hospitals;

( c ) recommend the contents of a continuing program for staff development with emphasis on the adequacy of preparation and training of personnel for maximum performance and efficiency (preservices and in-service training);

( d ) study and preparation of recommendations of policies regarding recruiting, qualifications, promotion, discharge, or retirement of personnel;

( e ) compilation of clinical and statistical data for use in the analysis of clinical work for the interpretation of the work of the hospital staff (medical auditing);

( f ) prepare, in collaboration with the Legal Division of the Office of Administrative Services, drafts of legislation affecting the hospitals and the Bureau of Medical Services;

( g ) recommend staffing patterns for hospitals; and

( h ) review and analyze hospital operation reports.

(2) develop and provide consultative and recommendatory services to hospital supervisors or inspectors in the field and check their techniques for further improvement. In collaboration with other Sections in this Division, this Section shall provide standard instructions for field inspectors in the following areas:

( a ) utilization of existing facilities and personnel (manpower) in order to improve the quality of service rendered to the patients;

( b ) professional efficiency of the Medical Staff;

( c ) public relations;

( d ) general housekeeping, laundry, and linen service of the hospital;

( e ) adherence to accepted practices and procedures;

( f ) proper care and treatment in general given to patients;

( g) quality and quantity of food given to patients;

( h ) handling complaints on the part of the patients against the hospital;

( i ) medical records, admission and discharge of patients;

( j ) other professional services such as x-ray laboratory, clinical laboratory,, hospital pharmacy and drug room, dental service, and out-patient department;

( k ) nursing services; and

( l ) medical social service functions; and

(3) provide consultative and recommendatory services on hospital nursing, study and prepare recommendations for the improvement of nursing service in hospitals, including nursing procedures, and provide liaison to the Department of Education in developing curricula for Schools of Nursing.

b . The Hospital Standardization and Architecture Section shall have the “following functions, among others:

(1) recommend standards for the different services in the hospitals, such as, nursing services, food services, medical services, etc.;

(2) recommend standards for the different policies and procedures; such as, admission of patients to nursing units; discharge of patients from nursing units; procedures following death, control, and management of communicable, infectious, and suspect diseases, nursing patients, medication brought by patients to hospitals, etc.;

(3) recommend standards for equipment; such as., beds, bed side tables, cabinets, x-ray, electrocardiography, cribs, specialist chair, carriage for dressing, bed pan sterilizer, oxygen aparatus, wheel stretcher, irrigator stand, etc.;

(4) recommend regulations that will insure future growth in effectiveness, good service, and public appreciation of hospital clinics;

(5) study and evaluation of existing programs and facilities, develop plans for the expansion of hospital facilities, and provide consultation in planning of hospital facilities;

(6) screen, for architectural acceptability, the application and issuance of permits for the construction of new hospitals (public and private);

(7) prepare standards plans for construction of hospitals of different bed capacities and other related buildings, and provide consultation services in the preparation of modern hospital plans;

(8) inspect and recommend proposed sites for new hospital buildings and inspect existing hospital buildings from time to time in order to recommend measures, improvement, and expansion plans;

(9) supervise and coordinate construction of hospital facilities within its field of jurisdiction;

(10) maintain liaison with the Bureau of Public Works for the Bureau of Medical Services on matters pertaining to plans and construction of hospitals and allied buildings; and

(11) provide consultative and recommendatory services in plant operation and repair of technical equipment in hospitals; develop and maintain operating manuals; and provide technical supervision over the maintenance, repair, and operation of equipment, machinery, and distributing lines.

Functions of Regional Health Offices

SEC. 46. In accordance with section 40 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A, the functions of the Regional Health Offices, among others, shall be to administer, direct, coordinate, and supervise all preventive and curative health services and activities in the region not specifically reserved to line authority from Headquarters entities; execute policies, standards, regulations, plans programs, and schedules involving Health services and activities; and supervise, through the Provincial Health offices (where applicable), the operation of hospitals in the region in accordance with prescribed standards, to report thereon and to make recommendations with respect thereto. Regional offices shall be organized in a manner parallel to the central office organization insofar as possible.

Field training programs in Regional training centers and elsewhere will foe conducted under the supervision of the regional officers, except where otherwise specified. Central office organizational units shall be responsible for the establishment of standards, methods, and procedures in their technical fields of jurisdiction for adoption by field offices, but shall be responsible for the execution of these functions only in the Central Office. Field office organizational units shall be responsible to their superior field office supervisors for field office operations, except where otherwise specified. Field office units, however, shall be obliged to utilize such standard methods and procedures as have been approved, and thus, may receive technical supervision from, and report technically to, their central office counterparts, subject to the direct authority of the regional office director. In unusual circumstances, field officers may issue instructions to deviate from approved practices, but in such instances, as in all others, they shall be responsible to their superiors for such action. Technical reports of Regional Laboratories and Quarantine Stations shall be submitted through the Regional Directors to the Office of the Undersecretary for Special Health Services.

SEC. 47. Each Regional Health Office shall have as its administrative head a Regional Health Director, who shall have such administrative supervision, as is not prohibited by law, over the Provincial Health Offices, the City Health Departments, and the Quarantine Stations in his region in accordance with sections 43 and 44, respectively, of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A.

SEC. 48. The Municipal and Rural Health Units and the Provincial Hospitals, as provided in section 45 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A, shall toe under the immediate administrative direction, supervision, and control of the Provincial Health Officers concerned.

SEC. 49. The Department shall have eight Regional Health Offices, the respective jurisdictions, boundaries, and headquarters offices of which shall conform to the pattern established by Reorganization Plan No. 53-A on Field Operations and its Implementing Details.

SEC. 50. The headquarters office of each Regional Office, under the administrative direction, supervision, and control of the Regional Health Director, shall consist of the following four entities, the respective duties and responsibilities of which are indicated accordingly in section 41 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A:

a . Consultant and supervisory staff;

b . Regional Health Training Center;

c . Regional Laboratory; and

d . Administrative Unit.

Functions of the Office of the Undersecretary for Special Health Services

SEC. 51. The functions powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Undersecretary for Special Health Services shall consist of those provided in section 12 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A which includes supervision, direction, and control of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories and the Bureau of Quarantine. Pursuant to section 10 of the same Plan, he shall be delegated such powers and authority necessary to enable him to discharge his functions, duties, and responsibilities as the Secretary may determine.

Functions of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories

SEC. 52. The functions of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall include, but not be limited to, those transferred to it by section 30 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A and section 1 of Reorganization Plan No. 12-A.

SEC. 53. The Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall have a Division of Laboratories, a Division of Food and Drugs Testing, and an Institute of Nutrition.

Functions of the Division of Laboratories

SEC. 54. The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Division of Laboratories, among others, shall be to develop the program to manufacture biological products; maintain and have laboratory experimental animals, collect blood plasma; and conduct research relating to blood, bacteriology, and pathology.

SEC. 55. The Division of Laboratories shall have a Section of Pathology and Microbiology, a Section of Plasma Dehydration, a Section of Sanitary Chemical Analysis, a Section of Production Laboratories, and a Section of Research, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Pathology and Microbiology Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) conduct research studies on bacteriology and pathology of intestinal diseases;

(2) conduct studies on causes and prevention of virus diseases;

(3) conduct. analysis of blood, sputum, urine, feces, and spinal fluid;

(4) perform autopsies;

(5) perform diagnoses on tissues; and

(6) study the causes of food spoilage and recommend methods of improving food preparation.

b . The Research Section ishall have the following functions, among others:

(1) perform research on snail fever control;

(2) study life cycles and pathogenicity of blood and lung parasites;

(3) perform research on amoeba, flagellates, and worms; and

(4) develop the programs for research on antibiotics, virus diseases, enteric diseases, etc.

c . The Blood Plasma Dehydration Section shall have the following functions, among others:.

(1) collect blood from donors;

(2) process plasma in dried form;

(3) process plasma to prepare different protein fractions and prepare them in dried form; and

(4) perform research on plasma substitutes.

d. The Sanitary Chemical Analysis Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) analyze air and body fluids for presence of poisonous substances absorbed from surrounding air or materials that constitute health hazards; and

(2) conduct analysis of water to determine its fitness for industrial purposes or for human consumption.

e . The Production Laboratories Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) develop the programs for the production of vaccines, sera, and other antitoxins;

(2) manufacture vaccines and sera; and

(3) conduct research as may be required in the development of the production program.

Functions of the Division of Foods and Drugs Testing

SEC. 56. The functions, duties and responsibilities of the Division of Foods and Drugs Testing, among others, shall be to analyze food samples collected locally and imported from abroad in accordance with the Pure Food Law; collect analytical data for the preparation of food standards; detect local adulterants in food; analyze new drugs and medicinal preparations, both imported and manufactured locally; conduct research work on the stability of vitamin products; perform microbiological assay of new antibiotics and antibiotics containing drug preparations; perform chemical assay, sterility, pyrogen, toxicity, and other tests on antibiotic products; and conduct research work on methods of assay under local conditions.

Functions of the Institute of Nutrition

SEC. 57. The functions duties and responsibilities of the Institute of Nutrition, among others, shall be to conduct research in the basic and applied science of food and nutrition in accordance with policies established by the Undersecretary for Special Health Services, and to provide technical assistance, consultative and recommendatory services and quality control in the implementation of the Rice Enrichment Law (Republic Act No. 832) as supplemented by Executive Order No. 59 and Proclamation No. 58.

SEC. 58. The Institute of Nutrition is authorized to receive subsidies, endowments, requests and donations, and to use the same for such, purposes that the donors may specify within the laws, orders, regulations, etc., governing such matters. In the absence of express wishes of the donors, all such contributions shall form part of the funds of the Institute and shall be available for expenditures as may be duly authorized by the Undersecretary for Special Health Services.

SEC. 59. The functions of the Institute of Nutrition Board shall be retained as they are in accordance with section 2 of Plan No. 14-A.

SEC. 60. The Institute of Nutrition Board shall retain its present system of mebership including the methods of appointment and tenure.

SEC. 61. The Institute of Nutrition shall have a Food and Nutritional Biochemistry Section, Medical and Applied Nutrition Section, and a Philippine Rice Enrichment Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Foods and Nutritional Biochemistry Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) analyze and study composition of local foods;

(2) undertake biochemical studies on the nutritional levels of our people to help determine nutritional deficiencies and weaknesses in our dietary practices and make appropriate recommendations for their improvement;

(3) perform research on the requirements of Filipinos for the different food nutrients;

(4) perform other nutrition research services including:

( a) analysis for nutritional levels of biological samples which are referred by the Nutrition Clinic or other government agencies,

( b ) examination of food samples submitted by other government laboratories, and

( c ) consultant services on nutritional biochemistry and methods of analysis; and

(5) upon request, conduct dietary and food consumption surveys to determine trends in food habits.

b . The Medical and Applied Nutrition Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) conduct researches on the practical application of nutrition knowledge in the prevention and treatment of disease; and

(2) provide consultative and recommendatory services on necessary public health measures for the prevention and j control of deficiency diseases for use in nationwide program planning on nutrition and health.

c. The Philippine Rice Enrichment Section shall have the following functions, among others:’

(1) develop policies for procurement, installation and operation of rice enrichment equipment;

(2) recommend procedures for field inspection services on the recognition and inspection for enriched rice;

(3) recommend action on medical nutrition with special reference to beri-beri, iron deficiency, anemia and associated deficiencies;

(4) do informational work as resource staff for lectures, and demonstrations on rice enrichment;

(5) conduct research studies on rice with special reference to nutritional values and other aspects of nutritional practices;

(6) encourage the manufacture and distribution of premix rice;

(7) encourage the manufacture, design and distribution of enrichment equipment with a view to improvement; and

(8) perform laboratory analysis of samples of premix rice and/or enriched rice for assistance to regional offices for enforcement purposes including quality control.

Functions of the Bureau of Quarantine

SEC. 62. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Bureau of Quarantine shall be as provided in section 1 of Reorganization Plan No. 13-A, which shall be interpreted to include, among others, the following:

a. recommend policies and plans for operation of quarantine stations or rules and regulations for the prevention of introduction or transmission of quarantinable diseases from foreign countries, or from one port to another;

b . provide consultative and advisory services to operating entities in the field of quarantine;

c. lay down plans, programs, policies, and standards in the field of quarantine;

d . perform allied functions with respect to quarantine;

e . provide supervision over the Manila Regional Quarantine Station, as provided in section 3 of Plan No. 13-A, which shall be responsible for operational quarantine functions in its area; and

f . inspect inter-island vessels and aircraft for purposes of enforcing proper standards of sanitation.

Functions Transferred to the Department

SEC. 63. The functions enumerated above for the Department are interpreted to include those functions transferred to the Department from other Departments and/ or entities.

REALLOCATION OF APPROPRIATIONS

SEC. 64. From the total appropriations authorized for the period from July first, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, consisting of the following:

a . Under Republic Act Numbered 1600

Manila Airport Revolving Fund

General Fund

General Fund

General Fund

Total Appropriations

the following sums, subject to adjustment by the Commissioner of the Budget, based on the unexpected balance of the appropriations available as of the effective date of these Implementing Details, are reallocated for the operation of the Department during the period from July first, nineteen hundred and fifty-six to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, except where otherwise provided:

A. Funds Transferred Out

General Fund

₱25,347.00

B. Current Operating Expenditures (1) Office of the Secretary

PROGRAM I: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND-STAFF SERVICES

Program II: HEALTH EDUCATION, PERSONNEL TRAINING, AND STATISTICS

For health education and dissemination of health information; for training of technical and non-technical personnel of all disciplines; for the development, and maintenance of a coordinated health statistics and research system, ₱320,480.00: Provided , That the amount of ₱96.440.00 for training in public health services and methods which has heretofer been paid from the receipts of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office shall continue to be charged against the said fund, and’ the Board of Directors of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office shall allot such amount in the distribution of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Fund, (Sec. 938 ( h ), Rev. Adm. Code; C. A. No. 430, R. A. No. 604; Ex. Or. Nos. 317, s. 1941; 94, s. 1947, 392, s. 1950).

Total

(2) Office of the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services

PROGRAM I: EXECUTIVE, DIRECTION, SUPERVISION, AND STAFF SERVICES

(3) Bureau of Health Services

PROGRAM I: PROGRAM PLANNING AND CONSULTANT SERVICES

(4) Bureau of Medical Services

PROGRAM I: STANDARDS FOR HOSPITAL SERVICES

(5) Bureau of Disease Control

PROGRAM I: PROGRAM PLANNING, EVALUATION, AND CONSULTANT SERVICES

For program planning, evaluation and consultant services for disease control, including tuberculosis, malaria, leprosy, Social hygiene, cancer, and mental hygiene

(6) Office of the Undersecretary for Special Health Services

PROGRAM I: EXECUTIVE DIRECTION, SUPERVISION, AND STAFF SERVICES

(7) Bureau of Research and Laboratories

PROGRAM I: LABORATORY EXAMINATION, PRODUCTION, AND RESEARCH

For laboratory examination and research services, for blood plasma dehydration; for production of vaccines, sera, and antitoxins and other biological products; for analysis of -foods, drugs, and cosmetics; for laboratory research for the prevention and cure of disease; and for nutritional research ₱1,825,603.00: Provided : That the income to be realized from the analysis of foods and drugs, public health examinations, and proceeds from the sale of biological products shall accrue to the Alabang Laboratories Revolving Fund: Provided , That the Director of the Blood Bank shall be paid a salary of two pesos (₱2.00) per annum: Provided , That of the amount appropriated for nutritional research, ₱960.00 shall be for per diems of the chairman and members of the Institute of Nutrition Board who are not government officials, at the rate of ₱20.00 each for every session actually attended: And Provided , That of the amount appropriated for Project (1) General Management, ₱12,460.00 shall be for reimbursement to the Budget Commission and to the General Accounting Office for expense of accounting and auditing services.

Total

(8) Bureau of Quarantine

PROGRAM I: QUARANTINE ADMINISTRATION

(9) Field Operators

PROGRAM II: REGIONAL HEALTH TRAINING CENTERS

PROGRAM III: REGIONAL LABORATORIES

PROGRAM IV: FIELD HEALTH SERVICES

Total

PROGRAM V: SANITARIA SERVICES

PROGRAM VI: QUARANTINE SERVICE

₱539,310.00

PROGRAM VII: HOSPITAL SERVICES

Total Current Operating Expenditures

₱42,985,658.00

C. Special Provisions

The total current operating expenditures of ₱42,985,658.00 authorized for the Department in these Implementing Details shall be paid out of the following funds:

Total

The total current operating expenditures of ₱42,985,658.00 authorized for the Department shall be allotted for the following objects subject to adjustment by the Commissioner of the Budget based on the balance of funds available as of the effective date of these Implementing Details:

Personal Services, including ₱882,756.00 for temporary and emergency help

Total

Total Funds

D. General Provisions

The “General Provisions” of Republic Act Numbered Sixteen hundred, to which reference is hereby made, shall remain in full force and effect, and is made a part of this Section on “Reallocation of Appropriations,” except that: (a) Section 16, “Officials entitled to transportation allowance,” is modified to include therein the Director of Health Services, the Director of Disease Control, the Director of Medical Services, the Director of Research and Laboratories, the Chief) of Field Health Operations, the Chief of the Administrative Services, and the Chief of Health Education and Personnel Training, as among! those granted commutable transportation allowance of one hundred pesos each per month; and to exclude therefrom the Director of Health, the Director of Hospitals, whose positions are abolished; and ( b ) Section 17 is modified to include the Bureau of Health Services for the development and execution of programs in the field of health services, to include the Bureau of Disease Control for the development and execution of programs to control certain special diseases, to include the Bureau of Medical Services for the development and execution of hospital programs, to include the Bureau of Research and Laboratories for health research and distribution of vaccines, sera and other biological preparations, and to include the Regional and other field offices of the Department of Health, for the purpose of executing functions of the Department of Health, and to exclude the Public Health Research Laboratories and the Bureau of Health which have been abolished. All special provisions of Republic Act Numbered Sixteen hundred applicable to the Department of Health not inconsistent with the provisions of these Implementing Details, shall remain in full force and effect.

STAFFING PATTERN

SEC. 65. The following Staffing Pattern by project activity is provided for the Department for the periods from the effective date of these Implementing Details to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, subject to the provisions of Reorganization Plans Nos. 1-A, 2-A and 3-A, except that authority is hereby granted to the Secretary subject to approval of the Commissioner of the Budget, to make necessary salary adjustments resulting from final selection of personnel to fit the positions in the Staffing Pattern, in order that no incumbent receives a reduction in salary, and further to make necessary salary adjustments resulting from new appointments, promotions, or salary increases: Provided , That no such adjustment may result in a salary rate which exceeds the minimum of the applicable salary range as provided in Reorganization Plan No. 2—A: Provided, further , That new appointments,: promotions and salary increases presently pending which would exceed the maximum rate of the appropriate salary range are cancelled until further notice: And provided, finally , That nothing in the said Staffing Pattern shall be construed as depriving the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission, during its existence and the Commissioner of the Budget thereafter, of its power to make changes therein, to correct mistakes, discriminations or other Injustices that may, in its opinion, have been committed; in the preparation thereof:

(1) Office of the Secretary

PROGRAM I: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND STAFF SERVICES

Project 1: General Administration and Staff Services

Office of the Secretary, Total

OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

Office of the Chief, Administrative Services

PERSONNEL AND RECORDS DIVISION

Office of the Chief

Personnel Transactions Section

Personnel Services Section

Records Section

BUDGET AND FINANCE DIVISION

Office of the Chief

Budget Section

Finance Section

LEGAL DIVISION

GENERAL SERVICES DIVISION

Office of the Chief

Supplies Section

Building and Grounds Management Section

Motor Pool Section

Office of Administrative Services—Total

Office of Health Education and Personnel Training

PROGRAM II: HEALTH EDUCATION, PERSONNEL TRAINING AND STATISTICS

Project 1. Program Management

Office of the Chief

Project 2. Education and Information Services

DIVISION OF HEALTH EDUCATION

Program Section

Publications and Information Section

Project 3. Personnel Training

PERSONNEL TRAINING DIVISION

Public Health Services Section

Medical Specialist III

₱20,940.00

Medical Services Section

Project 4: Statistics and Research

DIVISION OF STATISTICS

Research Section

Vital Statistics Section (To be staffed in 1958)

Office of Health Education and Personnel Training—Total

67

₱178,360.00

(2) Office of the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services

PROGRAM I: EXECUTIVE DIRECTION, SUPERVISION AND STAFF SERVICES

Project 1: Executive Direction, Supervision and Staff Services

Office of the Undersecretary

Office of Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services—Total

(3) Bureau of Health Services

PROGRAM I: PROGRAM PLANNING AND CONSULTANT SERVICES

Project 1: Program Planning and Consultant Services

Office of the Director

DIVISION OF PREVENTABLE DISEASES

DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL SANITATION

DIVISION OF MATERIAL AND CHILD HEALTH

DIVISION OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE

Bureau of Health Services—Total

(4) Bureau of Medical Services (Division of Hospitals)

PROGRAM I: STANDARDS FOR HOSPITAL SERVICES

Project 1: Standards for Hospital Services and Consultant Services

Office of the Director

Hospital Organization and Management Section

Medical Adviser (Chief of Section) 1

Hospital Standardization Section

Bureau of Medical Services—Total

(5) Bureau of Disease Control

PROGRAM I: PROGRAM PLANNING, EVALUATION AND CONSULTANT SERVICES

Project 1: Program Planning, Evaluation and Consultant Services

Office of the Director

DIVISION OF MALARIA

DIVISION OF TUBERCULOSIS

DIVISION OF SANITARIA

Sanitaria Services Section

Skin Clinics Section

DIVISION OF SOCIAL HYGIENE

DIVISION OF CANCER CONTROL

DIVISION OF MENTAL HYGIENE

Bureau of Disease Control—Total

(6) Office of the Undersecretary for Special Health Services

PROGRAM I: EXECUTIVE DIRECTION, SUPERVISION AND STAFF SERVICES

Project 1. Executive Direction, Supervision and Staff Services

Office of the Undersecretary

(7) Bureau of Quarantine

PROGRAM I: QUARANTINE SERVICE

Project 1: Quarantine Service

(8) Bureau of Research and Laboratories

PROGRAM I: LABORATORY EXAMINATION, PRODUCTION AND RESEARCH

Project 1: General Management

Office of the Director

DIVISION OF LABORATORIES

Office of the Chief

Project 2: Pathological and Microbiological Examination

Pathology and Microbiology Section

Project 3: Laboratory Research

Research Section

Project 4: Blood Plasma, Dehydration

Blood Plasma Dehydration Section

Project 5: Sanitary Chemical Analysis

Sanitary Chemical Analysis Section

₱14,520.00

Project 6: Vaccine Production

Production Laboratories Section

Project 7: Food and Drug Analysis

DIVISION OF FOODS AND DRUGS TESTING

Project 8: Nutrition Research

INSTITUTE OF NUTRITION

Office of the Director

Medical and Applied Nutrition Section

Foods and Nutritional Biochemistry Section

Philippine Rice Enrichment Section

Bureau of Research and Laboratories—Total

(9) Field Operations

PROGRAM I: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

Project 1: General Administration

REGIONAL HEALTH OFFICES—Manila

Office of Regional Health Director

₱42,780.00

Consultant Services

Administrative Staff

Operational Staff

Industrial Hygiene

International Airport First Aid Unit

PROGRAM II: REGIONAL HEALTH TRAINING CENTERS

Project I: Regional Health Training Centers

Regional Health Training Center

Manila Regional Offices—Total

PROGRAM I: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

Project 1: General Administration

REGIONAL OFFICES OTHER THAN MANILA

Consultant Staff

Administrative Staff

PROGRAM II: REGIONAL HEALTH TRAINING CENTERS

Project I: Regional Health Training Centers

Health Training Centers

Medical Specialist I

PROGRAM III: REGIONAL LABORATORIES

Project 1: Laboratory Examination Services

Regional Laboratory

Regional Offices—Except Manila—Total

Leyte Laboratory

Leyte Laboratory—Total

PROGRAM IV: FIELD HEALTH SERVICES

Project 1: Rural Health Units 1

Rural Health Units—Total

Project 2: Dental Services

Dental Services—Total

Project 3: Social Hygiene Services

Senior Clinic Supervisor

Social Hygiene—Total

Project 4: Malaria Eradication Services

Malaria Control—Total

Project 5: Tuberculosis Control Services

Chest Centers

BCG Immunization and Prevention

Mobile Tuberculosis Clinics

Rest Settlements

Tuberculosis Control—Total

Project 6: Environmental Sanitation

Environmental Sanitation—Total

PROGRAM V: SANITARIA SEVICES

Project 1: Sanitaria and Skin Clinics

Quarantine Services—Total

PROGRAM VII: HOSPITAL SERVICES

Project 1: General Hospitals

General Hospitals—Total

Project 2: Special Hospitals

Special Hospital—Total

Project 3: Schools of Nursing

School of Nursing—Total

Project 4: School of Midwifery

School of Midwifery—Total

TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY HELP

₱682,756.00

SEC. 66. The personnel structure of the Department for the period from the effective date of these Implementing Details to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven shall conform to the Staffing pattern provided in these Implementing Details.

SEC. 67. Except where the law provides otherwise, all-appointments to positions authorized in the Staffing Pat­tern shall be subject to the requirements of the civil service and other personnel laws, rules, and regulations: Pro­vided, That all personnel in the present staff who meet such requirements shall be employed before consideration is given to the employment of the persons, subject to the approval of the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission and the President.

DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

SEC. 68. Any delegation of authority required or author­ized by these Implementing Details shall be in writing; shall indicate to which officer or class of officers or em­ployees the delegation is made; shall define the extent to which each delegate will be held responsible for results; and shall vest each delegate with sufficient authority to enable him to discharge his assigned responsibility. Such delegations, where specifically provided by these Implementing Details, shall be within the limits of the provisions of these Implementing Details: Provided, That nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent other delega­tions.

PARTIAL INVALIDITY

SEC. 69. If any provision of these Implementing Details should be held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby.

TIMING OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS

SEC. 70. The Secretary shall direct the orderly scheduling of transfers, changes, and other transitional actions required by the Plan and by these Implementing Details with­in sixty days from the effective date of the Implementing Details. In the interim, each entity shall continue to per­form its existing functions until such time as the appro­priate authority orders change or cessation and each officer and employee shall continue to perform his duties and to ex­ercise his authority until such time as the Secretary orders otherwise.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

* not in totals; not paid from Institute appropriation in F. Y. 1957 1 Salary data exclude portions of salaries paid by provinces.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 288 : Providing for the implementing details for Reorganization Plans Nos. 12-A, 13-A, and 14-A relative to health. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 54 (6), 1681-1733.