MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 274

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF OLUTANGA IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant.to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the islands of Olutanga, Lampinigan, Lutangan, and Talata, composing of the barrios and sitios of Suba Nipa, Talusan, Sagasa, Leparot, Plasiris, Cabato-an, Bangalan, Calais, Cawilan, Gandaan, Tambanan, Bontalian, Pinaling, Taguisian, Tando Comot, Culiran, Olutanga, Port Sibulan, Calabasa, and Tawitawi, all of the municipality of Alicia, province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Olutanga with the seat of government at the barrio of Suba Nipa.

The boundary between the municipality of Alicia and the municipality of Olutanga shall be the middle of the channel or strait which separates the barrios, sitios, and islands above-named from the rest of the territory of Alicia on the mainland.

The municipality of Alicia shall have the same territory-minus that comprised in the municipality of Olutanga.

The municipality of Olutanga shall begin to exist after November 12, 1957, upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Alicia, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Olutanga, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 274 :  Creating the Municipality of Olutanga in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (20), 6929.