MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 268

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN PABLO IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios, which shall all hereafter be considered independent barrios, of Buton, Calilangan, Capamanok, Coddum, Culasian, Dansalan, Portion of Guling, Lumbayao, Miasin, Mulansong, Pao, Pantad, Payag, Pongapong, Sacbulan, Tandubuay, Tikala Island, and San Pablo, all of the municipality of Dinas, province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of San Pablo with the seat of government at the barrio of San Pablo.

The municipality of Dinas shall have the same territory minus that comprised in the municipality of San Pablo.

The municipality of San Pablo shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential serv­ices of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Dinas, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of San Pablo, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the  essential municipal service.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 268 :  Creating the Municipality of San Pablo in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (18), 5935.