MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 427

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ALCANTARA IN THE PROVINCE OF ROMBLON

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Alcantara, San Isidro, Comoed-om, Tugdan, Calagonsao, Bonlao, Madalag, and Camili, together with their respective sitios, all of the municipality of Looc, province of Romblon, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Alcantara with the seat of government at the barrio of Alcantara.

The municipality of Alcantara as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at a point marked 1 on the sketch plan, which is at the shore of Romblon Pass marked Hor. Grid 50; thence along the line following a northwesterly direction with a distance of about 3,700 meters to Guinhayaan Junction marked point 2; thence along the line following a northeasterly direction with a distance of about 18,000 meters to point marked 3 along the Odioñgan-Looc boundary line and marked Hor. Grid 65.8; thence along the line following a northeasterly direction along the Odioñgan-Looc boundary line with a distance of about 2,500 meters to point marked 4; thence along the line following a southeasterly direction with a distance of about 5,000 meters along the San Agustin-Looc boundary line to point marked 5 near Naabang Point which is at the shore of Romblon Pass; thence following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provision of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code to point marked 1, the point of beginning. (Based on the technical description furnished by the Bureau of Lands on the sketch plan or map of the municipality of Looc showing the boundaries of the proposed municipality of Alcantara, prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Romblon, on file in this Office, Scale: 1:50,000).

The municipality of Looc shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof included in the municipality of Alcantara, as delimited above.

The municipality of Alcantara shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Looc, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Alcantara, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 427 : Creating the municipality of Alcantara in the Province of Romblon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (14), 2453-2454.