MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 446

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BASISTA IN THE PROVINCE OF PANGASINAN

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Pangasinan and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Pangasinan a municipality to be known as Basista, to consist of the following barrios of the municipalities of San Carlos, Bayambang, and Malasique, all of the same province:

From the Municipality of San Carlos

From the Municipality of Bayambang

From the Municipality of Malasique

1. Patakbo

The boundaries of the municipality of Basista as herein constituted are as indicated by hatched red pencil lines on the map of the municipality of San Carlos, Scale 1:50,000, kept in this Office.

The seat of government of the municipality of Basista shall be at the barrio of Basista.

The municipalities of San Carlos, Bayambang, and Malasique shall have their present territories minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Basista.

The municipality of Basista shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipalities of San Carlos, Bayambang, and Malasique, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Basista, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 446 : Creating the municipality of Basista in the Province of Pangasinan. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (39), 6931-6932.