MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 443

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TABINA IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Tabina, Mabuhay, Malim, Concepcion, Abong-Abong, Manikaan, Baganian, Culabay, Tubotubo, and Limbayan, all of the municipality of Dimataling, province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Tabina with the seat of government at the barrio of Tabina.

The municipality of Tabian as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at a point marked “1” which is the intersection of the shoreline of Illana Bay and the left boundary line between barrio Sompot and barrio Abong-Abong, a distance of about 500.00 meters from Abong-Abong, due West; thence, in a straight line due South with a distance of about 10,400.00 meters (scaled from the provincial map of Zamboanga del Sur) until it intersects the shoreline at Maligay Bay at a point marked “2”; thence, counterclockwise following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code to point marked “1”, the point of beginning. (This technical description is based on the sketch plan or map of the proposed municipality of Tabina, prepared by the Office of the District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur, on file in this Office, Scale: 1:100,000)

The municipality of Dimataling shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof included in the municipality of Tabina, as delimited above.

The municipality of Tabina shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Dimataling; after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Tabina, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 443 : Creating the municipality of Tabina in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (39), 6590-6591.