MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 330

CREATING THE BARRIO OF MASAYA IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAY, PROVINCE OF LAGUNA

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Laguna, and pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, that portion of the municipality of Bay, province of Laguna, known as the sitio of Masaya, is hereby constituted into a regular barrio to be known as the barrio of Masaya. The territory and boundaries of the barrio of Masaya as herein constituted are as follows:

Bounded on the NE along lines 7-1 and 1-2, approximately S. 41° 30′ E., 2,200 meters, on the Revised Sketch Plan of the proposed Barrio of Masaya, prepared by Surveyor Mariano A. Foliente, Office of the District Engineer of Laguna, by Barrio Puypuy; on the SE along lines 2-3- arid 3-4 about 1,700 meters of Ulik Creek 13 meters wide, by the municipality of Calauan; on the SW. along line 4-5, approximately 1,700 meters, by Barrio Tranca; and on the NW. 1,500 meters along lines 5-6 and 6-7 of the Canbantok Creek, by Barrio Maitim, municipality of Bay, containing an area of approximately 321 hectares. Bearing assumed.

Corner 1 is the center point of the Irrigation Canal Concrete Culvert across the Puypuy-Batangas Road. Corner 2 is the center of the Canlubang Prenza Dam across the Ulik Creek. Corner 3 is the center point of the Steel Bridge of the Manila Railroad across the same Ulik Creek. Corner 4 is a cacawate post 20 cm. wide planted along the left bank of Ulik Creek on the land of Maria Delfino. Corner 5 is the Bulak tree 25 cm. diameter on the right bank of Canbantok Creek and corner boundary of the property of Cipriano Mendoza and Leocadio Ramos; Corner 6 is the center point of the Steel Bridge (MRR) across Canbantok Creek and corner 7 is a cacawate post planted in the right bank of Canbantok Creek on Juan Calcetas’ land.

Barrios Puypuy and Tranca in the municipality of Bay to which the sitio of Masaya at present belongs shall have the same territories minus the portions now to be comprised in the barrio of Masaya.

The changes herein made shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1959). [Executive Order Nos. : 328-461]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.