MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 367

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CAGDIANAO IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code and upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao, the barrios of Cagdianao, Mata-as, Bayantian, Cabuñgaan, Lahi, Santa Rita, Nueva Estrella, Del Pilar, Valencia, Boa, and Tigbao, together with their respective sitios and the sitios of Legaspi and Tapahan, all of the municipality of Dinagat, Surigao, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Cagdianao with the seat of government at the barrio of Cagdianao.

The municipality of Cagdianao as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From Suyangan Straight marked point ‘A’ then to the mouth of Bayantian Creek marked point ‘B’ following a northeasterly direction up to Bayantian Creek to the top of the ridge marked point ‘C’ following the mountain range to the northerly direction up to the boundary of Dinagat and Loreto at Sitio Tapahan source of Ga-as inlet marked point ‘D’; thence northeasterly following the course of Ga-as inlet downstream to where it empties into the sea; thence following the boundary of the municipal waters which the Municipality of Cagdianao shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to pont ‘A’, point of the beginning as indicated on the map.” (This description is based on data furnished by Highway District Engineer E. S. Evidente of Surigao on the index map of the municipality of Dinagat, scale 1:100,000, authenticated and submitted by him.

The municipality of Dinagat shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Cagdianao as delimited above.

The municipality of Cagdianao shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, the vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Dinagat, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Cagdianao, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for all the ordinary essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ENRIQUE C. QUEMA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 367 : Creating the Municipality of Cagdianao in the Province of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (52), 10671-10672.