MALACAÑANG MANILA BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO.269

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TUBOD IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios, which Siana, Capayahan, Timamana, Marga, Pingaping, Canlancog, Mahucdam, Lahi, and Diano, all of the municipality of Mainit, province of Surigao, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Tubod with the seat of government at the barrio of Tubod.

The boundary lines between the municipality of Tubod as herein organized and its mother municipality of Mainit shall be as follows:

“From a common intersection of established boundary lines of adjoining municipalities of Surigao, Placer, and Mainit, at ‘A’; on a straight line due south up to its intersection with Tigbawan River somewhere at its source at point ‘B’; thence following a straight line on a southeasterly direction to Balisayak Creek at point ‘C’; thence following the same southeasterly direction to point ‘D’; intersection of the boundaries of Bacuag, Mainit, and Gigaquit; thence following the established boundary lines of the municipalities of Mainit, Bacuag, and the boundaries of Placer and Mainit to point ‘A’, point of the beginning.” (The description is based on the data shown in the sketch of the map of the municipality of Mainit with the proposed municipality of Tubod, prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of the province of Surigao.)

The municipality of Mainit shall have its present territory minus that comprised in the municipality of Tubod.

The municipality of Tubod shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Mainit, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Tubod, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 269 :  Creating the Municipality of Tubod in the Province of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (18), 5936-5937.