MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 415

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TANTANGAN IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Tantangan, Upper Mangilala, Dumadalid, Bucaypait, New Iloilo, San Felipe, Tacob, Liken, Puti, Lumangket, Koloncilal, Tinungkop, Lebas, Maibu, Dunguan, Upper Luayan, Antong (New Lambunao), and Kabuling, all of the municipality of Tacurong, province of Cotabato, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Tantangan with the seat of government at the barrio of Tantangan.

The municipality of Tantangan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at a point on the Buluan-Tacurong boundary near the barrio of Mangilala; thence going southwesterly in a straight line perpendicular to the Norala-Tacurong boundary; thence going southeast following the Old Tacurong-Norala boundary line to a point on the Old Norala-Tacurong-Bañga boundary; thence going in a straight line directly East to its intersection with the Old Buluan-Tacurong boundary line near the barrio of Talik; thence going in a northwesterly direction following the Old Buluan-Tacurong boundary till it reaches the point of beginning near the barrio of Mangilala.” (As described in Resolution No. 228, series of 1960, of the Provincial Board of Cotabato).

The municipality of Tacurong shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Tantangan, as delimited above.

The municipality of Tantangan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Tacurong, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Tantangan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 415 : Creating the municipality of Tantangan in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (8), 1363-1364.