MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 319

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO DETERMINE THE MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SELLING PRICES OF PALAY AND CORN FOR THE VARIOUS REGIONS OF THE PHILIPPINES

For the purpose of extending protection to the producers of rice and corn throughout the Philippines by assuring them the recovery of the cost of production including a fair return from their investments in providing these basic commodities for our people, and so as to offer sufficient incentives for their continued efforts in improving the quantity and quality of the yield of their farms, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a committee composed of the following:

The committee shall have the following powers, duties, and functions:

1. To determine the minimum (floor) and maximum (ceiling) price per cavan of palay and corn for the various regions of the country producing said commodities;

2. To determine the financing requirements of the Government for the procurement of palay and corn from the producers thereof at the minimum and maximum prices it may fix; and

3. To exercise the powers, duties, and functions conferred by this Order before each planting season, and for this purpose to meet as a body at the proper time and place it may designate.

The committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government, including the corporations owned or controlled by the same, for such information or assistance as it need in the performance of its work.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 319 :  Creating a committee to determine the minimum and maximum selling prices of palay and corn for the various regions of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (33), 7711-7712.