MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 381

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ALBOR IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-height of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Libjo, Quezon, Bolodbolod, and San Jose, all of municipality of Loreto, province of Surigao, and the barrio of Osmeña, Kahayag, Arellano, and Plaridel, all of the municipality of Dinagat, same province, are hereby segregated from said municipalities and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Albor with the seat of government at the barrio of Libjo.

The municipality of Albor as herein organized have the following boundaries:

Beginning from a point marked “A” on the map at Awing, Lawayan Gamay; thence, in a straight line on an easterly direction across the mountain up to Balwarte point, marked point B; thence, following the Ga-as inlet up to Tapahan at the intersection of the boundary of the municipalities of Cagdianao and Dinagat, marked point C; thence following the Gaigdianao Dinagat poundary on a southerly direction to a point 4 kilometers along the boundary, marked point D; thence, in a straight line on a westerly direction up to Poladio between Banban point and Puerto Princesa, marked point E; thence, following the boundary of the Marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to point A, the point of beginning. The boundaries herein describe shall include the Islands of Kanihaan, Kayabangan, and Kanhanusa. (This description is based on the sketch plan or map of the proposed new municipality of Albor, prepared by the Highway District Engineer of Surigao, on file in this Office, Scale: 1:125,000.)

The municipalities of Loreto and Dinagat shall have their respective territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Albor, as delimited above.

The municipality of Albor shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 381 : Creating the Municipality of Albor in the Province of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (10), 2109-2110.