MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 452

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAYABAS IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Sur a municipality to be known as Bayabas, to consist of the following barrios of the municipalities of Cagwait and Tago, both of the same province:

From the municipality of Cagwait

1. Bayabas

3. Cabogo

From the municipality of Tago

1. La Paz

The seat of government of the Municipality of Bayabas shall be at the barrio of Bayabas.

The municipality of Bayabas as herein organized shall have the following boundaries: Beginning at the mouth of the Laksoyan River, marked “A”, on the plan; thence, following the course of said Laksoyan River upstream to its intersection with the Somosomo River, marked “B”; thence, following the course of the Somosomo River upstream to its intersection with the Tago and Cagwait municipal boundary, marked “D”; thence, following an imaginary straight line on a southeasterly direction to a point on Mt. Panongtoñgan, marked “E”; thence, following an imaginary straight line on a southeasterly direction to a point on Hinay-hayan Mt. range until it reaches a point at Mt. Mabaho, marked “G”; thence, following the Mabaho Mt. range to a point on Mt. Taglaboyo, marked “H”; thence, following the Taglaboyo Mt. range on an easterly direction until it reaches the seashore at a point marked “I”; thence, in a northerly direction following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code to point marked “A”, the point of beginning. (This technical description is based on the sketch plan or map of the proposed municipality of Bayabas, prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Surigao del Sur, on file in this Office, Scale: 1,100,000)

The municipalities of Cagwait and Tago shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Bayabas, as delimited above.

The municipality of Bayabas shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Cagwait and Tago, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Bayabas, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDILBERTO B. GALLARES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 452 : Creating the municipality of Bayabas in the Province of Surigao del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (50), 8992-8993.