MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 353

CREATING THE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF SAN ANDRES IN THE PROVINCE OF QUEZON

Upon the recommendation of the Provincia Board of Quezon, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight and section twenty-six hundred and thirty, as amended, of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of San Andres, Mangero, Alibijaban, Pansoy, Camplora, and Tala, with their respective sitios, ail of the municipality of San Narciso, province of Quezon, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent political suhdivison to be known as the Municipal District of San Andres with the seat of government at the barrio of San Andres.

The boundary line between the municipal district of San Andres as herein organized and the municipality of San Narciso, shall be the course of Bahay River from its mouth at Ragay Gulf upstream southwesterly to the junction of the Milowpitiwan Creek with said Bahay River, thence southwesterly in a straight imaginary line to a distance of 9,400 meters, more or less till it touches point or corner No. 44 on San Narciso-Aurora boundary as described in land classification project No. 15-B, Block B, Scale 1:20,000 of August 25, 1955, of the Director of Forestry. (References used in this description–A tracing of the land classification map cited here made by Surveyor Augusto Ella on August 15, 1959, survey section, District Land Office, Lucena, Quezon; and sketch map of San Narciso, Scale 1:2000,000, stamped received by the Provincial Board of Quezon August 4, 1959.)

The municipality of San Narciso shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipal district of San Andres as delimited above.

The municipal district of San Andres shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon prior certification by the Secretary of Finance that its probable estimated annual income shall not be less than one thousand pesos.

Done in the. City of Manila, this 20th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and bf the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 353 : Creating the Municipal District of San Andres in the Province of Quezon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (35), 7283.