MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 352

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SANTO TOMAS IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, and upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Davao, the barrio of Tibal-og and other barrios or sitios of the municipality of Kapalong and the barrios of La Libertad, Esperanza, Balagonan, and San Miguel of the municipality of Panabo, both of the province of Davao, as may be comprised within the boundaries specified hereunder, are hereby segregated from the said municipalities and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Santo Tomas with the seat of government at barrio Tibal-og, The municipality of Santo Tomas shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at a point marked corner 1 as shown in the sketch, which is 3 kilometers, more or less, due south from the intersection point of the existing boundary between the City of Davao and the municipalities of Panabo and Kapalong, both in the Province of Davao; thence following the present boundary of the City of Davao straight due north to a point marked corner 2 (marked on the sketch) being a point to intersect the boundary between the city of Davao and the municipality of Kapalong; thence a straight line due east to corner 3 (marked on the sketch) being a point to intersect the Tagum River; thence following the course of the Tagum River in a southeasterly direction to corner 4 (marked on the sketch) being the intersection point of the boundary of the municipality of Panabo with Tagum River; thence a straight line being S., 84° 30″ W., forty-five kilometers distance, more or less, to corner 1, the point of beginning.” (This description is taken from Resolution No. 510, series of 1958, of the Provincial Board of Davao as verified and checked by Vicente F. Montaña, Chief Survey Party No. 20, Davao City).

The municipalities of Kapalong and Panabo. shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Santo Tomas as herein above delimited.

The municipality of Santo Tomas shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Kapalong and Panabo, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios and sitios to constitute the new political sub­division, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for their essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila this 14th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 352 : Creating the Municipality of Santo Tomas in the Province of Davao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (35), 7281-7282.