MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 308

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAHAPLAG IN THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Hilusig, Cuatro de Agusto, Liberacion, Himamara, Tagaytay, Hemaguimetan, Lower Mahaplag, Upper Mahaplag, Palanogan, Campin, Mabunga, Mahayag, Malinao, Union, Uigis, Mahayahay, Palahongon and Pinamono-an, all of the municipality of Abuyog, province of Leyte, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Mahaplag with the seat of government at the barrio of Mahaplag.

The municipality of Abuyog shall have the same territory minus that comprised in the municipality of Mahaplag.

The municipality of Mahaplag shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Abuyog, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios and sitios comprised in the municipality of Mahaplag, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 308 :  Creating the municipality of Mahaplag in the province of Leyte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (17), 4897.