MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 299

CREATING AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE TOBACCO INDUSTRY

WHEREAS, the Philippine tobacco industry is beset as a major industry with many problems and difficulties which directly affect the people dependent upon it for their means of livelihood and retard the development of the national economy; and

WHEREAS, the administration of the tobacco support program and the implementation of laws for the development and protection of the tobacco industry need careful study in order to achieve their laudable objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an Advisory Committee on the Tobacco Industry, composed of a Chairman and four Members to be designated by the President, to study and investigate all phases of the tobacco industry and advise the President on matters affecting said industry.

The Committee shall have the powers of an investigating committee under sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code, including the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, and take testimony relevant to the investigation. It is hereby authorized to require the services of the National Bureau of Investigation, the Philippine Constabulary, the Bureau of Internal Revenue, the Bureau of Customs, and other agencies of the Government in the performance of its work.

The Committee shall submit to the President of the Philippines as soon as possible a report of its findings, together with its recommendations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Executive Order Nos. : 244-327]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.