MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 331

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAIGO IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Lanao, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Maigo, Balagatasa, Sigapud, and Mentring and their respective sitios of the municipality of Kolambugan; and the barrios of Liagan Proper, Barogohan, Camps I, II, and III and their respective sitios, of the municipality of Bacolod, all of the province of Lanao, are hereby segregated from said municipalities and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Maigo with the seat of government at the barrio of Maigo.

The municipality of Maigo as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

On the East, from the mouth of Liangan River in Panguil Bay, upstream to the junction of Big Tonob Creek following upstream to where said creek crosses the boundary of Pantau-Ragat; on the southeast, the portion of the Pantau-Ragat boundary line running southwestward from the point where Tonob Creek crosses said Pantau-Ragat boundary; and on the west, from the mouth of Kulasihan River, in Panguil Bay, upstream to its source somewhere in Munai Ridge, thence southeastward following said ridge up to the boundary of Pantau-Ragat.

The municipalities of Kolambugan and Bacolod shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Maigo, as delimited above.

The municipality of Maigo shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Kolambugan and Bacolod, after the segregation therefrom of the portions of their territories comprised in the municipality of Maigo, can, maintain credibility their respective municipal governments and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 331 :  Creating the municipality of Maigo in the province of Lanao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (10), 1731-1732.