MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 273

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LAPUYAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Lapuyan, Maruing, Kumalarang, Karpok, and Timbang, all of the municipality of Margosatubig, province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Lapuyan with the seat of government at the barrio of Lapuyan.

The municipality of Lapuyan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at point (1), (see attached provincial map) at the mouth of Dumanquilas River progressing in an easterly direction, bordering Lumanquilas River, Lapuyan side, straight to the provincial road at point (2) which is 100 meters from the school site at Bulawan and thence straight in northerly direction passing partly through sitios Talabab and Tiguba towards Tigbao (Tigbao is within the municipality of Dinas) at point (3), from thence, straight passing through the boundary of the municipalities of Pagadian and Margosatubig to point (4), and thence following the provincial boundary of Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur in westerly direction reaching point (5), which is the intersection of the boundaries of the municipalities of Margosatubig and Malangas and the provincial boundary of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte; and from thence it progresses to point (6) passing through the’ boundary of Malangas and Margosatubig municipalities, and from thence, it follows the boundary of the municipal waters which this municipality of Lapuyan shall have pursuant to Section 2321 of the Administrative Code, until it meets the mouth of Dumanquilas River at Point (1). (This description is based on the data shown in the sketch of the map of the Province of Zamboanga del Sur, showing the municipality of Margosatubig with the proposed municipality of Lapuyan, prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur.)

The municipality of Margosatubig shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Lapuyan, as delimited above.

The municipality of Lapuyan shall begin to exist after November 12, 1957, upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Margosatubig, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Lapuyan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of October, in the year, of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 273 :  Creating the Municipality of Lapuyan in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (20), 6927-6928.