MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 371

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LINAMON IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Lanao del Norte and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Linamon, Magoong, Samburon, Larapan, Purakan, Robocon, Napo, Busque, Tangkal, Tilapas, Tinaeg-Manok, Hinatogan and Tingintingin, all of the municipality of Kauswagan, province of Lanao del Norte, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Linamon with the seat of government at the barrio of Linamon.

The municipality of Linamon as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From the mouth of the Linamon River on Iligan Bay which is the present boundary of the municipality of Kauswagan and the city of Iligan, westward following the seashore to the mouth of Larapan River; thence upstream following the course of said river until it intersects the east bank of the same river and the straight line from M.B.M. No. 3 to M.B.M. No. 2; thence eastward in straight line passing through M.B.M. Nos. 3 and 4 to the west bank of the Agus River which is the present boundary of the municipality of Kauswagan and the municipal District of Matungao and the city of Iligan; thence downstream following the course of Agus River to its junction with Linamon River; thence downstream following the course of Linamon River to its mouth of Iligan Bay.” (This technical description is based on the sketch map of the proposed municipality of Linamon prepared and submitted by Highway District Engineer of Lanao del Norte, Scale: 1:25,000.)

The municipality of Kauswagan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Linamon, as delimited above.

The municipality of Linamon shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Kauswagan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Linamon, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ENRIQUE C. QUEMA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 371 : Creating the Municipality of Linamon in the Province of Lanao del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (2), 244-245.