MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 340

AUTHORIZING THE DESIGNATION OF TRAINING OFFICERS IN THE DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND AGENCIES OF THE NATIONAL, PROVINCIAL, AND CITY GOVERNMENTS, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS, PENDING THE CREATION OF REGULAR AND PERMANENT POSITIONS FOR SUCH OFFICERS

WHEREAS, in keeping with the Administration’s policy of achieving greater economy and efficiency in governmental operations and providing more and better service to the people, the Cabinet, at its meeting on April 7, 1953, approved a program of in-service training for government officials and employees;

WHEREAS, the survey conducted by the Bureau of Civil Service on in-service training reveals that many of the departments, bureaus, offices, and agencies of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, do not have any in-service training program on account of the lack of personnel to carry on such a program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by .law, and in order to achieve more fully the objectives of the government-wide in-service training program, do hereby authorize the designation of training officers in each department, bureau, office, or agency of the Government, pending the creation of regular and permanent positions for training officers, as follows:

1. Each department, bureau, office, or agency of the National, Provincial, or City Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, shall have, a training officer who, subject to the authority of the head of department, bureau, office, or agency, as the case may be, and to the regulations to be promulgated by the Commissioner of Civil Service, shall be responsible for employees training in his office or agency.

2. The training officer of the department, bureau, office, or agency of the National, Provincial, or City Government shall be designated by the head of department, the chief of bureau, office or agency, or the Provincial Governor or City Mayor, as the case may be, from among the qualified officers and employees therein, as provided in Paragraph 7 of this Order, and the person so designated shall perform the duties of training officer without additional compensation.

3. The training officer of a government-owned or controlled corporation shall be designated by the general manager of the corporation concerned, from among the qualified officers and employees therein as provided in Paragraph 7 of this Order, and the person so designated shall perform the duties of training officer without additional compensation.

4. Copies of such designation, together with the information sheet of the official or employee so designated, shall be furnished the Bureau of Civil Service for purposes of determining whether the training officer-designate possesses the desired qualifications.

5. Each department, bureau, office, or agency of the National, Provincial, or City Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, shall take necessary steps towards the creation of permanent positions for training officers by fiscal year 1959-1960.

6. The duties of the training officer shall be those found in the WAPCO Class Specifications in addition to such other duties as the head of office may from time to time assign in the interest of the service.

7. The Bureau of Civil Service shall prescribe the qualifications and civil service eligibility required for the filling of positions of training officers.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 340 : Authorizing the designation of training officers in the departments, bureaus, offices, and agencies of the national, provincial, and city governments, including government-owned or controlled corporations, pending the creation of regular and permanent positions for such officers. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (24), 4405-4407.