MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 323

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TUKURAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Sur, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Tukuran, Luya, Tinotungan, Militar, and Tagolo and their respective sitios, all of the municipality of Labangan, province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Tukuran with the seat of government at the barrio of Tukuran.

The municipality of Tukuran as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Point 1, mouth of Bayao Creek, following its upstream course to point 2, a distance of 2,900 meters; thence to point 3, N51°-00’W a distance of 6,500 meters; thence to point 4, N69°-00’W a distance of 10,5CC meters; thence due east to point 5, Intersection of Tukuran River and lat. 8°-00’N a distance of 3,700 meters; thence following the downstream course of Tukuran River to point 6, junction of Alegria Creek and Tukuran River, a distance of about 16,100 meters; thence to point 7, in a southeasterly direction until it intersects the Aurora-Pagadian National Road at Km. 142, a distance of 3,700 meters; thence to point 8, S23°-00’E until it intersects the political boundary of the provinces of Zamboanga del Sur and Lanao, a distance of 5,400 meters; thence following the said political boundary in a southwesterly direction to the shoreline to point 9, a distance of 3,100 meters and thence following the shoreline back to point 1, mouth of Bayao Creek.”

The municipality of Labangan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Tukuran, as delimited above. The municipality of Tukuran shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Labangan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Tukuran, can still maintain creditably its municipal government and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 323 :  Creating the municipality of Tukuran in the province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (37), 8409.