MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 347

CREATING THE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF SAN FERNANDO IN THE PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON

Upon recommendation of the Provincial Board of Bukidnon, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight and section twenty-six hundred and thirty, as amended, of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Abihid, San Alfonso (Tugop.), Taga Alas-as, Little Baguio, Halapitan, Kalagutay, Sinalanganan, and Malambago, all of the municiplity of Malaybalay, province of Bukidnon, and the barrios and sitios of Namnam, Ig-ugsad, Kibuncog, Bonacao, Perino (Palikpakan), Santo Domingo (Dulag), San Jose (Tugda-an), and. Ale (Bula-lang), all of the municipality of Maramag, also of the province of Bukidnon, are hereby segregated from said municipalities and organized into an independent political subdivision to be known as the Municipal District of San Fernando with the seat of government at the barrio of Nanmam.

The Municipal District of San Fernando as herein, organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From point marked 1 on the plan (Map of Malaybalay and Maramag), showing the proposed municipal district of San Fernando, approved by Civil Engineer Braulio O. Ceniza, in charge of office of the District Engineer) to point 2, S 91° 00′ W, 15 kms ; thence S. 11° 00 ‘ W; 13 kms. to Aga mountains; thence S. 5° 00′ E, 15 kms. to point 4; thence S, 7° 00 ‘ E, 14 kms. to point 5; thence N. 75° 00′ E; 14 kms. following the provincial boundary of Bukidnon-Cotabato to point 6, thence 38 kms. by following northward through the Kalagangan and PantaronMountains to point .of beginning.”

The municipalities of Malaybalay and Maramag shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipal district of San Fernando, as delimited above.

The municipal district of San Fernando shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon prior certification by the Secretary of Finance that its probable estimated annual income shall not be less than one thousand pesos.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 347 : Creating the Municipal District of San Fernando in the Province of Bukidnon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (32), 6294-6295.