MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 440

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAYUGAN IN THE PROVINCE OF AGUSAN

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Agusan and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Bayugan, Maygatasan, Nueva Sibagat, Verdo, Mambutay, Salvacion, Caridad, Sagmone, Calaitan, Sinadyap, Malindao, Noli, and other adjacent barrios and sitios, all of the municipality of Esperanza, province of Agusan, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Bayugan with the seat of government at the barrio of Bayugan.

The municipality of Bayugan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at the point of intersection of the Cabadbaran-Old Esperanza and Surigao boundaries; thence, in a southerly direction following the Old Esperanza-Municipal District of Las Nieves and Butuan City boundaries; thence, in a southeasterly direction straight to a point of intersection of the Esperanza-Bayugan provincial road and the Luna Lumber road connecting sitio San Toribio at barrio Salvacion; thence, in an easterly direction following an imaginary straight line until it intersects the Agusan-Davao national road at the middle of Sianib bridge; thence, in a northeasterly direction following the Old Esperanza-Urosperidad boundary until the intersection of the Surigao-Old Esperanza and Old Esperanza-Prosperidad boundaries thence, following the Agusan-Surigao boundary to the point of intersection of the Cabadbaran-Old Esperanza and Surigao boundaries; the point of beginning. (Based on the technical description furnished by the District Engineer of Agusan of the sketch plan or map of the proposed municipality of Bayugan, prepared by the said official and on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Esperanza shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Bayugan, as delimited above.

The municipality of Bayugan shall begin to exist not later than December 31, 1961, upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Esperanza, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Bayugan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 440 : Creating the municipality of Bayugan in the Province of Agusan. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (36), 6408-6409.