MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 380

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BUUG IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Buug, Palalian, Matinaw, Timualag, Labrador, Tinungtongan, Galit, Gaulan, Salag-manok, Bawang, Silupa, Sampule, Bulusan, Salawagan, Dipili, Bayog, and Balabac, all of the municipality of Malangas, province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Buug with the seat of government at the barrio of Buug.

The municipality of Buug as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at Point 1, at the mouth of the Palilian River near Silupa Point; thence N 45’—00W, about 9,000 meters to point 2, at barrio Gaulan; thence N 60-00W, about 4,200 meters to point 3 at barrio Bulusan; thence N1-15’W, about 20,600 meters to point 4 at barrio Bubuan intersecting the provincial boundary of Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur; thence following the provincial boundary until it intersects the municipal boundary of Lapuyan, point 5; thence due south about 28,600 meters to point 6, at the shore line near barrio Guson; thence following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to point 1, the point of beginning. (This description is based on the sketch plan or map of the proposed new municipality of Buug, prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer, province of Zamboanga del Sur, on file in this Office, Scale: 1:100,000.)

The municipality of Malangas shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Buug, as delimited above.

The municipality of Buug shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Malangas, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Buug, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 380 : Creating the Municipality of Buug in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (9), 1886-1887.