MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 416

PROVIDING INSTRUCTIONS TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS DURING THE TIME THAT THE PRESIDENT IS OUTSIDE THE PHILIPPINES

The following instructions are hereby issued for the conduct of public affairs during the absence of the President from the Philippines, on the occasion of his official visit to the Federation of Malaya from February 8, 1961, until he returns from abroad:

1. The President of the Philippines shall continue to exercise all the functions of his office as enjoined by the Constitution and the laws, in the same manner as when he is within the national territory. The Executive Secretary shall, as heretofore, sign all papers that are ordinarily signed by him by or under the authority of the President:

2. Each Secretary of Department shall attend to and decide matters which pertain to his department and which under the law he may decide. On those matters which require approval of the President, in case urgent action is needed, such approval shall be obtained by radio. On other departmental business which, although within the jurisdiction of a Secretary of Department, are of such importance as to affect the general policies of the Government and, therefore, should be the subject of consultation with the President, the Secretary concerned may communicate for such purpose with the President by radio or other convenient means of communication.

3. The Cabinet shall hold its regular meetings and shall meet at such other times as may be necessary. The Secretary of Finance shall preside over the meetings. Matters which have heretofore been acted upon by the Cabinet shall continue to be considered and decided by the Cabinet: Provided, however, That in the absence of unanimity of opinion on any important question submitted, no decision shall be taken until it shall have been submitted to the President.

4. All official communications to the President, whether by letter or by radio, shall be transmitted through or by the Executive Secretary.

5. The Executive Secretary shall represent the President in social functions requiring the presence of the latter and shall preside over official ceremonies, receive and return the official calls of foreign dignitaries on behalf and in representation of the President, and on such occasions the Executive Secretary shall be entitled to the honors and courtesies due the President of the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 416 : Providing instructions to be followed in the conduct of public affairs during the time that the President is outside the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (9), 1555-1556.