MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 264

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF POLOMOLOK IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as the municipality of Polomolok to consist of the following barrios and .sitios:

From the Municipality of General Santos

From the Municipality of Tupi

with the seat of government at the barrio of Polomolok. The municipality of Polomolok as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning on the point at the summit of Mt. Magolo going eastward to a point where the boundaries of the municipalities of General Santos and Tupi meet,at the Cotabato-Davao boundary; thence going on. a southeasterly direction following the Cotabato-Davao boundary ‘to a point near sitio Lambayan at the said Cotabato-Davao boundary; thence running on a southwestward direction on an imaginary line to a point on the source of Clinan River; thence following the Clinan River downward to its junction with Silway River; thence going westward traversing the Cotabato-Koronadal-Makar National Highway to a point where the boundaries of the municipalities of General Santos, Kiamba and Tupi intersect; thence going westward following the. boundary lines of the municipalities of Kiamba and Tupi to a point at the summit of Mt. Malibato; thence going in a northeasterly direction following the boundary lines of the municipalities of Tupi and Bañga to a point at the summit of Talayok Peak; thence going in a northeasterly direction on an imaginary line to a point at Km. 308 of the Cotabato-Koronadal-Makar National Highway; thence going in a northeasterly direction on an imaginary line to a point at the summit of Mt. Matutum; thence going in a northeasterly direction following the boundary lines of the municipalities of General Santos and Tupi to a point at the summit of Mt. Magolo the point of beginning.” (Based upon the technical description furnished by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of the province of Cotabato)

The municipalities of General Santos and Tupi shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Polomolok, as delimited above.

The municipality of Polomolok shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipalities of General Santos and Tupi, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Polomolok, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 264 :  Creating the municipality of Polomolok in the province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (16), 5111.