MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 320

PRESCRIBING THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE REPARATIONS COMMISSION

For the purpose of carrying out more effectively the provisions of Republic Act No. 1789 creating the Reparations Commission, and so as to have an appropriate and orderly procedure for the transaction of the business and performance of the duties and functions entrusted to it by law, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby prescribe the following rules of procedure for the observance of the Reparations Commission:

1. All acts of the Reparations Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, with reference to important matters including, but not limited to, appointments of personnel, disbursement of funds, approval of applications for reparations goods, approval of contracts, determination of policies, and all other acts that are binding on the Commission as a body shall be in the form of Resolutions reduced to writing, serially numbered, dated, signed by the Chairman and the two members of the Commission, attested and sealed by the Executive Director and Secretary, of the Reparations Commission, and kept in a separate record book entitled: Resolutions of the Reparations Commission, to be preserved in bound volumes.

2. All proposed resolutions must be in writing and in correct form, delivered to the Executive Director and Secretary of the Commission by its author who should be either one of the two members of the Commission or its Chairman. The Executive Director and Secretary shall calendar the same for discussion of the Commission not less than three days after such delivery to him.

3. A proposed resolution, in order to become an Act of the Commission, must be approved by the unanimous vote of the Chairman and two members of the Commission.

4. No meeting of the Commission shall take place except when duly called by the Executive Director and Secretary, or anyone acting in his capacity, by authority of the Chairman of the Commission or on request of two commissioners. Written notice of such meeting shall be served on all members of the Commission, including the Chairman, at least forty-eight (48) hours before such meeting. The Chairman shall always preside over all meetings of the Commission.

5. The Commission shall only be empowered to meet as a body to transact business with the presence of a quorum which, shall consist of the Chairman and the two members of the Commission. All actions taken or resolutions passed in the absence of a quorum shall be null and void.

6. The Commission may, by appropriate resolution, authorize the Chairman and each member of the Commission to sign papers and communications pertaining to their respective departments. Likewise, the Executive Director and Secretary or any other official of the Commission, so authorized by appropriate resolution of the Commission, may sign in his name and official capacity routinary papers giving information or disposing of ordinary administrative matters.

7. No member of the Commission, including the Chairman, shall act or speak on, or decide for, the Commission, any matter pending before that body for decision or action within its authority. The official action of the Commission shall be expressed in its written resolution duly authenticated as herein provided for and in no other form. Appointments shall be signed by the Chairman.

8. In case of illness or inability of the Chairman to discharge his duties, the President of the Philippines, being so advised by the Executive Director and Secretary, may designate any one of the other, two commissioners as Acting Chairman, without additional emoluments, who shall assume the duties and obligations and exercise the powers and prerogatives of the Chairman.

This supersedes Executive Order No. 315, dated September 1, 1958.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 320 :  Prescribing the rules of procedure of the Reparations Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (33), 7712-7714.