MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 442

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF KITCHARAO IN THE PROVINCE OF AGUSAN

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Agusan and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Kitcharao, Alegria, Mahayahay, San Roque, Jaliobong, Cabadiangan, Canaway, San Isidro, Pangi, Sangay, Lambog, Libertad, Agas-as, Siringan, Danao, Gamuton, and Ombong, all of the municipality of Jabonga, province of Agusan, are hereby segregated from the said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Kitcharao with the seat of government at the barrio of Kitcharao.

The municipality of Kitcharao as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at a point of intersection of the Agusan-Surigao National Highway and Bangayan River; thence, in a straight imaginary line in an easterly direction until it intersects the Agusan-Surigao boundary; thence, following the Agusan-Surigao boundary in a northeasterly direction to a point of intersection of the northern boundary of Agusan and Surigao and the eastern boundary of Agusan and Surigao; thence, in a westerly direction following the course of Magtiaco River downstream to the middle of Lake Mainit; thence, in a straight imaginary line in a southwesterly direction until it intersects an imaginary line due west from the point of the beginning; thence, in a straight imaginary line due east to the intersection of the Agusan-Surigao National Highway and Bangayan River, the point of beginning. (Based on the technical description furnished by the District Engineer of Agusan of the sketch plan or map showing the boundaries of the proposed municipality of Kitcharao, prepared by the said Office, Scale: 1:80,000)

The municipality of Jabonga shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof included in the municipality of Kitcharao, as delimited above.

The municipality of Kitcharao shall begin to exist not later than December 31, 1961, upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Jabonga, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Kitcharao, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 442 : Creating the municipality of Kitcharao in the Province of Agusan. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (37), 6589-6590.