MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 263

CREATING THE PINAGLABANAN COMMEMORATIVE COMMISSION

WHEREAS, at the initiative of the patriotic association called The Spirit of 1896, a campaign has been launched to enlist public support for the erection of an appropriate monument or memorial to commemorate the first battle for the emancipation of the Filipino people which took place in San Juan del Monte, province of Rizal, between midnight of August 28 and dawn of August 29, 1896;

WHEREAS, in the Battle of San Juan, commonly known as the Battle of Pinaglabanan, members of the patriotic association called the “Katipunan” founded by Andres Bonifacio gave up their lives for the freedom of the Philippines; and

WHEREAS, the perpetuation of the memory of the Battle of Pinaglabanan is the concern not only of any locality or entity but of the entire nation;

NOW, THEREORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby create and constitute a Commission, to be known as Pinaglabanan Commemorative Commission, composed of the following:

The Provincial Treasurer and the Provincial Auditor of Rizal shall act as Treasurer and Auditor ex officio, respectively, of the Commission.

The Commission is hereby entrusted with the following duties:

1. Soliciting and collecting voluntary contributions from the public for the purpose of erecting a monument or memorial to the Battle of Pinaglabanan;

2. Selecting the site of the monument or memorial and taking steps for its acquisition through donation, negotiated purchase, or otherwise; and

3. Directing and supervising the construction and erection of the monument or memorial up to its successful termination.

All funds coming into the Commission shall be deposited with the Philippine National Bank in the name of the Commission, and the necessary withdrawals therefrom shall be made only by checks duly signed by the Executive Vice-Chairman and countersigned by the Auditor.

All books of accounts kept in connection with the raising of funds and disbursements thereof shall always be made available for audit by the authorized representative of the Auditor General.

The Commission will submit to the President of the Philippines a progress report of its work on the first of July of each year.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 263 :  Creating the Pinaglabanan Commemorative Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (16), 5108-5110.