MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 444

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF DANGCAGAN IN THE PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Bukidnon and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Bukidnon a municipality to be known as Dangcagan, to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Kibawe and Maramag, both of the same province:

From the Municipality of Kibawe

From the Municipality of Maramag

The seat of government of the municipality of Dangcagan shall be at the barrio of Dangcagan.

The municipality of Dangcagan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at the intersection of the Maramag and Pulangi Rivers; thence, in an easterly direction following an imaginary straight line till it intersects the boundaries of the municipality of Maramag and the municipal district of San Fernando; thence, in a southerly direction following the boundaries of the municipality of Maramag and the municipal district of San Fernando to the intersection of the boundaries of the municipality of Maramag, the municipal district of San Fernando and the province of Cotabato; thence, S. 29° 15′ W., a distance of four kilometers following the boundary line of the municipality of Kibawe and the province of Cotabato; thence, in a westerly direction following an imaginary straight line to the center of the junction of the present National Highway and the Palma River; thence, following the center of the Palma River on a westerly direction to the junction of the Palma and Muleta Rivers; thence, in a northerly direction following the center of the Muleta River to a point met by the Muleta River and the boundaries of the municipality of Kibawe and the proposed municipality of Don Carlos; thence, in an easterly direction following the boundary of Kibawe and the proposed municipality of Don Carlos to the center of the Pulangi River; thence, in a northerly direction following the center of Pulangui River to the intersection of the Maramag and Pulangi Rivers, the point of beginning. (This description is based on the sketch plan or map of the proposed municipality of Dangcagan, approved by the District Engineer of Bukidnon, on file in this Office, Scale; 1:200,000)

The municipality of Dangcagan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipalities of Kabawe and Maramag, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Dangcagan, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 444 : Creating the municipality of Dangcagan in the Province of Bukidnon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (38), 6761-6762.