MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 441

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TULUNAN IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Tulunan, Popuyon, Dungos, Bagumbayan, La Esperanza, New Panay, Banayal, Tuburan, New Culasi, Minapan, Kanibong, Bual, Damawato, New Caridad, Manuitan, Sebseb, Maluguig, Galidan, Dongo-an, Tambak, Nabundasan, Lampagang, Bitu-an Itom, Bitu-an Puti, Salvan, Upper Nabundasan, May-bula, Lower Bual, all of the municipality of M’lang, province of Cotabato, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Tulunan with the seat of government at the barrio of Tulunan.

The municipality of Tulunan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at a point on the boundary between the municipalities of Buluan and the old M’lang on the Damawato River; thence directly north in a straight line to intersect the N62°30’W from the intersection of the Malasila River and the Kidapawan-Allah Junction Road; thence going S62°30’E to the intersection of the Malasila River and the Kidapawan-Allah Junction Road; thence following the Malasila River to MBM No. 2 of the old M’lang-Makilala boundary; thence going in a straight line to MBM No. 1, thence from MBM No. 2 to MBM No. 1 extended in a straight line to Davao-Cotabato boundary; thence from the point on the Davao-Cotabato boundary going in a straight line southwest to the source of the Damawato River; thence following the Damawato River downstream to its curve where it intersects a homestead road; thence following the homestead road to its intersection with the Kidapawan-Allah Junction Road about 1½ kilometers north of Damawato River; thence in a straight line in a westerly direction to the boundary of Buluan and old M’lang on the Damawato River, the point of beginning.” (As described in Resolution No. 237, series of 1960, of the Provincial Board of Cotabato).

The municipality of M’lang shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Tulunan, as delimited above.

The municipality of Tulunan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of M’lang, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Tulunan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 441 : Creating the municipality of Tulunan in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (36), 6409-6411.