MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 265

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF PADRE BURGOS IN THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Burgos, Santo Rosario, San Juan, and Triana and the sitios of Lungsodaan, Bunga, Capiniahan, and Magallanes, all of the municipality of Malitbog, province of Leyte, and the sitio of San Bernardo of the municipality of Macrohon, same province, are hereby segregated from said municipalities and constituted into an independent municipality in said province to be known as the municipality of Padre Burgos with the seat of government at the barrio of Burgos.

The municipalities of Malitbog and Macrohon shall have their respective territories minus the portions thereof included in the municipality of Padre Burgos.

The municipality of Padre Burgos shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof, and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality, and that the mother municipalities of Malitbog and Macrohon, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios and sitios comprised in the municipality of Padre Burgos, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 265 :  Creating the Municipality of Padre Burgos in the Province of Leyte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (17), 5501.