MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 414

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LIBUNGAN IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a new municipality to be known as the municipality of Libungan to consist of the following barrios and sitios: with the seat of government at the barrio of Cabaruyan.

From the Municipality of Midsayap

From the Municipality of Carmen

1. Bao

3. Rangayan

The barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Midsayap and Carmen not specifically mentioned in the foregoing but are within the perimeter or the boundary of the new municipality as described hereunder are deemed to be included and form part of the new municipality.

The municipality of Libungan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Margues Point on the South, along the Libungan River at the boundary between the Municipalities of Pigcawayan and Midsayap, and following the Libungan River towards the East until it reaches a point 400 meters, more or less, west of the National Highway; thence with a straight line eastward following the Abaga Feeder Road cutting the National Highway at a point about 400 meters from the Libungan River; thence prolonging the same straight line towards the East to a point about 2.5 kilometers from the National Highway; thence going with the straight line towards the North to the Libungan River; thence following the Libungan River towards the East until it reaches the concrete monument at the corner between Lots Nos. 1014 and 974, Pls. G-1, along the Libungan River; thence North 74 degrees East to the concrete monument at the corner between Lots Nos. 14 and 16 along the Malitubog River; thence following the Malitubog River up to a point where it intersects the 7 degrees 30′ Latitude; thence due West following said Latitude to the Old Boundary Line of Carmen and Midsayap; thence following the said boundary towards the North until it reaches the provincial boundary of Lanao and Cotabato; thence following the boundary of Lanao and Cotabato Province to Mt. Latukan; thence Southward following the Old Boundaries of Parang and Midsayap, and Midsayap and Pigcawayan up to Margues Point, the point of beginning. (As described in Resolution No. 2, current series of the Provincial Board of Cotabato).

The municipalities of Midsayap and Carmen shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Libungan, as delimited above.

The municipality of Libungan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Midsayap and Carmen, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Libungan, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 414 : Creating the municipality of Libungan in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (8), 1361-1362.