MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 222

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF AN INTER-AGENCY ROAD SAFETY COMMITTEE (IRSC) AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the promotion of travel safety, particularly the prevention of the significant incidence of road accidents in the country, is a primary concerned of the government;

WHEREAS, there is need to coordinate the review and enforcement of current measures on road safety, and formulate policies, programs and plans to further improve safety on the road;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Road Safety Committee hereinafter referred to as the Committee, composed of the following:

SEC. 2. Powers and Functions. The Committee shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Coordinate activities of individual agencies concerned with the formulation of policies, rules and regulations and enforcement of road safety;

b. Formulate immediate, medium-term and long-term plans involving infrastructure and other physical improvements, vehicle safety improvement program, and traffic accidents data base management;

c. Study and recommend an appropriate institutional body to coordinate and implement the abovecited plans and programs;

d. Recommend legislative measures to amend, supplement and/or enact laws on road safety travel; and,

e. Request assistance of any government agency, department, bureau or office, including government-owned and/or controlled corporation as may be necessary in the accomplishment of its operational activities.

SEC. 3. A Working Group composed of representatives from the Department of Public Works and Highways, (DPWH); Traffic Engineering Center (TEC); the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC); Land Transportation Office (LTO); the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB); and the Transport Planning Service (TPS); the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS); the Department of Health (DOH); the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG); the Philippine National Police (PNP) and the Highway Patrol Group (HPG); the Department of National Defense; the National Economic and Development Authority; Infrastructure Staff; and the Philippine Information Agency (PIA), as may be designated by the Head of the said offices/agencies. The group shall provide technical support and act as the Secretariat of the Committee.

SEC. 4. The amount as may be necessary for the operational requirement of the Committee and the Working Group shall be charged against any lump-sum appropriation in the General Appropriations Act as may be determined by the Department of Budget and Management, subject to the usual accounting and auditing law, rules and regulations.

SEC. 5. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.