MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 230

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 224, SERIES OF 1991, DIRECTING THE CONTINUED ADOPTION OF CERTAIN ECONOMY MEASURES FOR FISCAL YEAR 1991

WHEREAS, the Government has adopted the policy of devolution of authority and the allocation of responsibility and accountability to enable the different Departments to perform their functions efficiently and expeditiously;

WHEREAS, the Office of the President sees the need to delegate action on requests for exemption from the provisions of subsection (c), Section 2 of Administrative Order No. 224, series of 1991;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The function of acting upon requests for exemption from the provisions of subsection (c), Section 2 of Administrative Order No. 224 relative to foreign travels of officials and employees of all national government agencies, including government-owned or controlled corporations/ and local government units is hereby delegated to the Department Secre­taries, heads of the government-owned or controlled corporations not placed under or attached to any department and local government unit: heads, as the case may be.

It is understood that the Office of the President retains the authority I to act on all requests for foreign travel of Department Secretaries, Under­secretaries, Assistant Secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank.

SEC. 2. The official authorized to grant exemption shall be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of subsection (c), Section 2 of Administrative Order No. 224 and of this issuance and shall submit to the Office of the Executive Secretary at the end of each month a report on all actions/decisions taken relative to such implementation.

SEC. 3. All other issuances on the matter subject hereof and their corresponding implementing guidelines in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

SEC. 4. Effectivity – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of August in the year of K Our Lord nineteen .hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.