MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 193

CONSTITUTING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON NATURAL GAS DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, under the Geophysical Survey Contract No. 47 between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Occidental Philippines, Inc., the contractor shall undertake and execute the seismic and other necessary geophysical operations in the geophysical area defined therein i.e. offshore NW Palawan;

WHEREAS, under Section I (1.4) of the said Geophysical Survey Contract No. 47, Occidental Philippines, Inc., is given the option to convert eighty percent (80%) of the geophysical survey area into a service contract area pursuant to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 87, as amended, and Section 2, Article XII of the 1987 Constitution;

WHEREAS, Occidental Philippines, Inc., has entered into a Farm Out Agreement with Shell Exploration B.V. relative to its interest in the Geophysical Survey Contract No. 47;

WHEREAS, Occidental Philippines, Inc. and the Shell Exploration B.V., have jointly signified their intention to exercise the option to convert the Geophysical Survey Contract No. 47 into a Service Contract;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to create a body that shall undertake the study of various issues and concerns on the conversion of the said Geophysical Survey Contract into a Service Contract, and on the Farm Out Agreement between Occidental Philippines, Inc., and Shell Exploration B.V.;

NOW, THEREFORE, I CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order

Section 1. There is hereby constituted an Inter-Agency Committee on Natural Gas Development, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to be composed of duly authorized representatives of the following agencies:

Sec. 2. The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

(1) To evaluate and review all issues and concerns relative to the Farm Out Agreement between Occidental Philippines, Inc. and Shell Exploration B.V. relative to Geophysical Survey Contract No. 47 covering Offshore NW Palawan, and the conversion of said contract into a service contract.;

(2) To develop recommendations on the resolution of key issues relative to the development and utilization of natural gas that may be produced from the Camago gas field and vicinity as covered by GSEC No. 47;

(3) To coordinate and consult with Occidental Philippines, Inc. and Shell Exploration B.V. in the performance of the aforementioned functions;

(4) To call upon any government agency including government-owned or controlled corporations for such support and assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions;

(5) To submit its reports and recommendations to the President; and

(6) To perform such other functions as may be necessary and incidental to the accomplishment of its tasks.

Sec. 3. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.