MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 16-A

PROVIDING ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS IN RELATION TO ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 16 DATED FEBRUARY 11, 1987

WHEREAS, on February 11, 1987, I issued, for reasons stated therein Administrative Order No. 16 which reads as follows:

“In view of the provisions of Section 13, Article VII of the 1986 Constitution in conjunction with Sections 7 and 8 of Article IX(B), officials who are holding positions in the government other than their primary positions, are hereby authorized to continue to perform their duties in all such positions until guidelines are issued relative to said constitutional provision so as not to disrupt the operations of the office”;

WHEREAS, on 4 March 1987, a memorandum was issued to Undersecretary of Justice Reyes, Undersecretary Diokno of Budget and Management, Assistant Executive Secretary Elma, and Consultant Carlos Syquia of the Presidential Commission on Government Reorganization, which reads as follows:

“You are hereby directed to study the guidelines referred to in Administrative Order No. 16, copy enclosed, and to submit your report thereon on or before 12:00 noon, March 10, 1987, so that the same can be taken by the Cabinet at its meeting the next day”;

WHEREAS, in view of the complexity of the issue and the practical difficulties it will entail, the aforesaid officials have asked for more time to coordinate their efforts with the Cabinet Assistants System which is likewise studying the matter;

WHEREAS, any change at the moment might disrupt public services and cause losses to assets of the corporations and entities involved;

WHEREAS, the constitutional mandate must be addressed and provisionally measures should be adopted in the meantime that no final determination has been made.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. That a department secretary, undersecretary, or assistant secretary shall not occupy more than two positions other than the principal position he holds.

SECTION 2. That if for any reason an official holds more positions that what is prescribed above, he must resign from the excess position(s).

SECTION 3. That any vacancy created by such resignation shall be filled up by the official who is next in line, to wit: Undersecretary, assistant secretary, executive staff member, or bureau director but in no case can any official hold more than two additional positions.

SECTION 4. That this interim arrangement shall continue only such time as the constitutional intent and the practical difficulties are resolved.

SECTION 5. That all officials affected by this Administrative order are required to submit to the Office of the President their compliance thereon.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.