MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 269

DESIGNATING THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS THE LEAD AGENCY IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OF 1991 AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Local Government Code of 1991 mandates the transfer from the national government agencies to the local government units the responsibility for the delivery of basic services and facilities, together with their corresponding personnel, properties, records, assets and liabilities, by 30 June 1992;

WHEREAS, after the devolution of responsibility from the national government agencies to the local government units, the implementation of the Local Government Code shall be a continuing national government concern with the goal of developing self-reliant local government units;

WHEREAS, the process of developing self-reliant local government units should be managed and sustained to ensure the attainment of the objectives of the Local Government Code;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and upon the recommendation of the Oversight Committee constituted under the provisions of Book IV , Title Three, Section 533, of the Local Government Code, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Department of the Interior and Local Government is hereby designated as the lead agency in the implementation of the Local Government Code of 1991. As such lead agency, the Department shall:

a. Assist the Oversight Committee to perform its functions prescribed by the Local Government Code;

b. Conduct an extensive information campaign on the Local Government Code and its Implementing Rules and Regulations directed at the national government agencies, local government units, non-governmental organizations, the business sector, the foreign community and the general public;

c. Conduct, in coordination with the national government agencies involved, a sustained and continuing program of capability-building on the part of the local government units to facilitate the latter’s absorption and exercise of their new powers and functions, as well as their-utilization of resources and funds;

d. Supervise, monitor and facilitate, under the supervision and control of the Oversight Committee, the actual transfer of the functions, personnel, properties, records, assets and liabilities from the national government agencies involved to their local government units, and for this purpose, shall submit to the said Committee regular bimonthly reports on the progress of such transfer;

e. Assist, in coordination with the national government agencies involved the local government units in determining the administrative viability of devolution and submit its recommendation to the Oversight Committee on the appropriate measures to ensure the unhampered delivery of basic services and facilities;

f. Assist the local government units in maximizing the exercise of their powers and functions to promote, develop and strengthen their self-reliance;

g. Monitor, in coordination with the Civil Service Commission, any personnel action that may infringe on the rights of devolved national agency personnel; and

h. Perform such other related functions and responsibilities as may be assigned by the President and the Oversight Committee.

SEC. 2. All national government agencies and local government units are hereby directed to coordinate and cooperate with the Department of the Interior and Local Government to ensure the successful and harmonious implementation of the devolution process geared towards the unhampered and eventually much improved delivery of basic services and facilities to the general public.

SEC 3. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.