MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 252

CREATING THE TASK FORCE ON MINI-HYDROELECTRIC POWER DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7156 entitled “An Act Granting Incentives to Mini-Hydroelectric Power Developers and For Other Purposes” declares it “the policy of the State to strengthen and enhance the development of the country’s indigenous and self-reliant scientific and technological resources and capabilities and their adaptation to the country in order to attain energy self-sufficiency and thereby minimize dependence on outside source of energy supply” (Section 2, R. A. 7156);

WHEREAS, in pursuance of this State policy, mini-hydroelectric power developers shall be granted the necessary incentives and privileges to provide an environment conducive to the development of the country’s hydroelectric power resources to their full potential;

WHEREAS, R. A. 7156 vests in the Office of Energy Affairs (OEA) the sole and exclusive authority responsible for the regulation, promotion and administration of mini-hydroelectric power development and the implementation of the provisions of this Act;

WHEREAS, in the exercise of this Task, the Office of Energy Affairs shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper implementation and administration thereof in consultation with concerned government agencies;

NOW, THEREFORE. I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a Task Force on Mini-Hydroelectric Power Development, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, to be composed of the Executive Director, Office of Energy Affairs, as Chairman, and senior representatives of the following agencies, as members:

Department of Trade and Industry

National Water Resources Board

National Electrification Administration

National Power Corporation

National Irrigation Administration

National Economic and Development Authority

SEC. 2. The Task Force shall assist the Office of Energy Affairs in the promulgation of the rules and regulations to govern mini-hydroelectric power development. Such rules and regulations shall be made subject to consultations with the private sector.

SEC. 3. The rules and regulations to implement the provisions of R.A. 7156 shall include the following:

(a) Procedures for filing, processing evaluation and approving application for mini-hydroelectric power development;

(b) Obligations of mini-hydroelectric power developers;

(c) Terms and conditions for the purchase or for the commission/distributors, as the case may be, of electricity generated by the mini-hydro power developers; and,

(d) Other matters which shall be necessary to implement R. A. 7156.

SEC. 3. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.