MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 128

PROVIDING FOR AN INTEGRATED ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISM WITHIN THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FOR UNDERTAKING THE VARIOUS ASPECTS OF OFFICIAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE TO THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, foreign capital assistance serves as an important input in the country’s development effort;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the resources derived from official development assistance (ODA) be managed efficiently and effectively to ensure maximum benefits therefrom;

WHEREAS, there is need to establish an integrated administrative mechanism within the National Economic and Development Authority for undertaking the various aspects of the official development assistance (ODA) including programming, coordination of program and project development and of negotiation for foreign assistance, monitoring of and where necessary, the supervision of project implementation in accordance with the policies set by the National Economic and Development Authority Board;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There shall be a Committee on Official Development Assistance, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, in the National Economic and Development Authority, which is hereby authorized to undertake the various aspects of the official development assistance (ODA) including programming, coordination of program and project development and of negotiation for foreign assistance, and monitoring of and where necessary, supervision of the project implementation, all in accordance with the policies set by the National Economic and Development Authority Board (NEDA Board).

For this purpose, the Committee shall be composed of as follows:

Chairman

SECTION 2. The Committee shall be the focal point for undertaking and/or coordinating the handling of ODA, and shall serve as a forum where the public and private sector, particularly non-government organizations (NGOs), can actively interface in project identification and development. Its functional framework shall be basically project-oriented, viz.:

(a) Programming Responsibility . – Assume responsibility for the annual programming of ODA and for the release of ODA funds including counterpart funds in accordance with the policies set by the NEDA Board and existing laws.

(b) Project Development . – Precipitate, provide guidance and information to, and assist as necessary the implementing agencies in the preparation of program and project proposals for foreign assistance.

While the implementing agencies shall have basic responsibility for program and project development, including preliminary engineering and feasibility studies, the Committee shall be responsible for evaluation and approval of program and project proposals in accordance with the policies set by the NEDA Board.

(c) Negotiations . – Coordinate the conduct of negotiations for ODA with foreign sources in close collaboration with the concerned agencies.

The Committee shall look for new and expanded sources of foreign assistance for funding particular programs and projects.

(d) Project Implementation . – Coordinate, facilitate and monitor the implementation of foreign-assisted programs and projects which shall be the basic responsibility of the implementing agencies.

Subject to the approval of the President and as may be authorized by the NEDA Board, the Committee may cause the implementation of projects and programs by organizing management teams for the purpose where necessary in accordance with existing laws.

SECTION 3. The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or any instrumentality of the government, including government owned or controlled corporations, particularly the Office of the President, Department of Finance, Central Bank, Department of Trade and Industry, NEDA Secretariat and Department of Public Works and Highways for assistance, such as detail of personnel, as it may need in discharging its duties and functions.

SECTION 4. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 23rd day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1989). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.