MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 11

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL INVESTIGATION COMMISSION TO BE KNOWN AS THE CITIZENS’ MENDIOLA COMMISSION.

A Presidential Investigation Commission to be known as the Citizens’ Mendiola Commission is hereby created composed of retired Supreme Court Justice Vicente Abad Santos as Chairman, retired Supreme Court Justice Jose Y. Feria as Member and Mr. Antonio U. Miranda as Member for the purpose of conducting an investigation of the disorder, deaths, and casualties that took place in the vicinity of Mendiola Bridge and Mendiola Street and Claro M. Recto Avenue, Manila, in the afternoon of January 22, 1987. It should submit its findings to the President of the Philippines not later than February 6, 1987. In addition to the rules of procedures which the Commission may desire to adopt, it will function under the following guidelines:

1. Its conclusions regarding the existence of probable cause for the commission of any offense and of the persons probably guilty of the same shall be sufficient compliance with the rules on preliminary investigation and the charges arising therefrom may be filed directly with the proper court.

2. It may appoint such resource persons of high integrity, investigators and fiscals of known integrity to assist in the investigation and prosecution of criminal charges.

3. It shall have authority to issue subpoenas for the appearance of witnesses and for the production of documents and other evidence and it shall have the power to punish disobedience of said processes as contempt of court.

4. In all matters of procedure not covered by this Order, the Commission shall consider existing summary rules of criminal procedure as supplementary to this Order.

5. The Commission may deputize the National Bureau of Investigation, the Criminal Investigation Service of the Philippine Constabulary and any other law enforcing agency to assist in the performance of the Commission’s duties.

6. The Commission shall be funded such amounts as may be necessary to enable it to comply with its duties.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.