MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 99

CONSTITUTING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO UNDERTAKE A PROGRAM TO IMPROVE THE INFRASTRUCTURE OF THE JUSTICE SYSTEM

WHEREAS, the infrastructure of the justice system is characterized by an acute shortage or by the poor quality of buildings, rooms and other facilities assigned to officials exercising judicial functions;

WHEREAS, in order to facilitate the improvement of the infrastructure of the justice system, it is necessary that an inter-agency committee be constituted that will undertake a study of and implement a building construction and/or rehabilitation program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby constitute a Committee composed of the Secretary of Justice, as Chairman, and the Secretaries of Public Works and Highways and of Local Government, as members, to immediately undertake a program for the construction and/or rehabilitation of court buildings and offices of Fiscals, Citizens Attorneys and Probation Officers.

The Secretary of Public Works and Highways shall assist the Secretary of Justice in undertaking all the activities leading to the award of all the contracts under the program and in supervising all construction projects. The Secretary of Local Government, on the other hand, shall coordinate with the different local government units in prosecuting the projects under the program.

The Secretary of Budget and Management shall provide the necessary funding support for this program.

The Committee may request support from any department, bureau, office, agency and instrumentality of the Government to carry out its mission. It shall consult the Supreme Court in the physical design and allocation of courtrooms and offices of judges.

The Secretary of Justice shall submit a program report on the implementation of this program not later than 15 January 1989.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.