MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 30

DEFINING THE SYSTEMATIC APPROACH AND THE ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORK FOR THE GOVERNMENT’S PEACE EFFORTS

WHEREAS, the attainment of full and lasting peace is a primordial objective of government in order to lay the basic foundation for social justice, economic development and political stability;

WHEREAS, it is realized that peace is a basic condition for the attainment of prosperity as well as a means for making possible the achievement of individual and national aspirations;

WHEREAS, to attain the above objective it is necessary that all segments of society be mobilized to address systematically the present threats to peace and build the momentum for a sustained and successful peace effort;

WHEREAS, the successful realization of peace demands a wholistic approach that will require the combined and integrated efforts of the civilian government, the military and the citizenry as a whole;

WHEREAS, there is need to systematize the pursuit of peace as an organized process that will involve the mobilization of the various components of the whole society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Scope. The systematic approach for the pursuit of peace, as well as the administrative framework for carrying out the peace process shall be governed by this Administrative Order.

SECTION 2. Major Elements of the Peace Effort. — The systematic approach for the pursuit of peace as an organized effort shall have the following component elements:

a. Formulation of a National Program for Peace. This will involve the identification and articulation of policies, programs, projects and other activities that are oriented towards contributing to the attainment of peace in particular as well as to the socio-economic and political development of the nation in general. Such Program shall include clarifying the process of integrating alienated communities into the national mainstream and defining a strategy for peace around which the nation can be mobilized.

b. Negotiations and Dialogues. This will involve face-to-face discussions with groups that are threats to peace, designed to ascertain their grievances that will enable Government to formulate the necessary remedies.

c. Program Implementation. This will involve, as a conscious process of the Government, the implementation and realization of various reforms, programs and projects intended to create a positive climate conducive to peace, particularly of those identified as having an immediate impact for the realization of peace. The national program for peace and the results of negotiations will serve as the combined medium for determining such impact programs as will be undertaken to further the cause of peace.

d. Organized Support of Non-Government Groups. This will involve the realization of a systematic process for enlisting the cooperation and collaborative efforts of all groups in support of the pursuit of the Government’s peace initiatives. This shall be directed towards getting the commitment of ordinary citizens as well as groups and associations of citizens, such as the church, non-governmental organizations, and allied groups, to support the peace process. This would constitute a major means for developing and mobilizing a nationwide consensus for peace.

SECTION 3. Organization for the Peace Process . The administrative framework for carrying out the peace process shall be as follows:

a. The Presidency . – The President shall provide the active leadership for the prosecution of the peace process. She shall, from time to time, enunciate the broad guidelines that will serve as the policy framework for the conduct of the Government’s peace initiatives, as well as issue as necessary specific instructions and directives to carry out action programs designed to achieve peace.

b. Office of the Peace Commissioner . – This Office shall be headed by a Peace Commissioner who shall be assisted by such staff as may be necessary. It shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

1. Serve as staff to the President in coordinating the functions of the following offices: Office of the National Security Director, the Cabinet Secretariat, and Peace Negotiating Panels;

2. Assist the President in providing the day-to-day management and direction of the peace efforts;

3. Enlist, coordinate with, organize and mobilize a network of pro-peace citizen-groups (e.g. the church and civic, social, youth, religious and other organizations) for active involvement in the peace process; and

4. Perform such other functions and exercise such delegated authorities as may be assigned by the President.

c. Peace Negotiating Panels . – There shall be Peace Negotiating Panels which will perform the functions and responsibilities provided for in Section 2 (b) hereof, including the conduct of negotiations, dialogues and face-to-face discussions with groups that are threats to peace.

d. Staff for Non-Government Organizations Liaison . – There shall be a Staff for Non-Government Organizations Liaison which shall perform the functions and responsibilities referred to in Section 2 (d) hereof, or to enlist the cooperation and collaborative efforts of all groups in support of the pursuit of the Government’s peace initiatives, directed towards getting the commitment of ordinary citizens and non-government groups and associations such as the church and similar groups to support the peace process.

SECTION 4. Joint Executive-Legislative Peace Council . – There is hereby constituted a Joint Executive-Legislative Peace Council which shall serve as a consultative and coordinative body between the executive and legislative branches of the Government on fundamental issues relating to the attainment of full and lasting peace. It shall be composed of the following:

SECTION 5. Collaborative Efforts of the Military . – The peace process shall involve the collaborative efforts of the military and for this purpose, measures shall be taken to ensure the integration of military initiatives into the overall peace process.

SECTION 6. Funds . – Funds necessary for the implementation of this Administrative Order shall be taken from the Contingent Fund or any appropriate lump sum appropriations under the General Appropriations Act of 1987. Appropriations for succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget proposals for Congressional action.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause . – All previous administrative orders, memorandum orders and similar issuances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity . – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.