MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 198

CREATING A PHILIPPINE NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR VISIT ASEAN YEAR 1992

WHEREAS, the ASEAN Heads of Governments during the ASEAN Summit in Manila on 8-10 December 1987 have declared 1992 as the VISIT ASEAN YEAR (VAY) in celebration of the 25th founding of the Association of South East Asian Nations;

WHEREAS, the ASEAN Sub-Committee on Tourism (SCOT) of the ASEAN Committee on Trade and Tourism (COTT) has adopted a VAY ’92 Marketing Plan to ensure the success of VISIT ASEAN YEAR 1992;

WHEREAS, the VAY ’92 Marketing Plan provides for the formulation and implementation of a VAY ’92 Calendar of Events to generate greater interest in and stimulate increased travel to and within the ASEAN region;

WHEREAS, the 23rd Meeting of SCOT in Singapore on 16-19 January 1989 directed the creation of the respective VAY ’92 National Committees in each of the ASEAN member countries to oversee the respective participation in VAY ’92 and to supervise the holding of regional and national events programmed for VAY ’92 Calendar of Events;

WHEREAS, to effectively achieve the objectives and strategies set forth in the VAY ’92 Marketing Plan, there is a need to enjoin the concerted effort of both the government and private sectors in each of the ASEAN member countries;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. A Philippine National Committee for VISIT ASEAN YEAR 1992, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, is hereby created to undertake the implementation of the Philippines’ participation in the VISIT ASEAN YEAR 1992 (VAY ’92).

Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Secretary of Tourism shall designate an Assistant Secretary from the Department of Tourism as Executive Director, who shall also be a member of the Committee. The Executive Director shall head the Secretariat and supervise the implementation of the work program of VAY ’92.

An Advisory Board shall be formed to be composed of duly designated representatives from the Office of the President, the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Department of Trade and Industry, the Department of Budget and Management and such other national agencies as may be deemed necessary to provide the Committee with the specialized expertise, resources and capabilities needed in the pursuit of its objectives and the exercise of its functions.

Sec. 2. The Committee shall have the following objectives and functions:

A. OBJECTIVES

1. To maximize the benefits to the Philippines derived from its participation in and contributions to the VAY ’92 program;

2. To ensure the effective and competitive positioning of the Philippines vis-a-vis other ASEAN countries within the VAY ’92 Marketing Plan;

3. To generate added exposure specifically for the Philippines and Philippine-initiated activities within the VAY ’92 campaign;

4. To re-orient the local residents’ attitude towards more positive appreciation for and more active support of the Philippine program of tourism cooperation with its ASEAN neighbors; and,

5. To increase public awareness among Filipinos of the tourist attractions, peoples, histories, and socio-cultural traditions of each of the ASEAN member countries and thereby strengthen Philippine commitment to ASEAN solidarity and cooperation.

B. FUNCTIONS

1. To coordinate the implementation of the Philippine commitments and contributions to VAY ’92 and the cooperative projects outlined in the VAY ’92 Marketing Plan;

2. To formulate and implement a strategic action plan for the Philippines participation in VAY ’92 that will strengthen market focus on the Philippines vis-a-vis the other ASEAN countries in the VAY ’92 Marketing Plan;

3. To develop a series of programs and activities in the Philippines which shall comprise the Philippine Calendar of Events for 1992, and select which events and activities shall be included in the ASEAN-wide VAY 1992 Calendar of Events;

4. To work in coordination with appropriate agencies in the public and private sectors to assist the various sectors of the local tourism industry in undertaking new, updated or improved Philippine tour programs and packages for VAY ’92 and to promote these packages in the designated markets of VAY ’92;

5. To represent the Philippines in international and local meetings, events and activities pertinent to VAY ’92 and serve as central communications link to and from the ASEAN National Tourism Organizations (NTOs) and the ASEAN Tourism Information Centre (ATIC) on VAY ’92 – related matters;

6. To extend technical assistance to the private sector associations represented in the ASEAN Tourism Association (ASEANTA), as may be needed, in conjunction with their participation in VAY ’92;

7. To call upon the assistance of any department, agency, office or instrumentality, including government-owned and/or controlled corporation in the exercise of its functions; and,

8. To undertake such other functions that would enhance Philippine participation in VAY ’92, as may be directed by the Secretary of Tourism.

Sec. 3. The amount necessary for the VAY ’92, including the operations of the Committee, its Secretariat, working groups and advisory board, shall come from the following:

(a) Contributions from the income of the Duty Free Philippines, as may be allocated pursuant to Section 3 of Executive Order No. 46 dated September 4, 1986;

(b) Donations, grants and contributions or any form of assistance from any government or private entities;

(c) Proceeds from sales of promotional and advertising materials, collateral, souvenir items, display paraphernalia and gift items.

The above funds shall be deposited with the National Treasury, and disbursed in accordance with pertinent accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

In the case of items (a) and (b) above, the Department of Budget and Management shall issue the necessary Advice of Allotment and corresponding Notice of Cash Allocation immediately upon receipt of the certificate of remittance of the funds to be issued by the National Treasury. Proceeds under item (c) shall be released through a special budget pursuant to Section 40 of Presidential Decree 1177, as amended.

Sec. 4. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8 th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.