MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 109

PROVIDING MEASURES FOR THE SPEEDY DISPOSITION OF CASES FILED BEFORE ALL QUASI-JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES OF THE GOVERNMENT

For the purpose of speedy disposition of cases filed before all quasi -judicial and other administrative agencies of the government, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. Section 3, Rule 22, the Rules of Court in the Philippines on adjournments and postponements is hereby adopted and made applicable to all cases now pending and hereinafter filed in these agencies except in cases where summary proceedings or shorter periods for postponement are allowed by law or rules and regulations.

Unless a different period is provided by law, all proceedings for the reception of evidence in quasi -judicial and other administrative agencies performing adjudicatory functions shall be terminated within a period of three (3) months from the first day of hearing and may be extended only for the most exigent reasons and upon the written permission of the head of the department or agency concerned.

2. Section 5 of Republic Act No. 296, the Judiciary Act of 1948, on the Judge’s certificate as to work completed, is hereby adopted and made applicable to all cases now pending and hereinafter filed in these agencies.

All officials in quasi -judicial and other administrative agencies performing adjudicatory functions shall certify that all motions, where allowed, cases or matters which have been submitted for resolution, decision or determination for a period of ninety (90) days or more, computed from the last day of trial/proceedings and inclusive of the filing of Memoranda, if any, unless a shorter period is required by law or rules and regulations, have been decided or resolved on or before the date said certification is made. No leave shall be granted and no salary shall be paid without such certification.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1989). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.