MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 80

CREATING A NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR THE PHILIPPINE FIESTA YEAR

WHEREAS, Presidential Proclamation No. 245 dated April 12, 1988, declares 1989 as the Philippine Fiesta Year;

WHEREAS, to achieve effectively the goals set forth in the said Proclamation there is need to have a concerted effort from both the government and private sectors;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create:

A National Council to provide guidance, support and assistance in the implementation of the objectives of the Fiesta Year to be composed of the following:

The National Council is hereby empowered to call upon any Department, agency, office or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations for cooperation and assistance in the pursuit of the objectives of Proclamation No. 245, s. 1988.

The National Council is authorized to accept donations, grants, contributions and any other form of assistance, financial and otherwise, from any governmental or private individual, firm or entity, whether local or foreign, to achieve its goals and objectives, in accordance with applicable budget laws and accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations. The proceeds from such donations, grants, contributions and other forms of financial assistance received by the National Council shall be deposited, recorded and disbursed in accordance with applicable budget laws and accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations.

The implementing agency of the National Council shall be the Philippine Convention & Visitors Corporation (PCVC) which will ensure that the National Secretariat will plan, coordinate and supervise the implementation of the program. The pertinent budget needed for the financial and operational requirements of this project shall be primarily taken out of the approved budget of the PCVC for calendar years 1988-89.

The National Council is hereby empowered to establish a system of honoraria or allowances for its members in accordance with applicable budget laws and accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations.

The National Council shall formulate and adopt its implementing rules and regulations.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.