MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 73

CREATING A PHILIPPINE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION IN EXPOSITION/ACTIVITIES IN COMMEMORATING THE FIFTH CENTENNIAL OF THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA

WHEREAS, the Spanish Government, attaching great significance to the Fifth Centennial of the Discovery of America, has decided to commemorate that occasion by holding, among other activities, a Universal Exposition in Sevilla, Spain, from 20 April to 12 October 1992, whose theme will be the “Age of Discovery”;

WHEREAS, the Spanish Government, desiring to use this occasion to promote closer integration among IberoAmerican countries, has invited the Philippines to participate in the Sevilla Exposition;

WHEREAS, the Philippines acknowledges the historic value of the IberoAmerican influence on its national heritage and in the formation of its concept of nationhood, making it one of the first democratic countries in Asia;

WHEREAS, the Philippines would like to participate in the eventual formation of an IberoAmerican Community of Nations that is firmly established on the foundations of liberty, justice and peace and dedicated to the creation of a quality of international life based on political and economic cooperation with other centers of powers;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has accepted the invitation of the Spanish Government to participate in the Universal Exposition in Sevilla; and

WHEREAS, the Philippines would like to ensure that the quality of its participation truly reflects the IberoAmerican influence in its culture, making it a proud member of that Community.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the law, do hereby create the Philippine National Commission for Philippine Participation in Exposition/Activities in Commemoration of the Fifth Centennial of the Discovery of America, hereinafter known as the Commission. The Chairman of the Commission shall be the Secretary of Foreign Affairs with the Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports and the Secretary of Trade and Industry as Vice-Chairmen. The members of the Commission shall be:

The Commission shall perform the following functions:

1. To plan and implement programs and projects for the Philippine participation in the commemoration of the Fifth Centennial of the Discovery of America;

2. To coordinate and bring together all existing and future programs or projects related to the said Fifth Centennial celebration so that Philippine participation therein will be harmonized;

3. To set up and pursue programs that would enable the Philippines to better associate itself with the evolving IberoAmerican Community;

4. To represent the Philippines, through its officers or chosen delegates, at the IberoAmerican Conference of National Commissions for the Commemoration of the Fifth Centennial of the Discovery of America;

5. To establish linkages with the other national commissions, whether full member or observer of the abovementioned IberoAmerican Conference, and to appoint a liaison officer in Madrid to coordinate directly with the Permanent Secretariat of the Conference; and

6. To ask the assistance of any government office or agency whose services might be needed for the successful accomplishment of these functions.

The Commission shall establish a Secretariat to service the Philippine National Commission. The Secretariat shall be situated in the Department of Foreign Affairs.

The Chairman of the Commission shall establish a system of honoraria and allowances for the Philippine National Commission in accordance with accounting and auditing regulations.

The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to immediately allot and release the funds needed for the financial and operational requirements of the Commission and the Secretariat, chargeable to the funds of the Department of Foreign Affairs and subject to accounting and auditing requirements.

The Commission shall formulate and adopt its implementing rules and regulations.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.