MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 191

CONSTITUTING A CONTINGENCY PLANNING COMMITTEE FOR THE PRESENT OIL SUPPLY SITUATION

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby constituted a Contingency Planning Committee composed of the following:

which shall be primarily responsible for formulating Contingency Plan and Guidelines for the sectoral responses to the present oil supply situation.

The Contingency Plan shall incorporate specific and complementary measures to meet an assumed contingency and shall define the role and responsibility of the concerned government agencies in the following critical areas:

a) energy situation b) production c) basic utilities and services d) social concerns e) financial resources implications f) information of the public g) national security

SEC. 2. All departments and government agencies are hereby directed to submit their respective sectoral contingency plans to the Committee for collation and finalization. For this purpose, applicable and pertinent portions of the 1980 draft contingency plan may be used as starting point in drawing sectoral contingency plans.

SEC. 3. The Committee, departments or agencies shall consult with, and encourage inputs from, the appropriate Committees of Congress in the development of sectoral contingency plans particularly those requiring legislation.

The Committee, departments or agencies shall also encourage the involvement of the concerned sectors of the country to promote a national consciousness on the importance of judicious and efficient usage of energy and the corresponding national discipline and unity in addressing any critical situation.

SEC. 4. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of August, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.