MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 157

CREATING THE NATIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE FOURTH ASIAN AND PACIFIC MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE ON SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, the General Assembly of the United Nations through Resolution No. 43/182, adopted at its session of 20 December 1988, proposed the preparations for an international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade;

WHEREAS, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) reaffirming that the primary responsibility for their development rests with the developing countries themselves and that the commitment from other countries to support these efforts is of vital importance for the achievement of this aim;

WHEREAS, the ESCAP at its Forty-Fifth Session, recognized that the eradication of absolute poverty, pursuit of distributive justice, and enhancement of popular participation should be central issues in all development efforts in the Asia-Pacific Region, and reiterated the importance of the family as the basic social unit for social development;

WHEREAS, in response to the need to develop viable strategies for integrating social concerns and the human dimensions into overall development policy and planning as a means of improving the quality of life of the people and thereby ensuring social progress and stability in the Region, the ESCAP Secretariat has embarked on a project to formulate a regional social development strategy towards the year 2000 and beyond;

WHEREAS, all member countries and associate members of the ESCAP, as well as United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, have been invited to contribute to the development of the strategy and had decided to convene the Fourth Asian and Pacific Ministerial Conference on Social Welfare and Development in 1991 to consider and adopt the strategy;

WHEREAS, the Philippines fully subscribing to the development of a social development strategy towards the year 2000 and beyond for the Asia-Pacific Region proposed to host the Fourth Asian and Pacific Ministerial Conference in Manila;

WHEREAS, the proposal of the Philippines to host the conference has been unanimously approved at the Forty-Fifth Session of the ESCAP, thus, it is now incumbent on the Philippine Government to undertake such preparations as are necessary to ensure the successful holding of the conference in Manila in 1991;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the National Organizing Committee for the Fourth Asian and Pacific Ministerial Conference on Social Welfare and Social Development, herein after referred to as the Committee.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The members of the Committee may designate their respective permanent representatives in case of their inability to personally participate in the work of the Committee.

The Committee is empowered to create a Secretariat and Sub-Committees and to call upon all other government, non-government and private agencies and individuals concerned to assist the Committee in its tasks.

Such amount as may be necessary for the operation of the Committee, its Secretariat and Sub-Committees, and the holding of the conference shall be included in the International Commitments Fund portion of the FY 1991 budget proposal submitted to the Congress.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.