MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 280

IMPOSING THE PENALTY OF SUSPENSION OF SIX MONTHS TO MS. MARIVIC V. BONITA, FOREIGN SERVICE OFFICER CLASS III, DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

This refers to the administrative case filed by the Department of Foreign Affairs against Ms. Marivic V. Bonita for malfeasance in office, misconduct and frequent unauthorized absences from duty.

After due investigation, the Board of Foreign Service Administration found the following:

“1. Malfeasance in Office

On 12 February 1990, respondent Bonita, while serving as 3rd Secretary and Vice-Consul at the Philippine Embassy in Hanoi, transmitted without authorization to the Vietnamese Foreign Affairs Ministry a note verbale, containing the contents of a Memorandum Circular from the Home Office classified “Secret” in the interim administration of Cambodia, in violation of Department Memorandum Circular No. 82-89 dated 10 January 1989 in connection with Memorandum Circular No. 78 of the Office of the President dated 14 August 1964. The wrongful act of respondent has caused embarrassment to the Department and has prejudiced the interest and prestige of the Philippine Government.

In her Answer to the charge sheet, Ms. Bonita admitted having transmitted the note verbale to the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry, but claimed that she was motivated with good intentions, that she did not mean to intentionally reveal Philippine position and that she overlooked the fact that the circular message from the Department was classified.

The Board held that her defense is untenable and reflects the negligence of respondent. As a foreign service officer and at the same time the Charge d’Affaires, a.i. of the Embassy, she should have verified the exact message received from the Department especially since it was coursed through radio.

2. Misconduct and Frequent Unauthorized Absences

The respondent admitted that she was absent from duty at the Philippine Embassy in Hanoi from 16 September to 30 November 1989 without approved leave of absence. She had an approved leave of absence from 15 August to 15 September 1989, but after the lapse of the period she kept the embassy in Hanoi as well as the Home Office in the dark as to her whereabouts.”

In recommending the penalty of suspension for six months, the Board considered the previous administrative case against respondent Bonita for immoral and disgraceful conduct while assigned at the Philippine Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya and for which she was reprimanded and warned by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

In view of the foregoing, the findings of the Board of Foreign Service Administration are sustained and respondent Marivic V. Bonita is hereby SUSPENDED for a period of six (6) months.

DONE in the City of Manila, 22nd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.