MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 105

CREATING THE COORDINATING COUNCIL ON THE PHILIPPINE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

WHEREAS, there is a need to mobilize the international community’s support to achieve the objectives of sustainable economic growth coupled with an equitable distribution of income and wealth; and

WHEREAS, it is to the best interest of the Government to take the lead role, in partnership with the private sector, in coordinating efforts to effectively mobilize the aid and to ensure its successful implementation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Coordinating Council on the Philippine Assistance Program . – There is hereby created a Coordinating Council for the Philippine Assistance Program, hereinafter referred to as the Council, to be composed of the following:

– The Secretary of Foreign Affairs – The Secretary of Finance – The Secretary of Justice – The Secretary of Agriculture – The Secretary of Public Works and Highways – The Secretary of Trade and Industry – The Executive Secretary – The Secretary of Transportation and Communications – The Secretary of Budget and Management – The Secretary of Socio-Economic Planning – The Secretary of Agrarian Reform – The Cabinet Secretary – The Governor of Central Bank – The Representative of the Senate to be designated by the Senate President – The Representative of the House of Representatives to be designated by the Speaker – Four representatives from the private sector to be named by the President

The Council may invite any individual or representative of non-government organizations, agriculture and industrial labor groups, and such other related associations to serve as Resource Person. It is likewise authorized to call on any departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the government, including Foreign Service Offices/establishments, for appropriate assistance.

SECTION 2. The Chairman and the Secretary . – The Council shall select from amongst its members its Chairman who shall be directly responsible to the President for the implementation of the Philippine Assistance Program. The Cabinet Undersecretary shall serve as Secretary of the Council.

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions of the Council . – The Council shall:

a. serve as clearing house for all government positions and statements on the assistance program;

b. serve as the overall implementing mechanism for the assistance program;

c. formulate and recommend policies and guidelines that will govern the implementation of the assistance program;

d. conduct appropriate consultations with concerned local groups and foreign governments/institutions on matters relating to the implementation of the assistance program;

e. monitor, review, and evaluate the implementation of programs and projects under the assistance program;

f. prepare and submit to the President reports on the implementation of the assistance program; and

g. perform such other functions as may be directed or authorized by the President.

SECTION 4. Committees of the Council . – A Technical Committee composed of senior officials or representatives designated by the members of the Council is hereby created. Its principal functions include the preparation of technical reports for consideration of the Council and the review of proposals submitted for the approval of the Council. The Council may appoint an Executive Director and other subordinate officials and create such working committees as may be necessary for the attainment of its functions.

SECTION 5. Technical Secretariat . – Technical Secretariat support to the Council and its Technical Committee shall be provided by the Department of Finance and the Central Bank. Overall coordination, conference and other liaison activities shall be provided by the Office of the President (Cabinet Secretariat).

SECTION 6. Funding . – The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to immediately release the funds needed for the financial and operational requirements of the Council, chargeable against the funds of the Office of the President, subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedures.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause . – Administrative Order No. 81, series of 1988, is hereby repealed.

SECTION 8. Effectivity . – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1989). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.