MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 5

CREATING AN AD HOC COMMITTEE TO STRENGTHEN THE CAPABILITY OF THE GOVERNMENT’S MACHINERY FOR SETTLEMENT OF LABOR DISPUTES IN THE CITIES AND PROVINCE OF CEBU.

WHEREAS, the recent changes in the political and economic atmosphere have spawned numerous labor-management disputes in the country, particularly in the province and cities of Cebu;

WHEREAS, the labor problems arising in Cebu are partly caused by its geographical distance from the seat of the Central Government;

WHEREAS, in the settlement of the labor controversies in Cebu, there is a need to bridge this geographical gap to enable the Central Government to act more efficiently and expeditiously;

WHEREAS, in the settlement of these labor problems, there is a need to involve the political leaders in Cebu to assist the National Government in establishing industrial peace as a condition for favorable investment climate;

WHEREAS, the incidence of labor disputes in Cebu could be avoided by timely conciliation initiated by its political leaders;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an ad hoc Committee to assist in the speedy negotiation, conciliation, arbitration and settlement of labor disputes in Cebu Province and the cities of Cebu, composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To conduct tripartite conferences and other meetings to gather views and recommendations in identifying the causes of labor disputes in the area.

2. To coordinate with employers and workers’ organizations in the formulation of measures designed to expedite resolutions of labor disputes and strikes.

3. To seek and secure assistance of any office, agency or instrumentality of the government necessary to accomplish its task.

4. To submit to the Minister of Labor as soon as possible its findings and recommendations as to the remedial measures that should be taken.

In cases where an impending labor dispute comes to the attention of the committee, it shall immediately convene representatives of the interested parties to a conciliation meeting and try to avert interruption of work. Should this not be possible after sincere efforts have been, exerted, then the committee shall recommend to the Minister of Labor such action it may deem appropriate in the premises.

In the performance of its duties and functions as above mentioned, the Committee is hereby empowered to administer oaths and issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of any person and/or production of such books, papers, contracts, records, and such other documents as may be necessary in the performance of its functions.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of September in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) FULGENCIO S. FACTORAN, JR. Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 150]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.