MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 227

DIRECTING THE CONTINUED ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL REDUCTION PROGRAM

WHEREAS, personnel services cost is one of the biggest component of the National Government Budget;

WHEREAS, to trim down said personnel services cost, there is imperative need to continue the Staff Reduction Program and the redeployment of personnel initiated under Administrative Order No. 205, Series of 1991:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Adoption of Staff Reduction Program . The Staff Reduction Program and redeployment of personnel initiated under Administrative Order No. 205, Series of 1991, is hereby reiterated. For this purpose, all government offices and agencies, including state universities and colleges and government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as local government units are hereby directed and enjoined to effect the reduction and/or redeployment of authorized permanent positions by five percent (5%) by the end of June 1991 and by cumulative ten percent (10%) by the end of December 1991.

SEC. 2. Coverage . The staff reduction program shall apply to all agencies of the national government, including state universities and colleges and government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as local government units.

For purposes of this Administrative Order, the Staff Reduction Program as prescribed herein shall cover the whole department, its offices and bureaus as well as attached agencies, government-owned or controlled corporations attached to departments for policy and program coordination. They shall develop and implement their own respective staff reduction programs in accordance with the provisions of this Administrative Order.

SEC. 3. Redeployment of Positions and Personnel . Excess positions and corresponding personnel may be redeployed to manpower deficient regional offices, field units and other front line service units.

SEC. 4. Rules and Regulations . The guidelines prescribed under National Budget Circular No. 421 are hereby adopted and reiterated and shall continue to be in full force and effect. Supplementary rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary shall be issued by the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 5. Agency Head Responsibility . Department secretaries, agency heads and heads of local government units shall be responsible for the implementation and reporting of the agency Staff Reduction Program in accordance with the procedures and requirements of this Administrative Order.

SEC. 6. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Administrative Order Nos. : 151 – 289 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.