MEMORANDUM ORDER No. 35

GRANTING COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENTS TO EMPLOYEES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT REQUIRED TO RENDER SERVICE BEYOND THE REGULAR OFFICE HOURS.

In view of the volume and peculiar nature of the function of the Office of the President, certain employees of the Office have to work beyond the prescribed office hours, including Saturdays, Sundays, and Holidays. For this reason, Chiefs of Divisions and other primary units in the Office are hereby required to submit the names of employees in their respective units whose services are required and/or essential even beyond the regular office hours; and those approved by the Executive Secretary shall be entitled to compensation adjustments pursuant to the provisions of Section 3(a) of Reorganization Plan No. 2-A, otherwise know as the WAPCO Law, in accordance with the following schedule:

This schedule is also applicable to employees receiving salaries from any of the lump-sum appropriations whose positions have not been classified by the WAPCO. For purposes of the schedule, the compensation adjustments for such personnel shall be determined on the basis of the WAPCO salary range nearest to their basic salary. Thus, an employee receiving a monthly salary of P200 will have his compensation adjustments determined on the basis of WAPCO salary range 29.

Employees who, under this Memorandum Order, have been granted compensation adjustments are hereby required to render not less than 15 hours a week or a total of 60 hours a month of overtime service in accordance with schedules to be prepared by the Chiefs of Divisions and other primary units concerned and approved by the Executive Secretary.

Proportionate reduction in the compensation adjustments herein granted shall be made against employees whose total overtime service falls short of the monthly minimum above-prescribed without prejudice to withdrawal of the adjustment in case of habitual or deliberate violation of this Order,

Memorandum Order No. 28 dated April 30, 1963, and the schedules thereunder prepared by the various divisions and units, are hereby revoked.

By authority of the President:

SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Executive Secretary

Manila, June 20, 1963.

Source : Supreme Court Library