MEMORANDUM ORDER No. 5

AUTHORIZING THE HOLDING OF A TRAINING COURSE IN MANAGEMENT SUPERVISION FOR ASSISTANTS WITH SUPERVISORY FUNCTIONS IN THIS OFFICE.

The ultimate success of any organization, whether governmental or industrial, depends upon the ability of the people who make up the organization and the way they apply that ability. The degree to which any individual employee will apply his own ability and interest to his job ordinarily depends upon the quality of the direction and guidance which he receives from his immediate supervisor. It follows then that one of the key factors in the process of organizing people for productive purposes is the way in which supervisors carry out their responsibilities.

Aware of the vital role assistants with supervisory functions must perform and the immense challenge that faces them, there is hereby authorized the holding of a training course in Management Supervision in this Office. The sessions shall be conducted every Monday, Wednesday and Friday from 2:30 to 4:30 p.m., from April 16 to June 15, 1962, at the Malacañang Club House, Malacañang Park. Assistants with supervisory functions up to assistant division chief level are qualified to take this course. This course will undoubtedly broaden (heir outlook and perspective and help them grain more confidence and assurance in the performance of their duties. Properly equipped with basic management skills and techniques, they can effectively utilize and channel the talents and abilities of the men under them towards the attainment of the goals and objectives of this office. It may be timely to restate the fact that, according to a Memorandum Circular dated September 10, 1058, of the Commissioner of Civil Service, successful completion of an approved training course will be one of the factors to be considered in matters of promotion in the government service.

In view of the importance of this course, all chiefs of divisions and primary units in this Office are hereby urged to submit a list of their nominees to this course (at least three from each division and primary unit) to the Administrative Division not later than Tuesday, April 10, 1962. For more detailed information regarding- the course, attached is the syllabus or outline thereof.

By authority of the President:

AMELITO R. MUTUC Executive Secretary

Manila, April 2, 1962

Source: Supreme Court Library