MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 7

REORGANIZING THE DEPORTATION BOARD

WHEREAS there are many pending complaints against aliens, alleging that they gave aid and comfort to the enemy during the last war; and

WHEREAS, since the promulgation of Executive Order No. 257, dated March12, 1940, changes in the administrative organs of the Government have taken place;

Now, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution and the existing laws, do hereby amend the third paragraph of Executive Order No. 33, dated May 29, 1936, as amended by Executive Order No. 257, dated March 12, 1940, so as to read as follows:

“Now, therefore, by virtue of the powers conferred upon me by the Constitution and the existing laws, I hereby name and appoint the Undersecretary of Justice, the Undersecretary of the Interior, the Undersecretary of National Defense, the Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs, and the City Fiscal of Manila, the first as Chairman and the last four as Members of a board which is hereby constituted, to be known as the Deportation Board, with authority to take action on all complaints that certain persons in the Philippines are undesirable aliens, and conduct investigations thereon in the manner prescribed in section sixty-nine of the Administrative Code, and thereafter to recommend the deportation of aliens in such cases as may require it, all in accordance with, and in pursuance of, the following rules and regulations in so far as the same may not be applicable.”

Done at the City of Manila, this 18 th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.