MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 57

CREATING A BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION SERVICE

WHEREAS, the Metropolitan Transportation Service originally created by Executive Order No. 59, dated July 27, 1945, for the operation and maintenance of a passenger bus service for the City of Manila has been authorized to operate between this City and the provinces and has otherwise expanded its activities;

WHEREAS, the expansion of its activities has rendered it necessary for the Metropolitan Transportation Service to be operated under the management of a Board of Directors; and

WHEREAS, it is deemed wise and conducive to social justice and industrial democracy that the laborers actually employed in the Metropolitan Transportation Service participate in the power and responsibility of administering the affairs of the said enterprise;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Fifty-one, do hereby create a Board of Directors of the Metropolitan Transportation Service to be composed of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, as Chairman, and as members, the Secretary of Labor, a representative elected by ballot from among themselves by the laborers actually employed in the Metropolitan Transportation Service, and two persons to be appointed by the President. The Board of Directors shall determine the policies of the Metropolitan Transportation Service and administer its affairs and properties through a General Manager who shall be appointed by the President. At least three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for its meetings and the vote of a majority of the quorum shall be necessary to carry out any proposition before the Board. The members of the Board shall receive a per diem of P20.00 each for each meeting attended by them.

The provision of Executive Order No. 59, dated July 27, 1945, and all other laws, orders and regulations, inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby revoked or amended accordingly.

Done at the City of Manila, this 7th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1947). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.