MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 11

CREATING BOARD OF SURVEYS

In order to systematize and coordinate  future horizontal and vertical control surveys, prescribe and recommend standards and date for the different classes of surveying work in the Philippines, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby constitute and create a Board of Surveys to be composed of the Director of Coast Surveys, as Chairman, the Director of Public Works, the Director of the Bureau of Lands, the Manager of the National Power Corporation, the Manager of the Metropolitan Water District, the Chief of Engineers of the Philippine Army, the Director of the School of Surveying, University of the Philippines, and the President of the Philippine Society of Civil Engineers, as members.

The duties of the Board shall be as follows:

1. To delegate the responsibilities for the collection and filling of all available horizontal and vertical control of one Government bureau.

2. To prescribe and recommend standards of accuracy to fulfill the needs of all interested parties.

3. To prescribe and recommend standard requirements on monumentation of control points.

4. To prescribe and recommend adequate standard methods of description suitable to all concerned.

5. To prescribe and recommend adequate standard recording and computation methods.

6. To establish a suitable common horizontal datum and vertical datum of the Philippines.

7. To establish plane coordinate systems based on suitable mathematical projections.

8. To coordinate horizontal and vertical control surveys in the Philippines to eliminate needless duplication of work.

9. To prepare recommendations to the President on the ways and means to accomplish the decisions reached by the Board.

The members of the board shall serve without additional compensation.

All Executive Orders and Regulations which are in conflict with this Order are hereby revoked

Done at the City of Manila, this 31 st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.