MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 87

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 320, DATED JANUARY 27, 1941, AS AMENDED BY EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 99, DATED MARCH 11, 1946, ENTITLED “REGULATING THE MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF RACE TRACK AND HORSE RACING”

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, do hereby further amend paragraph 5 of Executive order 320, dated January 27, 1941, as amended by Executive Order No. 99, dated March 11,1946, to read as follows:

“5. Automatic electric totalizator or other mechanical device for selling mutual tickets . – No person, race track, racing club, nor any other entity holding horse races the gross crossings of which on any race day exceeds  fifty thousand pesos, shall be allowed to hold races, unless such person, race track, racing club, or entity is provided with an automatic, electrically operated public indicator system and ticket selling machines, by means of which every ticket purchased on every horse in any race, shall be automatically and instantaneously recorded by electrical impulse on a prominently displayed bulletin board, each figure, letter, or symbol of which shall be readable from a distance. However, any such person, race track, racing club, or entity may, upon proper application, be  provisionally licensed by the Board on Races to hold horse races even without the required automatic electric totalizator, provided that it shall provide itself with mechanical or other devices by which every ticket purchased on every horse in any race shall be recorded on a prominently displayed bulletin board readable from a distance in lieu of the required automatic electric totalizator which shall be subject to the approval of the Board on Races after they have been tested and found by the Board to be satisfactory; and provided, further, that such person, race track, racing club, or entity shall acquire and install within its premises  the required automatic electric totalizator within such period as may be determined by the Board but not beyond January 1, 1948, and failure to comply with this requirement will cause the cancellation of their respective licenses.”

Done at the City of Manila, this 3rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 87 : Further amending Executive Order No. 320, dated January 27, 1941, as amended by Executive Order No. 99, dated March 11, 1946, entitled “Regulating the maintenance and operation of race track and horse racing”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 43 (10), 4081-4082.