MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 19

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF VALLEHERMOSO, PROVINCE OF ORIENTAL NEGROS, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF CANLAON

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Oriental Negros and the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the twenty-four municipalities of the Province of Oriental Negros, as established by section thirty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, are hereby increased to twenty-five, by segregating from the municipality of Vallehermoso the barrios of Panubigan, Linothangan, Masolog, and Budlasan with all the sitios composing these barrios, and the sitio of Lucap of the barrio of Malaiba, and organizing the same into an independent municipality under the name of Canlaon, with the seat of government in the sitio of Mabigo, barrio of Panubigan.

The boundary line between the municipality of Canlaon and the municipality of Vallehermoso, outside the area now known to be claimed by both the municipality of Vallehermoso, Oriental Negros and the municipality of San Carlos, Occidental Negros, shall be as follows:

“From a concrete boundary monument which is corner No. 721 of Northern Negros Forest Reserve, Proclamation No.798, April 29, 1935, Southeast to a point, identical to Bureau of Forestry concrete monument marked N.N. F.R. No. 21; thence southeast to a point, identical to Bureau of Forestry concrete monument marked N.N. F.R. No.20; thence S., 18 degrees 30’ W., to a point identical to the peak of Binaliewan Mountain at the intersection of this line with the boundary line between Vallehermoso and Guijulngan.”

The municipality of Canlaon as herein organized shall consist of the barrios of Panubigan, Linothangan, Masolog and Budlasan, with all the sitios composing said barrios, and the sitio of Lucap of the barrio of Malaiba.

The municipality of Vallehermoso shall consist of its present territory, minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Canlaon.

The organization herein made shall take effect as soon as the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof shall have been appointed and qualified.

Done at the City of Manila, this 11 th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six and of the Independence of the Republic of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.