MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 3

ON THE CONTROL OF EXPORTS FROM THE PHILIPPINES

By the virtue of the powers vested in me under Commonwealth Act No. 728, entitled “An Act to prohibit certain exports from the Philippines, to authorize the President of the Philippines to regulate, control, curtail and prohibit said exports, to provide penalties for the violation of this Act and of regulations issued pursuant thereto, and for other purposes,” I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1 . Except as permitted in section 3 and 4 of this Order, the exportation of the following is hereby prohibited until further orders:

1. Rice

2. Sugar

3. Milk

4. Cheese

5. Butter and imitations thereof

6. Eggs and preparations thereof

7. Lard and substitutes thereof

8. Poultry, meat, soap, fish, and preparations thereof

9. Grains, seeds, cereals, and preparations thereof

10. Pulses, vegetables, fruits, nuts (except coconuts) and preparations thereof

11. Coffee

12. Cacao and preparations thereof

13. Textiles and manufactures thereof

14. Cotton and light material

15. Shoes

16. Soap

17. Fertilizer

18. Pigments

19. Paints

20. Dyes

21. Varnishes

22. Chemical and pharmaceutical products

23. Oils, fats, waxes, and derivatives thereof

24. Matches and match sticks of all kinds

25. Papers and manufactures thereof

26. Medical supplies and equipment

27. Building materials

28. Agricultural implements

29. Electric and electro-technical apparatus and appliances

30. Sewing equipment

31. Radio apparatus, and parts, appurtenances and accessories thereof

32. Telephone and telegraph wires and equipment

33. Work animals

34. Lamps and other lighting supplies

35. Laboratory equipment

36. Coal and cake

37. Asphalt, cement and other materials for road construction

38. Railroad supplies

39. Mechanical tools, implements and instruments

40. Fishing equipment

41. Hides and skins

SEC. 2. The exportation from the Philippines of all other products, merchandise, articles, materials, and supplies is hereby permitted upon specific export license to be issued by the Philippine Sugar Administration covering each individual shipment. The permit shall be signed “By authority of the President”.

SEC. 3. There is hereby granted a general license for the purpose of Commonwealth Act No. 723 covering exportations to the United States of whatever products, merchandise, articles, materials, and supplies, whether of prohibited exportation or not; and no specific license shall be required to cover each individual shipment: Provided, That such shipment shall be under through bill of lading from the Philippines to the United States.

SEC. 4. The exportation of products, merchandise, articles, materials, and supplies purchased from the United States Foreign Liquidation Commission specifically for export, whether covered by section 1 or by section 2 hereof, is hereby permitted upon specific export license to be issued as provided in sec 2 hereof.

SEC. 5. Before an export license may be issued, the interested party shall file an export declaration containing the following information:

(a) The name and address of the exporter or his duly authorize agent or representatives;

(b) The name and address of the consignee;

(c) The port from which exportation is to be made;

(d) The port and country of destination;

(e) The name of the vessel on which shipment is to be made;

(f)  The date on which such vessel is expected to depart from the Philippines;

(g) The description of the products, merchandise, articles, materials, and supplies to be exported, and the quantity and declared value thereof.

SEC. 6. As used in this Order, the word “United States” means the States of the United States of America, the District of Colombia, the territories of Alaska and Hawaii and Puerto Rico.

SEC. 7. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.