MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 74

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 183, dated February 2,1939, every proposed appointee in the classified service of the Government, in the University of the Philippines, and in Government-owned or controlled corporations, who, if appointed, would acquire the status of a person upon whom membership insurance is compulsory as provided in Commonwealth Act No.186, is required to undergo a physical and medical examination to determine his fitness for work and the presence, if any, of disqualifying diseases or physical impairments which will make him a menace to his co-workers and unacceptable as an insurance risk;

WHEREAS, to safeguard the health of Government employees, promote efficiency in the service, and insure the solvency of the Government Service Insurance System, it is necessary that the provisions of said Executive Order be also made applicable to proposed appointees in the unclassified service of the Government and in Government boards, agencies and instrumentalities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct that the provisions of Executive Order No. 183, dated February 2, 9139, shall also be observed when making appointments in the unclassified service of the Government and in Government boards, agencies and instrumentalities whether or not they are members of the System: Provided, That the provisions of said Executive Order shall not apply to appointments of officials and employees mentioned in subsections  (a), (e) and (f) of section 671 of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 177; to those which will not entitle the appointees to compulsory membership insurance under the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 186; to those which are vested in the President of the Philippines, and to those which may be specifically exempted from the provisions thereof by the President of the Philippines.

Done at the City of Manila, this 12 th day of August, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M (1947). Executive Order No. 74 : Physical and medical examination of proposed appointees in the unclassified service and in Government Boards, agencies and instrumentalities. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 43 (9), 3559-3560.