EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 94

REORGANIZING THE DIFFERENT EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND AGENCIES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES, MAKING CERTAIN READJUSTMENTS OF PERSONNEL AND REALLOTMENTS OF FUNDS IN CONNECTION THEREWITH, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Fifty-one, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order —

SECTION 1. Section seventy-four of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 74. Departmental organization . — All executive functions of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall be directly under the Executive Department, subject to the supervision and control of the President of the Philippines in matters of general policy. The Departments are established for the proper distribution of the work of the Executive, for the performance of the functions expressly assigned to them by law, and in order that each branch of the administration may have a chief responsible for its direction and policy. Each Department Secretary shall assume the burden of, and responsibility for, all activities of the Government under his control and supervision.

“For administrative purposes, the President of the Philippines shall be considered the Department Head of the Executive Office, the Budget Commission, the Institute of Science, the Bureau of Civil Service, the Civil Service Board of Appeals, the National Commission on Educational, Scientific and Cultural Matters, the National Research Council, the National Economic Council, the Government Quarters Committee, the Board on Pensions for Veterans, the Council of National Defense, the Philippines Heraldry Committee, and of all other offices and branches of the service not assigned by law to any Department.”

SECTION 2. Section seventy-five of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 75. Executive Departments . — There shall be eleven executive departments, to wit: the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Department of the Interior, the Department of Finance, the Department of Justice, the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Department of Public Works and Communications, the Department of Education, the Department of Labor, the Department of National Defense, the Department of Health, and the Department of Commerce and Industry, which shall be under the direct control of the respective Secretaries of Departments, exercising their functions subject to the general supervision and control of the President of the Philippines.”

SECTION 3. Section seventy-six of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 76. Secretaries of Departments . — The Department of Foreign Affairs shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs; the Department of the Interior shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of the Interior; the Department of Finance shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Finance; the Department of Justice shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Justice; the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources; the Department of Public Works and Communications shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications; the Department of Education shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Education; the Department of Labor shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Labor; the Department of National Defense shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of National Defense; the Department of Health shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Health; and the Department of Commerce and Industry shall perform its functions under the executive authority of the Secretary of Commerce and Industry.”

SECTION 4. Section seventy-seven of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 77. Appointment of Secretaries . — The Secretaries of Departments shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress, at the beginning of his term of office, and shall hold office, unless sooner removed, until the expiration of his term of office, or until their successors shall have been appointed and qualified.”

SECTION 5. Section seventy-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 78. Qualifications of Secretaries . — All Secretaries shall have the following qualifications: Be a citizen of the Philippines and have resided in the Philippines continuously during the three years next preceding his appointment and be not less than thirty years of age.”

SECTION 6. The name “Shipping Commission,” as used in Executive Order Numbered Thirty-one, dated November twenty-eight, nineteen hundred and forty-six, as amended, is hereby changed to “Shipping Administration.”

Salary Law

SECTION 7. Section three of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two, known as the Salary Law, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 3. Schedule of grades and corresponding rates of compensation . — With the exception of the special groups in section five hereof, the positions to which this Act applies are classified into the following grades with their rates of annual compensation:

Chiefs of Divisions, Chiefs of Sections, Supervisory Positions, and Positions of Equivalent Rank

Subordinate Clerical or Equivalent Positions

“(a) Grades 1, 2, and 3 shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under administrative direction and with very wide latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to serve as heads of very large or very important divisions or other units of organization of similar import, engaged in work involving technical training and extended experience on the part of the incumbents; or to supervise the design and installation of complex and important accounting, office, or institutional system, methods, procedures; or to plan, organize and conduct investigations in original research or in development work in professional, scientific, or technical fields; or to perform the most important, difficult, and responsible work along highly specialized professional, scientific, or technical lines requiring training, extended experience, and demonstrated attainments of an exceptionally high order.

“(b) Grades 4, 5, 6, and 7 shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under administrative direction and with wide latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to serve as heads of large or important divisions or other units of organization of similar import, engaged in work involving technical training and extended experience on the part of the incumbents; or to plan, organize, and conduct investigations in original research or in development work in a professional, scientific, or technical field; or to perform the most important, difficult, and responsible work along specialized professional, scientific, or technical lines, requiring training, extended experience, and demonstrated attainments of a high order.

“(c) Grades 8, 9, 10, and 11 shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under administrative direction and with considerable latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to serve as heads of divisions of very large or very important sections or other units of organization of similar import, engaged in work involving technical training and considerable experience on the part of the incumbents; or to perform exceptionally difficult, important, and responsible work along professional, scientific, and technical lines, requiring training and extended experience and demonstrated attainments or along very highly specialized clerical lines requiring extended training and mastery in stenography, translation, or other kindred subjects.

“(d) Grades 12, 13, 14, and 15 shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under direction and with considerable latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to serve as heads of sections, or other units of organization of similar import, engaged in work involving technical training and considerable experience on the part of the incumbents; to perform very difficult, important, and responsible work along professional, scientific, or technical lines, requiring training, considerable experience, and demonstrated executive ability, or along highly specialized clerical work, requiring training, extended experience and proficiency in stenography, translation, and kindred subjects.

“(e) Grades A to D shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under direction and with considerable latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to engage in difficult specialized work; or to perform difficult, important, and responsible work along professional, scientific, technical or specialized clerical lines, requiring training, considerable experience, and demonstrated capacity for sound independent work, and an intimate knowledge of a special subject matter, and/or superior skill in crafts or arts.

“(f) Grades E to H shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under direct supervision and with substantial latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to engage in varied and difficult work; or to perform moderately difficult, important, and responsible work along professional, scientific, technical or specialized clerical lines, requiring training and moderate experience, or a lower training but considerable experience, thorough knowledge of a special subject matter, and/or unusual skill in crafts or arts.

“(g) Grades I to L shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under general supervision and with some latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to engage in difficult routine work; or to perform responsible work along professional, scientific, or technical lines, or along clerical lines, requiring training and moderate experience, or lower training but considerable experience, and a good knowledge of a special subject matter, or skill in arts, crafts, or trades.

“(h) Grades M to P shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under immediate or general supervision and with some latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to perform responsible work along technical or clerical lines, requiring training and moderate experience, and a broad knowledge of a special subject matter; or simple elementary work requiring scientific or professional training with little or no experience; or subordinate professional or scientific work requiring training and experience; or important, difficult, and responsible subordinate vigilance work; or skill in crafts or manual labor.

“(i) Grades Q to R shall include all classes of positions the duties of which are, under immediate or general supervision and with limited latitude for the exercise of independent judgment, to perform simple but responsible work along technical, clerical, messengerial, or subordinate vigilance lines; or simple and elementary subordinate professional or scientific work or crafts; and all classes of positions the duties of which are, under immediate supervision, to perform the simplest routine clerical, messengerial, or custodial tasks or unskilled manual labor, including apprenticeship in subordinate professional or scientific work or crafts.”

SECTION 8. Section four of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Services established by this Act . — The following services are established:

“I. Administrative Service

II. Professional and Scientific Service

III. Educational Service

IV. Navigation Service

V. Vigilance Service

VI. Subprofessional Service

VII. Craft and Labor Service

“The Administrative Service shall include all groups comprehending positions the duties of which are in general to perform administrative, fiscal, or clerical work, or any other work commonly associated with office, business or fiscal administration.

“The Professional and Scientific Service shall include all groups comprehending positions the duties of which are to perform routine, advisory, administrative, or research work which is based upon the established principles of a profession or science, and which requires professional or scientific training equivalent to that represented by graduation from a college or university of recognized standing.

“The Educational Service shall include all groups comprehending positions the duties of which in general are to give or to supervise regular and systematic instruction designed to develop the mental, physical, aesthetic or vocational powers, including manual skill.

“The Navigation Service shall include all groups comprehending positions the duties of which are to perform work related to the operation, maintenance, and administration of airships, vessels and other floating craft which are not a part of the equipment of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, including the operation, maintenance, and administration of property designed to aid navigation.

“The Vigilance Service shall include all groups comprehending positions the duties of which are to perform or supervise police or fire-protection work, the guarding of persons or property under the custody of the Government, the preservation of law and order, and the protection of life and property.

“The Subprofessional Service shall include all groups comprehending positions the duties of which are to perform work which is incident, subordinate, or preparatory to the work of employees holding positions in the professional and scientific service, requiring or involving professional and scientific service, requiring or involving professional, scientific, or technical training or any degree inferior to that represented by graduation from a college or university of recognized standing.

“The Craft and Labor Service shall include all groups comprehending positions the duties of which are to perform or supervise domestic, manual, or mechanical work involved in the execution of public works; the manufacture and handling of supplies and equipment; the repair of equipment; the operation of mechanical equipment; the transportation of personnel and property; the caring for the needs of the sick and of persons in the care and custody of the Government, and/or of persons in its employ who are entitled to maintenance; or to perform or supervise work of similar character.”

Salary Board Abolished

SECTION 9. The Salary Board created in section nine of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two is hereby abolished, and its powers, functions, duties, and records are hereby transferred to the Budget Commission. The terms “Salary Board” and “Board” used in the other parts of said Act shall be understood to mean the “Budget Commission” and “Commission,” respectively.

SECTION 10. Paragraph (a) of section ten of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two is hereby amended to read as follows:

“(a) To establish within the services the necessary groups with their corresponding grades, designating (1) the titles of the classes, (2) the duties and responsibilities involved in each class, illustrated where necessary by examples of typical tasks, and (3) the minimum qualifications required for the satisfactory performance of such duties and tasks, in conformity with the specifications outlined in sections three and four herein: Provided, however, That the Commission may lower or waive the experiential requirement for any particular group or groups in the service below Grade P and graduate the experiential requirement accordingly for the high grades within the same group if, in the opinion of the said Commission, such action is for the best interest of the public service.”

SECTION 11. Section fourteen of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 14. Limitation of salary rates . — Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no appointments to positions subject to the provisions of this Act shall be made except at rates of compensation in conformity to the rates prescribed herein. An appointee to any position shall be entitled to receive the salary appropriated for the position after serving at least six months in every intermediate grade, if any, between that position and the position from which he has been promoted, unless he has previously received the same or higher salary in any position under the same or any other branch of the government service or he has been in continuous service for more than one year prior to the proposed promotion, in which case every year of such service counting from the date of his original appointment, during which he has not had one-rate promotion, shall be equivalent to six months’ service in every intermediate grade between his old and new positions and entitle him to the corresponding salary increase not exceeding the rate provided for the new position: Provided, That original appointments shall be made at salaries not exceeding the entrance rates for the civil service eligibility of the employees concerned: Provided, further, That notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, no employee shall be appointed at a salary higher than the maximum allowed for his civil service eligibility: And, provided, finally, That an appointment to any position in grades seven to one shall not take effect until the fitness of the appointee to hold the higher position by reason of his character, experience, training and other personal qualifications shall have been passed upon and approved by the President upon recommendation of the Cabinet.”

SECTION 12. All positions now provided by law in the different departments, bureaus, and offices shall, upon approval of this Order, be deemed allocated to the grades to which they would correspond by reason of the rates of salaries now authorized therefor in accordance with the schedule provided in section seven hereof.

Automatic Salary Increases

SECTION 13. Should the savings made available under section 162 (5) of this Executive Order be insufficient to pay all employees the automatic salary increases authorized therein, priorities shall be given to the employees occupying positions of the lowest grades: Provided , That when payments of the automatic salary increases shall be made to employees of any grade, the same shall be made to all employees of that grade. No payment of the automatic salary increases shall be made to employees of the next higher grade if all employees within that grade cannot be provided for from the residual funds still available. Automatic salary increases unpaid by reason of insufficiency of funds shall not be cumulative.

Automatic salary increases shall not affect the basic salary attached to the positions.

The provisions of section 162 (5) of this Executive Order referring to automatic salary increases shall not be applicable to employees occupying positions the salaries of which are fixed by law, as in the case of enlisted men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine Constabulary.

Employees paid from funds other than those appropriated in Republic Act Numbered One hundred fifty-six may be paid automatic salary increases in accordance with the provisions of said Act and this Executive Order when authorized in the special budget allotting the corresponding funds.

Salary of Recreated Positions

SECTION 14. When a position, which is subject to the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two, as herein amended, is abolished by the retirement of the incumbent thereof under Act Numbered Twenty-five hundred eighty-nine, as amended, the same may be filled, when recreated by authority of the President, at a salary equal to two-thirds of the salary authorized by law for the said position: Provided , That when such two-thirds is not of the rates authorized in this Order, the same shall be adjusted to the next higher or lower rate, whichever is the nearer, unless otherwise provided in subsequent general appropriation acts.

SECTION 15. Sections eleven and twelve of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two are hereby repealed.

Councils of Personnel Administration

SECTION 16. There is hereby created in every Department, bureau or office, in every corporation owned or controlled by the government, and in every agency or instrumentality of the Government a Council of Personnel Administration to be composed of the chiefs of divisions or primary units in the said offices and two representatives of the subordinate personnel who shall be elected from among the employees whose basic salary does not exceed two thousand four hundred pesos per annum each. The chairman of the Council shall be elected by its members from among themselves.

SECTION 17. The Council is hereby authorized to examine the records of efficiency and fitness of all employees in its respective office with a view to making appropriate recommendations, in accordance with the Civil Service Law and Rules, concerning officials and employees who may be found inefficient, inept, incompetent or otherwise unfit for further efficient service.

SECTION 18. It shall be the duty of the Council to bring to the attention of the administrative authorities concerned matters of general interest or benefit to the public service; to recommend such measures as will promote the well-being and improve the morale or efficiency of the personnel in the service; and to perform such other allied duties as may be assigned to it from time to time by the Department Head, director or chief of the bureau or office, or managing head of the corporation concerned.

Office of the President of the Philippines

Institute of Science — Board of Regents

SECTION 19. The Bureau of Science is hereby renamed “Institute of Science” and placed under the executive supervision of the President of the Philippines. The Institute of Science shall be governed by a Board of Regents which is hereby created, consisting of a Chairman and eight members who shall all be appointed by the President of the Philippines with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress for a term of three years: Provided , That the members first appointed shall hold office as follows: the Chairman and four members for two years and four for three years, the term of office of each member to be specified in his appointment by the President. All vacancies, except through expiration of the term, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. There shall be a Director of Science to carry out the resolutions of the Board of Regents. He shall be appointed by the President with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress.

SECTION 20. The Institute of Science shall have such powers, functions, and activities as are now by law vested in the Bureau of Science including particularly the following:

(a) The conduct of regional researches and investigation in the basic science of industry;

(b) The conduct of researches, investigations, and experiments of a technical nature to find new uses for raw materials and their by-products;

(c) The conduct of researches, investigations, and experiments bearing on industry, on industrial plant scale, whether under government auspices or under the auspices of corporations owned or controlled by the Government or private enterprises, on a basis of cooperation approved by the Board of Regents;

(d) The testing or verifying under local conditions of the results of researches, investigations, and experiments obtained elsewhere that may have application to Philippine industries and their problems;

(e) The conduct of research and experimentation regarding the possibility of aircraft construction and the use of Philippine materials in such construction, as provided under subsection (b), section six, of Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred sixty-eight, which function shall be transferred from the Civil Aeronautics Administration to the Institute of Science; and

(f) The conduct of such researches and experiments including those that are of fundamental nature incidental but indispensable thereto, as will benefit industry and, in other ways, increase, promote and improve industrial production.

SECTION 21. The Board of Regents shall exercise the following specific powers:

(a) To guide and control the Director of Science in the administration of all the funds appropriated for the maintenance and operation of the Institute of Science, or received in the manner indicated in sections twenty-three and twenty-five hereof;

(b) To decide on the program of industrial research and to act on the budget of the Institute submitted by the Director of Science; and

(c) To promulgate rules and regulations for the establishment of fellowships in accordance with the provisions of the subsequent sections hereof.

SECTION 22. The several bureaus and offices of the Executive Branch of the Government, the University of the Philippines, and the corporations owned or controlled by the Government may assign to the Institute of Science such personnel as the Director of Science and the head of the corresponding department or organization may agree upon, either to pursue a separate research or experiment in relation to industries not being undertaken by the Institute of Science, or to assist in the conduct of a research or experiment on a fellowship basis.

SECTION 23. The bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities of the Government, including corporations owned or controlled by the Government, private individuals, corporations, and enterprises may grant subsidy or contribution to the Institute of Science for the conduct of whatever research, study, or investigation they may desire the Institute of Science to undertake but such research, study, or investigation shall be carried on under the direction and supervision of the said Institute.

SECTION 24. The personnel, equipment, and other facilities of the Institute of Science shall be available to researchers that may be detailed to the said Institute under fellowship conditions, as provided in this Executive Order and approved by the Board of Regents.

SECTION 25. The Board of Regents is authorized to receive for the Institute of Science subsidies, endowments, bequests, and donations and use the same for such purposes as the donors may specify. In the absence of the express wishes of the donors, all such contributions shall form part of the fund of the Institute and shall be available for such expenditure as may be authorized by the Board of Regents.

National Research Council of the Philippines

SECTION 26. The “National Research Council of the Philippine Islands” created and established under Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred twenty, shall hereafter be known as the “National Research Council of the Philippines.”

The Executive Office

SECTION 27. The Executive Office shall have a chief who shall be known as Executive Secretary. His assistants shall be known as Assistant Executive Secretaries. The Executive Secretary shall have the rank of a Secretary of Department and shall exercise such powers, functions, and duties as may be assigned to him by the President from time to time, and such others as may be imposed upon him by law.

Bureaus and Offices Under the Executive Office

SECTION 28. The Bureau of the Census and Statistics, the Shipping Administration, the Bureau of Printing, the National Museum, the Institute of Nutrition, the Social Welfare Commission, and the National Urban Planning Commission, together with their respective powers, functions, activities, personnel, records, supplies, equipment, properties, and unexpended balances of funds or appropriations are hereby placed under the immediate supervision and control of the Executive Secretary. The Radio Broadcasting Board shall continue to be under his supervision and control. The Bureau of Printing shall continue to be operated on a revolving fund basis.

National Museum

SECTION 29. The Gallery of Art and History Division of the National Library is hereby merged with the Natural History Museum Division of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce. These combined units shall have the category of a Bureau to be designated “National Museum,” and shall be placed under the immediate supervision and control of the Executive Secretary. The National Museum shall have a chief who shall be known as Director of National Museum and whose salary, until otherwise fixed by law, shall be seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum.

Institute of Nutrition

SECTION 30. There is hereby created, in the Executive Office, an Institute of Nutrition which shall serve as a clearing-house of data and information concerning nutrition; shall advise, guide, and give suggestions towards a coordination of all experimental work, objectives, and results of nutritional experiments being undertaken by the different units of the Government and by all private organizations; shall foster and encourage harmonious cooperation among the said units, private institutions and other organizations engaged in various activities in order to promote a national nutrition program; and shall seek close adherence to, and correlated execution of, the said program after its approval by the President. This Institute shall be composed of a Chairman and ten members, who shall all be appointed by the President of the Philippines with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress for a term of four years: Provided , That the members first appointed shall hold office as follows: the Chairman and three members for two years, three members for three years, and four for four years, the term of office of each member to be specified in his appointment by the President. All vacancies, except through expiration of the term, shall be filled for the unexpired term only. There shall be a Director of Nutrition who shall be appointed by the President, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress.

The Institute of Nutrition is authorized to receive subsidies, endowments, bequests, and donations and use the same for such purposes as the donors may specify. In the absence of the express wishes of the donors, all such contributions shall form part of the fund of the Institute and shall be available for such expenditures as may duly be authorized by the said Institute.

Social Welfare Commission

SECTION 31. The Bureau of Public Welfare is hereby abolished and in lieu thereof, the Social Welfare Commission is created under the executive supervision of the Executive Secretary. This Commission shall have a chief who shall be known as Commissioner of Social Welfare to be appointed by the President, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress, and whose salary, until otherwise fixed by law, shall be seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum.

SECTION 32. All the personnel, records, documents, supplies, equipment, properties, and the unexpended balances of funds or appropriations pertaining to the Bureau of Public Welfare are hereby transferred to the Social Welfare Commission.

SECTION 33. The Social Welfare Commission shall have such powers, functions, and activities as are now by law vested in the Bureau of Public Welfare, including, particularly, the proper enforcement of the laws and regulations relative to relief and other social services, and the administration of all charitable and relief agencies, including institutions for the care of the aged and/or infirm and of dependent, defective and/or delinquent children supported, whether wholly or partly by the Government or any of its branches or instrumentalities: Provided , That during the time that the Philippine Relief and Trade Rehabilitation Administration undertakes relief functions which are in conflict with the functions of the Social Welfare Commission specified in this section, the President of the Philippines may delimit and coordinate the jurisdiction and activities of the Philippine Relief and Trade Rehabilitation Administration and the Social Welfare Commission in connection therewith.

Department of the Interior

SECTION 34. Section eighty-six of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 86. Bureaus and offices under the Department of the Interior . — The Department of the Interior shall have executive supervision over the administration of provinces, municipalities, chartered cities and other local political subdivisions, except the financial affairs and financial agencies thereof, the Philippine Constabulary, the Board of Review for Moving Pictures, the Racing Commission, and the Boxing and Wrestling Commission.”

Philippine Constabulary

SECTION 35. Twelve thousand officers and men of the present Military Police Command, Armed Forces of the Philippines, are hereby withdrawn therefrom and transferred to the Department of the Interior and constituted into a national police force to be known and designated as the Philippine Constabulary: Provided, however , That the President of the Philippines may, to meet emergency conditions, have the normal strength of the Constabulary temporarily increased by attaching thereto the necessary number of units from the Armed Forces through temporary detail. Such number of civilian personnel as the appropriations herein transferred will permit are likewise transferred to the Philippine Constabulary.

SECTION 36. The Philippine Constabulary herein organized shall be deemed to be a Bureau and the Chief of Constabulary shall have all the powers generally conferred upon directors of bureaus particularly by Sections five hundred fifty to five hundred fifty-seven, inclusive, of the Revised Administrative Code. He shall have power also to prescribe the insignia, arms, equipment, and uniform of the members of the Philippine Constabulary: Provided , That such uniform shall be different from those of the other armed forces of the Philippines or of the local police forces, and no person not a member of the Philippine Constabulary is authorized to wear the same or another closely similar to it.

SECTION 37. There shall be one Chief of Constabulary who shall have the rank of Brigadier General, one Deputy Chief who shall have the rank of Colonel, and such number of Assistant Chiefs, whose ranks shall not be lower than Lieutenant-Colonel, as the President may authorize from time to time within the limits of available appropriations. The Chief and the Deputy Chief of Constabulary shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress.

SECTION 38. All police duties, functions, authority, and responsibility, except those of military character, of the Military Police Command, Armed Forces of the Philippines, shall hereafter be exercised and assumed by the Philippine Constabulary, which shall be charged with the enforcement of law and order. The provisions of Sections eight hundred thirty-two, eight hundred thirty-three, eight hundred thirty-four, eight hundred thirty-five, eight hundred thirty-six, eight hundred thirty-seven, eight hundred thirty-eight, eight hundred thirty-nine, eight hundred forty, and eight hundred forty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, which are hereby declared in full force and effect, shall govern the members of the Philippine Constabulary in the exercise of their authority and duties as peace officers and in their relations with provincial and municipal law enforcement agencies and officials. During any period of emergency any element of the Armed Forces of the Philippines may, upon direction of the President, be employed to assist the Philippine Constabulary, and the military element thus employed shall be temporarily under the control or command of the appropriate Constabulary commander senior in relative rank unless the President directs otherwise. If the emergency so warrants, the President may direct that all Constabulary and local police elements operating in the affected region may be attached to the Armed Forces of the Philippines and placed under the operational control of the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces or such subordinate commander as the Chief of Staff may designate. In all cases where elements of the Armed Forces and the Constabulary operate in conjunction with or under the control of the other, routine matters of administration and supply will remain the responsibility of their respective commanders.

SECTION 39. Commissioned and enlisted personnel detailed from the Armed Forces of the Philippines or transferred therefrom to the Philippine Constabulary shall be deemed to have the same status, including ranks, rights, privileges, and obligations as officers and enlisted men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. The Philippine Constabulary shall form part of the Reserve Force, and all service performed by any officer or enlisted man in the Philippine Constabulary shall be counted, for all legal purposes, as military service rendered. No person called to the service of the Philippine Constabulary shall, by virtue thereof solely, suffer a reduction in pay or deprivation of any additional benefit or privilege earned by him as a member of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

SECTION 40. For a period of one year after the effective date of this Order and with the authority of the President of the Philippines, any officer or enlisted man of the Armed Forces of the Philippines may, with his consent, be assigned to serve in the Philippine Constabulary or vice versa . To meet emergency conditions, the President is authorized to detail temporarily any personnel of the Armed Forces for duty with the Constabulary or vice versa .

SECTION 41. When the present strength of the Philippine Constabulary shall have been reduced to twelve thousand, no enlistment except when approved by the Secretary of the Interior for specially qualified key personnel will be permitted, unless the President determines that a larger strength than twelve thousand officers and men should be organized. Vacancies in the positions for enlisted personnel occurring from time to time may be filled by the Philippine Constabulary by direct enlistment, each enlistment to last for a period not more than three years, and the soldiers so enlisted shall be considered as members of the Reserve Force of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

SECTION 42. By authority of the President of the Philippines, officers of the Philippine Constabulary temporarily detailed to the Armed Forces or vice versa with their consent may be temporarily promoted to grades authorized for the respective positions they may hold under such detail. All requirements for permanent promotions excepting those pertaining to position vacancies shall be the same as in the Armed Forces. For position vacancy requirements the Constabulary will have its own promotion roster.

SECTION 43. The Articles of War governing the Armed Forces of the Philippines are hereby made applicable to the Philippine Constabulary. Other laws, rules and regulations regarding appointments and commissions, enlistment, pay and allowances, rank or grade, promotions, retirements, resignation and discharge of members of the Armed Forces shall, as far as practicable, be applicable to members of the Constabulary: Provided, however , That the President may, if appropriations are available and in appropriate cases, authorize additional pay and allowances to members of the Constabulary. The provisions of the Constabulary Law, Chapter thirty-five, Book Two, of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, and other laws, executive orders, rules and regulations which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Order or with any of  the laws made applicable to the Constabulary are hereby declared applicable to the officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Constabulary.

SECTION 44. Real estate, including buildings and installations appurtenant thereto, formerly owned by the old Philippine Constabulary and still in the possession of the Government; leases over private property heretofore held by the Military Police Command, Armed Forces of the Philippines; facilities and equipment heretofore used by the Military Police Command in ballistics, fingerprinting and other activities peculiar only to criminal investigations and apprehension; and all record, files and correspondence heretofore kept by the Military Police Command are hereby transferred outright to the Constabulary. Armament, military supplies, and equipment sufficient for the use of twenty thousand officers and enlisted men belonging to the Armed Forces of the Philippines heretofore in the possession of the Military Police Command shall be turned over to the Philippine Constabulary on a loan or reimbursable basis. Future transfers to the Constabulary of armament, supplies and equipment belonging to the Armed Forces and surplus to their immediate needs shall be on a loan or reimbursable basis, upon mutual agreement subject to the approval of the President.

SECTION 45. Enlisted personnel transferred from the Military Police Command who are unqualified for Constabulary duty and not desired by the Armed Forces may be separated from the service without prejudice. Separation of officers unqualified for Constabulary duty who are not desired by the Armed Forces shall be in accordance with procedures established for similar personnel of the Armed Forces.

SECTION 46. The Armed Forces of the Philippines will furnish logistical support whenever practicable so as to eliminate duplication of installations and expense. Air or water transportation beyond the capabilities of the Philippine Constabulary shall be furnished by the Philippine Air Force or the Philippine Naval Patrol. Vehicle and armament repairs beyond the capabilities of the Constabulary shall be furnished by Armed Forces installations. Communication facilities and installations operated by the Armed Forces shall be utilized by the Constabulary whenever the communications system of the latter is inadequate, and vice versa . All logistical support rendered shall be reimbursable to the extent of actual cost.

Racing Commission

SECTION 47. The name “Board on Races” as used in Executive Order Numbered Three hundred twenty, dated January twenty-seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one, as amended, is hereby changed to “Racing Commission.”

Department of Finance

SECTION 48. Section eighty-one of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 81 Bureaus and offices under the Department of Finance . — The Department of Finance shall have executive supervision over the Bureau of Customs, the Bureau of Internal Revenue, the Bureau of the Treasury, the Bureau of Banking, the Procurement Office, the Manila Harbor Board, and the Tobacco Board. It shall also have general supervision over the financial affairs and financial agencies of provincial, municipal, and city governments, banks, banking transactions, coinage, currency, and, except as otherwise specially provided, over all funds the investment of which may be authorized by law.”

Procurement Office

SECTION 49. The special division attached to the Office of the Secretary of Finance, which is known as the Division of Purchase and Supply, is hereby changed to and shall hereafter be known as the Procurement Office.

Direct Purchases by the Armed Forces

SECTION 50. Upon recommendation of the Secretary of National Defense, the President may authorize the Armed Forces of the Philippines to make direct purchases without the intervention of the Procurement Office, under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, of specific materials, supplies and equipment of military character.

Bureau of Customs

Commissioner of Customs

SECTION 51. The designation of the position of “Insular Collector of Customs” is changed to “Commissioner of Customs,” and its salary is fixed at nine thousand pesos per annum until otherwise provided by law.

Collector of Customs for the Port of Manila

SECTION 52. The position of “Deputy Insular Collector of Customs” is changed to “Collector of Customs for the Port of Manila” which position shall have a compensation of seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum. The Port of Manila is hereby placed for administrative purposes under the immediate supervision of the Collector of Customs for the Port of Manila.

Customs Patrol Service

SECTION 53. There is hereby organized a “Customs Patrol Service” through the consolidation of the Secret Service Division and the Harbor Police Division, including the positions and personnel paid by the entity operating the arrastre service, to take direct charge of the enforcement of the laws and regulations within the customs premises and the port area.

SECTION 54. The positions in the Customs Patrol Service are hereby declared primarily confidential and appointments thereto will be subject only to the discretion of the Secretary of Finance.

Lighthouse Service and Revenue Cutter Service Transferred

SECTION 55. The Lighthouse Service and the Revenue Cutter Service of the Bureau of Customs, including the appropriations, personnel, records, properties and equipment pertaining thereto are transferred to the Philippine Naval Patrol.

The Commander of the Philippine Naval Patrol shall furnish the Commissioner of Customs or the Collector of Customs in ports of entry such vessels as may be necessary in connection with the performance of the duties of the Bureau of Customs.

Bureau of Internal Revenue

SECTION 56. Any laws or orders to the contrary notwithstanding, the authority of the Collector of Internal Revenue under section three hundred and nine of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred sixty-six, otherwise known as the National Internal Revenue Code, to compromise internal revenue cases or to refund taxes, shall be exercised only after taking into consideration the recommendation of a committee to be composed of the head of the Law Division, as chairman, and the heads of the Income Tax Division, the Inspection Division, the Miscellaneous Tax Division, and the auditor for the Bureau of Internal Revenue, as members: Provided , That when the amount of the original assessment is in excess of twenty thousand pesos, the action of the Collector shall not become effective unless the same is approved by the Secretary of Finance: Provided, further , That warrants for the refund of taxes shall be countersigned by an official superior to the auditor for the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

For the purposes of sections three hundred forty-seven and three hundred forty-nine of the National Internal Revenue Code, the auditor for the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall be considered an officer of the said Bureau while performing duties as a member of the committee created in the next preceding paragraph.

SECTION 57. All violations of internal revenue laws, rules and regulations discovered and all persons apprehended for such violations shall be reported immediately by field men to the provincial or city revenue agent in the provinces and cities other than the City of Manila and to the Collector of Internal Revenue in the City for action. No final settlement of civil liability arising from such violations of internal laws, rules and regulations shall be made unless the corresponding tax and the corresponding penalties due are first paid.

SECTION 58. No officer or employee of the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall accept employment from any taxpayer nor accept a taxpayer as client in any matter related in any way to any tax. Violation of this rule shall be sufficient ground for the summary dismissal from the service of the officer or employee concerned. No officer or employee in any tax-collecting agency shall accept any outside occupation for gain without the prior approval of the President upon recommendation of the Secretary of Finance.

SECTION 59. No provincial revenue agent shall be stationed longer than three years in any one province, and no agent, examiner or other field men of the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall be assigned to any province for more than two years. In Manila and other cities or places where large numbers of business establishments are located, the territory shall be divided into districts and the necessary number of field men shall be assigned to each district. No field man shall be assigned to a district for more than six months. Each field man shall keep a diary of his activities and shall submit the same to the Collector of Internal Revenue, the diary to show the following:

(a) Place of assignment,

(b) Nature of inspection work undertaken,

(c) Names and addresses of persons, stores or firms inspected during the day,

(d) Time of inspection,

(e) Findings, and

(f) Action taken.

SECTION 60. All records of the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall be under the charge and custody of the Records Section of the Administrative Division.

SECTION 61. The Law Division of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, subject to the control and supervision of the Collector, shall pass upon all legal matters involved in internal revenue cases and shall take charge of the interpretation and application of internal revenue laws.

Department of Justice

SECTION 62. The first paragraph of section eighty-three of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 83. Bureaus and offices under the Department of Justice . — The Department of Justice shall have executive supervision over the Office of the Solicitor General, the Courts of First Instance and the Inferior Courts, the Public Service Commission, the Bureau of Prisons, the General Land Registration Office, the Court of Industrial Relations, the National Bureau of Investigation, the Bureau of Immigration, the Board of Pardons and Parole, the People’s Court, the Office of Special Prosecutors, the Tenancy Law Enforcement Division, the Deportation Board, the Code Commission, and the Office of the Government Corporate Counsel. It shall also have the general supervision and control of the provincial sheriffs and all law officers of the Government other than provincial and city fiscals or attorneys and other prosecuting officers.”

National Bureau of Investigation

SECTION 63. The Bureau of Investigation created in Republic Act Numbered One hundred fifty-seven is hereby renamed National Bureau of Investigation.

SECTION 64. Section one hundred eighty-six of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 186. Officers in function of sheriff . — In the City of Manila, the Clerk of Court of First Instance of said City shall exercise the functions of sheriff. In each of the several provinces of the Philippines the duties and functions of provincial sheriff shall hereafter be exercised by a Clerk of Court of First Instance, who is hereby designated ex officio provincial sheriff, in addition to his regular duties: Provided , That in provinces where there are at present separate individual provincial sheriffs, this arrangement shall not be effective until after the position of sheriff becomes vacant.”

Anti-Usury Board Abolished

SECTION 65. The Anti-Usury Board, created by Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred nine, as amended, is hereby abolished, and its powers, functions, duties, personnel, equipment, records and appropriations are transferred to the National Bureau of Investigation.

Bureau of Justice Renamed Office of the Solicitor General

SECTION 66. The present Bureau of Justice shall hereafter be known and referred to as the Office of the Solicitor General.

SECTION 67. The first paragraph of section one thousand six hundred fifty-nine of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 1659. The Office of the Solicitor General shall have one Chief to be known as the Solicitor General whose salary shall be twelve thousand pesos per annum and shall have the rank of an Undersecretary of a Department. He shall be assisted by one First Assistant Solicitor General whose salary shall be nine thousand pesos per annum. When the Solicitor General is unable to perform his duties or in case of a vacancy in the office, the First Assistant Solicitor General shall temporarily perform the functions of said officer, or, in his absence, the Secretary of Justice may designate the acting chief of the office. There shall also be four Assistant Solicitors General and such number of solicitors as may from time to time be available under current appropriation and as the conditions of the service shall require.”

SECTION 68. Section one thousand six hundred sixty of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 1660. Function of Office of the Solicitor General . — The Office of the Solicitor General constitutes the law office of the Government of the Philippines and by it shall be performed duties requiring the services of a law officer.

“The Office of the Solicitor General shall have general supervision and control over provincial and city fiscals and attorneys and over other prosecuting officers throughout the Philippines, shall prepare rules for their guidance, and may require reports from them concerning the public business in the courts of their respective provinces or concerning other matters relating to the administration of justice therein.”

Bureau of Immigration Transferred to Department of Justice

SECTION 69. The Bureau of Immigration, together with its personnel, powers, functions, activities, records, documents, equipment and unexpended balances of appropriations, is hereby transferred from the Department of Labor to the Department of Justice.

Salvage Warehouse and Industrial Division Revolving Funds Merged

SECTION 70. The Salvage Warehouse Revolving Fund and the Bureau of Prisons — Industrial Division Revolving Fund are hereby consolidated.

Board of Pardons and Parole

SECTION 71. The “Board of Indeterminate Sentence” created in Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred and three, as amended by Act Numbered Four thousand two hundred and twenty-five, and the “Board of Pardons” created in Executive Order Numbered Eighty-three, dated January eleventh, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, are hereby abolished and there is created in their stead a “Board of Pardons and Parole.” Any reference to the abolished boards in any act, executive order, rule or regulation shall be deemed a reference to the “Board of Pardons and Parole.”

SECTION 72. Sections four and five of Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred and three are hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. The Board of Pardons and Parole is authorized to adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for carrying out its functions and duties. The Board is empowered to call upon any bureau, office, branch, subdivision, agency, or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance as it may need in connection with the performance of its functions. A majority of all the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote shall be necessary to arrive at a decision. Any dissent from the majority opinion shall be reduced to writing and filed with the records of the proceedings. Each member of the Board, including the Chairman and the Executive Officer, shall be entitled to receive as compensation ten pesos for each meeting actually attended by him, notwithstanding the provisions of section two hundred and fifty-nine of the Revised Administrative Code, and in addition thereto, reimbursement of actual and necessary traveling expenses incurred in the performance of duties.”

“SEC. 5. It shall be the duty of the Board of Pardons and Parole to look into the physical, mental and moral record of the prisoners who shall be eligible to parole and to determine the proper time of release of such prisoners. Whenever any prisoner shall have served the minimum penalty imposed on him, and it shall appear to the Board, from the reports of the prisoner’s work and conduct and the study and investigation made by the Board itself, that such prisoner is fitted by his training for release, that there is a reasonable probability that such prisoner will live and remain at liberty without violating the law, and that such release will not be incompatible with the welfare of society, said Board of Pardons and Parole may, in its discretion, and in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted hereunder, authorize the release of such prisoner on parole, upon such terms and conditions as are herein prescribed and as may be prescribed by the Board. The said Board of Pardons and Parole shall also examine the records and status of prisoners who shall have been convicted of any offense other than those named in section two hereof, for more than one year by final judgment prior to the date on which this Act shall take effect, and shall make recommendations in all such cases to the President of the Philippines with regard to the parole of such prisoners as they shall deem qualified for parole as herein provided, after they shall have served a period of imprisonment not less than the minimum period for which they might have been sentenced under this Act for the same offense.

“It shall also be the duty of the Board of Pardons and Parole to examine or cause to be examined the prison records and history of prisoners confined in any prison or penal colony in the Philippines who are not entitled to parole under the provisions of this Act and to recommend the pardon of any of said prisoners whenever it is satisfied that such prisoner has so reformed that upon being pardoned, he will not become a menace to society or become a public charge. In passing upon the wisdom and advisability of recommending the granting of pardon, the Board shall take into consideration the crime committed, the probabilities of the prisoner’s again violating the law, his conduct while in prison, and all other matters that in any way bear upon the effect which the pardon of the prisoner may have upon society.”

Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources

SECTION 73. The present Department of Agriculture and Commerce shall hereafter be known as Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

SECTION 74. Section eighty-four of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 84. Bureaus and offices under the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources . — The Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources shall have executive supervision over the Bureau of Plant Industry, the Bureau of Animal Industry, the Bureau of Forestry, the Bureau of Lands, the Bureau of Mines, the Bureau of Fisheries, the Fiber Inspection Service, matters pertaining to colonies and plantations of public lands, and matters concerning hunting, fisheries, sponges, and other sea-products, including the issuance of licenses therefor.”

Veterinary, Mining Engineers, and Surveyors Examining Boards

SECTION 75. The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources shall assume and exercise, with respect to the Veterinary Examining Board, the Board of Examiners for Mining Engineers, and the Board of Examiners for Surveyors, such prerogatives, functions, and authority as are conferred upon Department Heads by the provisions of Section ten of Act Numbered Four thousand seven, otherwise known as the Reorganization Law of 1932.

Department of Public Works and Communications

SECTION 76. Section eighty-five of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 85. Bureaus and offices under the Department of Public Works and Communications . — The Department of Public Works and Communications shall have executive supervision over the Bureau of Public Works, the Bureau of Posts, the Bureau of Telecommunications, the Government Marine Railway and Repair Shops, the Motor Vehicles Office, the Irrigation Council, and the Flood Control Commission.”

Bureau of Posts

Stamp and Philatelic Division

SECTION 77. There is created in the Bureau of Posts a division to be known as the “Stamp and Philatelic Division.” The Bureau of Posts shall exercise and undertake, through this Division, the following powers, functions, and activities:

(a) To prepare appropriate designs for postage stamps so as to portray and serve the best interest of the Philippines — its history, great men, heroes, memorable events, places of historical and scenic importance, flora and fauna, and agriculture and industries;

(b) To determine and designate dates to be commemorated on postage stamps of the Philippines;

(c) To encourage and promote stamp collecting and better philately by cooperating with organized stamp clubs;

(d) To disseminate and propagate through the radio and press the educational and recreational value of philately in the public schools and other institutions and to the general public;

(e) To build a philatelic library;

(f) To publish Philippine philatelic literature;

(g) To determine when and by what method a stamp will be withdrawn from sale or condemned; and

(h) To undertake all other activities pertaining to philately, national or international.

Bureau of Telecommunications

SECTION 78. There is hereby created a Bureau of Telecommunications. It shall have one chief to be known as Director of Telecommunications who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress. Until otherwise provided by law, the salary of the Director of Telecommunications shall be fixed at seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum.

SECTION 79. The Bureau of Telecommunications shall exercise the following powers and duties:

(a) To operate and maintain existing wire-telegraph and radio-telegraph offices, stations, and facilities, and those to be established to restore the pre-war telecommunication service under the Bureau of Posts, as well as such additional offices or stations as may hereafter be established to provide telecommunication service in places requiring such service;

(b) To investigate, consolidate, negotiate for, operate and maintain wire-telephone or radio telephone communication service throughout the Philippines by utilizing such existing facilities in cities, towns, and provinces as may be found feasible and under such terms and conditions or arrangements with the present owners or operators thereof as may be agreed upon to the satisfaction of all concerned;

(c) To prescribe, subject to approval by the Department Head, equitable rates of charges for messages handled by the system and/or for timecalls and other services that may be rendered by said system;

(d) To establish and maintain coastal stations to serve ships at sea or aircrafts and, when public interest so requires, to engage in the international telecommunication service in agreement with other countries desiring to establish such service with the Republic of the Philippines; and

(e) To abide by all existing rules or regulations prescribed by the International Telecommunication Convention relative to the accounting, disposition and exchange of messages handled in the international service, and those that may hereafter be promulgated by said Convention and adhered to by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines.

SECTION 80. All provisions of laws and contracts relating to radio and telegraph stations and cables the enforcement of which has heretofore been vested in the Director of Posts shall hereafter be enforced by the Director of Telecommunications.

SECTION 81. All the personnel, powers, functions, activities, appropriations, properties, equipment, supplies, records and documents pertaining to or intended for the electrical communication service under the Bureau of Posts shall be transferred to the Bureau of Telecommunications.

Motor Vehicles Office

SECTION 82. The Division of Motor Vehicles shall hereafter be known as the Motor Vehicles Office. It shall have one chief to be known as Chief of the Motor Vehicles Office whose compensation, until otherwise provided by law shall be seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum. The Chief of the Motor Vehicles Office shall be in charge of the administration of the Motor Vehicles Law. Wherever the words “Director of Public Works” and “Bureau of Public Works” are used in said law, the same shall be substituted by the words “Chief of the Motor Vehicles Office” and “Motor Vehicles Office,” respectively.

Department of Education

Changes in Names of Bureaus

SECTION 83. The Department of Instruction shall hereafter be known as the Department of Education; the Bureau of Education as the Bureau of Public Schools; the Office of Private Education as the Bureau of Private Schools; and the National Library as the Bureau of Public Libraries.

SECTION 84. Section eighty-two of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 82. Bureaus and offices under the Department of Education . — The Department of Education shall have executive supervision over the Bureau of Public Schools, the Bureau of Private Schools, the Bureau of Public Libraries, the Board on Textbooks, the Institute of National Language, and the Philippines Historical Committee.”

Division of Physical Education

SECTION 85. The Office of the National Physical Director shall hereafter function as a unit directly attached to the Office of the Secretary of Education and shall be renamed the Division of Physical Education.

Division of Adult Education

SECTION 86. The Office of Adult Education is hereby converted into the Division of Adult Education. The said Division, together with its functions, powers, duties, personnel, records, equipment, property and unexpended balances of appropriations, is transferred to the Bureau of Public Schools.

Board on Documents Abolished

SECTION 87. The Board on Documents created by Commonwealth Act Numbered fifty-four is hereby abolished, and its powers, functions and duties shall be assumed and exercised by the Director of Public Libraries.

National Council of Education Abolished

SECTION 88. The National Council of Education created and allocated under the Department of Public Instruction by Executive Order Numbered Nineteen, dated February nineteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, is hereby abolished, and its records, property, equipment, and unexpended balances of appropriations, and personnel except the Chairman, the members, and the executive secretary, are transferred to the National Commission on Educational, Scientific and Cultural Matters created under Republic Act Numbered One hundred seventy-six.

Department of Labor

SECTION 89. Section four of Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred twenty-one, as amended by Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred thirty-nine, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Bureaus and offices under the Department of Labor . — The Department of Labor shall have executive supervision over the Bureau of Labor, the Labor Placement Office, the Safety Inspection Service, and all bureaus, divisions and offices hereafter created concerning labor alone or labor in its relation with capital, and also the proper enforcement of all laws relative to labor and capital in the Philippines and over all other matters related to the welfare of the Filipino laborers in this country and abroad.”

Department of National Defense

SECTION 90. Section two of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred thirty is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Bureaus and offices under the Department of National Defense . — The Department of National Defense shall be charged with the duty of supervising the national defense program of the country, and for this purpose, it shall have executive supervision over the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the Philippine Veterans Board. This Department shall function under the executive control of the Secretary of National Defense who may be assisted by an Undersecretary.”

Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey

SECTION 91. (a) There shall be established in the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey a commissioned corps of officer distributed in the grades of captain, commander, lieutenant commander, lieutenant, lieutenant (junior grade), and ensign: Provided , That the number of officers in the grades of captain and commander shall not exceed five per centum and eight per centum, respectively, of the total authorized number of commissioned officers on the active list, except that the number of commanders may be increased by the number of vacancies in the captain grade.

(b) Officers of the corps shall be citizens of the Philippines and shall rank with and after officers of corresponding grades in the Armed Forces of the Philippines with the same length of service in grade, as follows: captain with colonel, commander with lieutenant colonel, lieutenant commander with major, lieutenant with captain, lieutenant (junior grade) with first lieutenant, and ensign with second lieutenant.

(c) Whenever a final fraction occurs in computing the authorized number of officers of any grade, the nearest whole number shall be regarded as the authorized number: Provided , That no officers shall be reduced in grade or pay or separated from the active list as the result of any computations made to determine the authorized number of officers in the various grades.

SECTION 92. (a) The President is authorized to appoint the commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey: Provided , That, except as provided in paragraph ( b ) of this section, all original appointments shall be made in the grade of ensign from among cadets who have qualified in accordance with this section: And provided, further , That all appointments and promotions to the rank of captain or commander shall be made with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress.

(b) Upon the effective date of this Order, the President is authorized to appoint to commissioned grades authorized in section 91 ( a ), ( b ), and ( c ) hereof qualified persons then serving in the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey as field or administrative officers, without reference to the requirements specified in paragraph ( a ) of this section and Section 94 ( b ) hereof.

(c) The Director and the Assistant Director of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey shall have the ranks of captain and commander, respectively, and shall be appointed by the President, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress from the list of commissioned officers of the Bureau not below the rank of lieutenant commander and lieutenant, respectively: Provided , That persons serving as Director and Assistant Director appointed by the President with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress upon the approval of this Order shall have the ranks of captain and commander, respectively.

SECTION 93. (a) Cadets shall be appointed by the Secretary of National Defense, upon recommendation of the Director of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, from a list of eligibles established under such regulations as the Secretary of National Defense may prescribe. The number of cadets shall not exceed six, except that the number of cadets may be increased by the number of vacancies in the ensign grade. Persons to be eligible for appointment as cadets shall be citizens of the Philippines and shall have a bachelor’s degree in civil, mechanical, geodetic or electrical engineering from a college or university of recognized standing.

(b) Cadets shall be promoted to ensign under such regulations as the Secretary of National Defense may prescribe as vacancies occur in the commissioned force, after not less than six months of continuous and satisfactory service as cadet.

SECTION 94. (a) Commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey shall be promoted within the limitations imposed under Section 91 hereof, according to a system to be approved by the Secretary of National Defense, and shall receive the same pay and allowances as are now or may hereafter be authorized for officers of corresponding grades in the Armed Forces of the Philippines: Provided , That for officers commissioned in accordance with Section 92 (b) hereof, longevity pay shall be based on the total of all Coast and Geodetic Survey service completed on the date of commission.

(b) Promotions to all grades shall be made by the President: Provided , That no person shall be appointed ensign or shall be promoted from ensign to lieutenant (junior grade), or from lieutenant (junior grade) to lieutenant until after passing a satisfactory mental and physical examination conducted in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary of National Defense.

SECTION 95. All laws now in effect or which hereafter may enacted relating to retirement, separation, leaves of absence, medical treatment, commissary, and all other privileges for officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall apply to commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey.

Armed Forces of the Philippines

SECTION 96. The Armed Forces of the Philippines will consist of the Regular Force and the Reserve Force divided in major commands as hereinafter provided.

Commander-in-Chief

SECTION 97. The President of the Philippines is Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. He exercises command through the Secretary of National Defense who directly represents him.

Chief of Staff

SECTION 98. The Chief of Staff executes the President’s command functions in relation to strategy, tactics, and operations. He is the immediate adviser of the Secretary of National Defense, and is responsible for the planning, development, and execution of the national defense program as prescribed by the Secretary of National Defense. He has command of all elements of the Armed Forces, and in the discharge of this responsibility, the Headquarters National Defense Forces shall function as a Field Headquarters in addition to its role as an administrative headquarters. He is authorized to prescribe the functions, duties, and powers of the various Staffs, Services, installations, and other units of the Armed Forces, and to issue from time to time such detailed instructions regarding personnel, funds, records, property, routing of correspondence, and such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order. Orders, regulations, directives, and instructions are published in the name of the Chief of Staff, by order of the Secretary of National Defense.

Deputy Chief of Staff

SECTION 99. There shall be a Deputy Chief of Staff to assist the Chief of Staff and to perform his functions during his absence. The Deputy Chief of Staff shall also exercise general supervision over the General and Special Staffs and the Administrative and Technical Services.

General Council

SECTION 100. The General Council shall consist of the members of the General Staff and the Commanders of the Major Commands. The Council shall review and comment on any studies and plans which may be referred to it by the Chief of Staff. The Council or any of its individual members may initiate recommendations and suggestions to the Chief of Staff on any matter pertaining to the Armed Forces, especially on matters of long-range planning. The group functions are entirely advisory.

National Defense General Staff

SECTION 101. The National Defense General Staff shall be composed of the Chief of Staff, the Deputy Chief of Staff, the Assistant Chiefs of Staff from the General Staff Divisions, the Secretary to the National Defense General Staff, and such other officers of grades not below that of first lieutenant as may be detailed thereto from time to time by the Chief of Staff with the approval of the President of the Philippines. All officers in the Headquarters National Defense Forces with the rank of not lower than first lieutenant serving in or with the General Staff or performing duties that are of General Staff nature are designated as members of the General Staff Corps. Assignment to, or relief from, the National Defense General Staff shall be accomplished under such rules and regulations as the Chief of Staff may prescribe with the approval of the Secretary of National Defense.

Divisions of General Staff

SECTION 102. The National Defense General Staff shall be organized into five Divisions, each under the direction of an Assistant Chief of Staff, as follows:

(a) Plans and Operations Division (OPD);

(b) Personnel and Administration Division (G-1);

(c) Intelligence Division (G-2);

(d) Organization and Training Division (G-3); and

(e) Service, Supply and Procurement Division (G-4).

SECTION 103. The heads of the Divisions of the National Defense General Staff, acting as assistants to the Chief of Staff, will plan and coordinate the development and operations of the Armed Forces in accordance with the following principles:

(a) They plan, direct, coordinate, and supervise. They assist the Chief of Staff in getting assigned missions or duties done by the subordinate commands and agencies, but they are not in the chain of command.

(b) By direct contact with operating agencies, they insure that orders, directives, instructions, and plans are carried out faithfully.

(c) Decentralization to the fullest possible degree should be observed.

(d) Unnecessary duplication and overlapping of activities should be avoided.

(e) Personnel of the General Staff shall be representative of the Air, Naval, and Ground Forces.

(f) Only officers in the General Staff Corps Eligibility List may be assigned to the National Defense General Staff, but if not enough officers are available to fill the necessary General Staff positions, officers from other branches may be assigned. However, such assignment alone does not confer eligibility to the General Staff Corps Eligibility List nor the privilege of wearing the General Staff Corps insignia.

Administrative Staffs and Services

SECTION 104. The following constitute the Administrative Staffs and Services under the Chief of Staff:

(a) Adjutant General’s Service;

(b) Judge Advocate General’s Service;

(c) Educational and Recreational Service; and

(d) Chaplain Service.

Technical Staffs and Services

SECTION 105.     The following constitute the Technical Staffs and Services under the Chief of Staff:

(a) Corps of Engineers;

(b) Ordnance Service;

(c) Quartermaster Service;

(d) Signal Corps;

(e) Medical Service; and

(f) Finance Service.

National Defense Special Staff Divisions

SECTION 106. The following constitute the National Defense Special Staff Divisions under the Chief of Staff:

(a) Office of the Inspector General;

(b) Research and Development Division;

(c) Public and Legislative Relations Division;

(d) Budget Division; and

(e) Historical Division.

Each unit headed by a Chief of Division shall have such assistants as the Chief of Staff may direct. The Chiefs of Administrative Staffs and Services, Technical Staffs and Services, and of Special Staff Divisions shall be responsible for the efficient performance of the duties pertaining to their divisions and for the proper execution of all instructions and orders prescribed by the Chief of Staff.

Major Commands

SECTION 107. The Regular Force shall be divided into Major Commands and such other permanent installations, separate commands or task forces as may be created by authority of the President. There are hereby created the following Major Commands:

(a) Philippine Ground Force;

(b) Philippine Air Force; and

(c) Philippine Naval Patrol.

Philippine Ground Force

The Philippine Ground Force is charged with the mission of providing for the land defense of the Philippines and with such other missions as the President may direct. It shall be responsible for the determination of its requirements and provisions and for those of its units and attached services with respect to their personnel, materiel, and facilities; and for the preparation of plans for the development, organization, equipment, tactical operations, supply and maintenance thereof, including replacements.

It is also charged with the training and instruction of all trainees, the training of ground force reserve units, and such other missions as the President may direct.

Tenure of Office and Temporary Promotions

SECTION 108. The Commanders of the Major Commands and of the Military Areas, the Superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy, and the heads of the National Defense General Staff Divisions, the National Defense Special Staffs, and the Administrative and Technical Staffs and Services shall hold their positions for a period not exceeding three years, unless retained by authority of the Commander-in-Chief. By authority of the President, they may be temporarily promoted to grades authorized for their respective positions without vacating their permanent commissioned grades.

Military Areas

SECTION 109. The ten military districts are abolished and four Military Areas are hereby established as separate subordinate commands under the Chief of Staff which are designated as:

I. First Military Area;

II. Second Military Area;

III. Third Military Area; and

IV. Fourth Military Area.

The President shall, from time to time, determine the territorial extent of each Military Area. He may abolish a Military Area or create additional ones whenever he deems it necessary. Each Military Area shall be under a commander and such assistants as the Chief of Staff may direct. The commander shall be responsible for the efficient performance of the duties and the execution of all instructions and orders that may be issued by the Chief of Staff from time to time.

Philippine Air Force

SECTION 110. The present Philippine Army Air Force is hereby converted into the Philippine Air Force and raised to the category of a Major Command. All the powers, functions, duties, appropriations, personnel, records, armament, weapons, equipment, supplies, clothing, buildings, real estate and the appurtenances thereto, and other properties assigned or allocated to the Philippine Army Air Force are hereby transferred to the Philippine Air Force.

SECTION 111. The Philippine Air Force is charged with the primary mission of providing for the air defense of the Philippines. It shall be responsible, under policies prescribed by the Chief of Staff, for the determination of requirements and the provisions for the facilities and the preparation of necessary plans for the development, organization, equipment, training, tactical operations, supply and maintenance thereof, including replacements.

Commander of the Air Force

SECTION 112. The Philippine Air Force shall have a Commander with such rank as shall be determined by the President of the Philippines. He is charged with the administration, control, and operation of the Air Force under the Chief of Staff.

SECTION 113. Officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Air Force shall continue to be paid under existing laws and orders until otherwise provided for by law.

Philippine Naval Patrol

SECTION 114. The former Offshore Patrol is hereby converted into the Philippine Naval Patrol and raised to the category of a Major Command. All the powers, functions, duties, appropriations, personnel, records, armament, weapons, equipment, supplies, clothing, buildings, real estate and the appurtenances thereto, and other properties assigned or allocated to the former Offshore Patrol are hereby transferred to the Philippine Naval Patrol.

SECTION 115. The Philippine Naval Patrol is charged with the mission of carrying out sea patrol operations and defense action in Philippine waters, and the instruction and training of naval trainees and reserve units. Whenever properly authorized, it shall attend to, or render assistance in, the enforcement of laws and regulations pertaining to customs revenue, navigation, immigration, fishing, quarantine, and the neutrality of the Philippines. It shall be responsible for the determination, under policies prescribed by the Chief of Staff, of requirements and the provisions for its units with respect to personnel, materiel, facilities; and for the preparation of necessary plans for the development, organization, equipment, training, tactical operations, supply and maintenance thereof, including replacements.

Commander of Naval Patrol

SECTION 116. The Philippine Naval Patrol shall have a Commander with such rank as shall be determined by the President of the Philippines. He is charged with the administration, control, and operation of the Philippine Naval Patrol under the Chief of Staff.

The Revenue Cutter Service, The Lighthouse Service, and the Philippine Nautical School

SECTION 117. The Philippine Nautical School under the Department of National Defense is hereby transferred to the Philippine Naval Patrol, together with its personnel, appropriations, properties, equipment, and records.

The revenue cutter service and the lighthouse service which have been transferred from the Bureau of Customs to the Philippine Naval Patrol, and the Philippine Nautical School shall be maintained as separate and distinct entities from the Naval Patrol proper and they shall retain their own personnel.

Commissioned and Enlisted Personnel

SECTION 118. Authorized commissioned and enlisted grades for personnel of the Philippine Naval Patrol, with their equivalent in the Ground Force and Air Force, shall be as follows:

Officers

Naval Patrol Grade

Ground Force

Equivalent Grade

Enlisted Men

Pay and Allowances

SECTION 119. The pay and allowances of officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Naval Patrol shall be the same as those prescribed for the corresponding ranks and grades in the Armed Forces, plus an additional amount equivalent to ten per cent of the base pay of officers and enlisted men while assigned on sea duty. Additional ration allowances may be provided for officers and men of the Philippine Naval Patrol assigned on sea duty in accordance with its annual appropriations.

Headquarters

SECTION 120. The Headquarters Army of the Philippines and the Central General Staff are hereby re-designated the Headquarters National Defense Forces and the National Defense General Staff, respectively.

Separate Rosters

SECTION 121. The Philippine Air Force and the Philippine Naval Patrol shall each keep a roster of its officers and men separate from that of the rest of the Armed Forces.

Uniforms and Insignia

SECTION 122. With the approval of the President of the Philippines, the Chief of Staff is authorized to prescribe the uniforms and insignia of the officers and enlisted men of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

Authority to Modify Existing Organizations

SECTION 123. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the President of the Philippines may, in the interest of economy, efficiency, and simplicity abolish or modify existing major commands, staff divisions and sections, services, military areas, installations, task forces, and other units, establish new ones.

Laws Repealed

SECTION 124. The provision of General Order Numbered Six, dated June twenty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, entitled “Composition of the Central General Staff of the Philippine Army,” and of Executive Order Numbered One hundred, dated March fifteenth, nineteen hundred and forty-six, on the Peace and Order Functions of the Military Police Command, and of all other laws, orders or regulations inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Department of Health

SECTION 125. The second paragraph of Executive Order Numbered Three hundred seventeen, dated January seventh, nineteen hundred and forty-one, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“The Department of Health shall be charged with the protection of the health of the people, the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the proper enforcement of the laws and regulations relative to health, sanitation, food, drugs and narcotics, slum housing, garbage and other waste disposal, and for these purposes, it shall exercise executive supervision over the Bureau of Health; the Bureau of Quarantine; the Bureau of Hospitals; the Board of Medical Examiners; the Board of Pharmaceutical Examiners; the Board of Dental Examiners; the Board of Optical Examiners; the Board of Examiners for Nurses; the National Advisory Health Council; the Alabang Vaccine and Serum Laboratories; the health departments of chartered cities; the national, provincial, city and municipal hospitals, dispensaries and clinics except the Philippine General Hospital; the public markets and slaughter-houses; hotels, restaurants, and other food establishments; and health resorts and similar establishments.”

Alabang Vaccine and Serum Laboratories Transferred to Department of Health

SECTION 126. The Alabang Vaccine and Serum Laboratories together with its functions, duties, personnel, records, documents, equipment, supplies and other property, and the Alabang Laboratories Revolving Fund are hereby transferred to the Office of the Secretary of Health. The Secretary of Health, the Commissioner of the Budget and the President of the University of the Philippines shall determine the personnel who should be transferred to the Office of the Secretary of Health in case they render services both to the University of the Philippines and the Alabang Vaccine and Serum Laboratories.

SECTION 127. Samples of biological products manufactured in the Alabang Vaccine and Serum Laboratories shall be submitted at least once a month to the Institute of Science for analysis to determine their purity and efficacy. Copies of the report showing the results of the analysis shall be furnished the Office of the President. Rules and regulations for the securing and submission of samples of biological products for analysis shall be issued jointly by the Department of Health and the Institute of Science.

Bureau of Health

SECTION 128. Section nine hundred thirty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 938. Functions of the Bureau of Health . — The Bureau of Health is charged with the protection of the health of the people of the Philippines and the maintenance of sanitary conditions therein. Its general powers and duties shall extend to and comprehend, among other things:

“(a) The detection and detention of persons suffering from dangerous communicable diseases and the making of provision for their isolation until they shall cease to be source of infection;

(b) The control over the sanitation of schoolhouses and school premises and over prisons, penal settlements, jails, and other places for the detention of arrested persons, convicts, or offenders of any sort;

“(c) The control and supervision of school medical service in private schools, colleges, and universities;

“(d) The effectuation and maintenance of internal quarantine in times of epidemic or threatened spread of any dangerous communicable diseases;

“(e) The inspection and investigation of the sanitary condition of coastwise passenger vessels;

“(f) The sanitary disposal of the dead and the control over the sanitation of cemeteries;

“(g) The effectuation, at regular intervals or from time to time as conditions may require, of systematic vaccination and inoculations of the people of the country by the use of virus, vaccines, sera, or other prophylactics;

“(h) The dissemination of hygienic information among the people and especially the inculcation of knowledge as to the proper care of infants and the methods of preventing and controlling dangerous communicable diseases;

“(i) The making, from time to time, of adequate inspections of all health organizations or offices primarily concerned with the prevention of diseases, taking account of their equipment and facilities and the character of their work; and

“(j) The making of an epidemiological study and/or investigation of preventable diseases, especially those of an epidemic or communicable character; and the collection of statistical data or other information relative to the sources of mortality in the Philippines and the effects of localities, employments, conditions, habits, foods, beverages, and medicines on the health of the people; and the chemical composition and medical properties of the minero-medicinal waters of the Philippines.”

Bureau of Hospitals

SECTION 129. There is hereby created a Bureau of Hospitals under the executive supervision and control of the Department of Health. The Bureau of Hospitals shall have one chief to be known as Director of Hospitals whose salary shall be seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum. The general powers and duties of the Bureau of Hospitals shall extend to and comprehend, among other things:

(a) The conduct and management of Government hospitals (except the Philippine General Hospital), leprosaria, and sanatoria;

(b) The control and supervision of all hospitals for dangerous communicable diseases;

(c) The control and supervision of maternity, mental, orthopedic, tuberculosis, and other special hospitals;

(d) The control and supervision of skin disease clinics, venereal disease clinics, and other medical units;

(e) The control and supervision of puericulture centers, charity clinics, and dispensaries; and

(f) The supervision of private hospitals.

Division of Hospitals Abolished

SECTION 130. The Division of Hospitals under the Bureau of Health is hereby abolished and all its powers, functions, activities, personnel, documents, records, equipment, property, and appropriations are transferred to the Bureau of Hospitals.

Division of Child and Maternal Health Transferred

SECTION 131. The powers, functions, activities, personnel, records, equipment, property, and appropriations of the Division of Child and Maternal Health under the Bureau of Health are hereby transferred to the Bureau of Hospitals.

Indigent Children’s Hospital Transferred

SECTION 132. The Indigent Children’s Hospital under the Bureau of Public Welfare, together with its personnel, records, equipment, property, powers, functions, activities, and appropriations are transferred to the Bureau of Hospitals.

Department of Commerce and Industry

SECTION 133. There is created the Department of Commerce and Industry which shall have charge of the regulation, control, promotion, and development of the commerce and industry of the country.

SECTION 134. The Department of Commerce and Industry shall have executive supervision over the Bureau of Commerce, excluding its function of supervising the organization and operation of provincial trading corporations; the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Weather Bureau, the Patent Office, the Civil Aeronautics Board, the Civil Aeronautics Administration, the Radio Control Division, the Manila Trading Center and Exchange, the Sugar Quota Office, the Radio Control Board, including the power of supervision and control over the establishment and operation of all radio stations (receiving, transmitting, or broadcasting) other than the Government radio station and those maintained by the Bureau of Posts. The Secretary of Commerce and Industry shall assume and exercise with respect to the Board of Examiners for Aeronautical Engineers such prerogatives, functions, and authority as are conferred upon Department Heads by the provisions of section ten of Act Numbered Four thousand seven, otherwise known as the Reorganization Law of 1932.

SECTION 135. All the personnel, powers, functions, activities, equipment, materials, records, and unexpended balances of funds or appropriations pertaining to the bureaus, offices, and services placed under the executive supervision of the Department of Commerce and Industry are hereby transferred thereto.

Civil Aeronautics Administration

Aviation Terms Defined

SECTION 136. The following definitions shall control in the application and construction of this Order and other laws in so far as they apply to the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Civil Aeronautics Administration, unless the context otherwise requires:

(a) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

(b) “Aeronautics” means the art or science of aerial flight, or the science that treats of the operation of aircraft.

(c) “Air commerce” shall be taken to mean and include the transportation, in whole or in part, by aircraft of persons, property, or mail; the navigation of aircraft in furtherance of a business; or the navigation of aircraft from one place to another in the conduct of a business.

(d) “Air transportation” means carriage of persons, property, or mail, in whole or in part by aircraft.

(e) “Domestic air transportation” and “foreign air transportation” respectively mean the carriage by aircraft of persons, property, or mail for hire, (1) between places within the limits of the territory of the Republic of the Philippines and (2) between a place in any part of the territory of the Philippines and any place outside thereof, whether such carriage is wholly by aircraft or partly by aircraft and partly by other means of transportation.

(f) “Aircraft” means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or designed for navigation of, or flight in, the air.

(g) “Aircraft engine” means a device used, or intended to be used, for propulsion of aircraft and includes all parts, appurtenances, and accessories thereof other than propellers.

(h) “Airman” means (1) any individual, such as the person in command, the pilot, mechanic, or any member of the crew, who engages or assists in the navigation or operation of aircraft while under way; (2) any individual who is directly in charge of or actually performs the inspection, maintenance, overhauling or repair of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, or appliances; and (3) any individual who serves in the capacity of aircraft dispatcher or air-traffic control operator.

(i) “Air navigation facility” shall include any airdrome, emergency landing field, light or other signal structure, radio directional finding facility, radio or other electrical communication facility, and any other structure or facility used as an aid to air navigation.

(j) “Airdrome” means an airport or a defined area, either on land or on water, including any building or installations thereon, normally used for the take-off and landing or alighting of aircraft, and which provides facilities for shelter, supply and repair of aircraft, or a place used regularly for receiving or discharging aircraft passengers or cargo.

(k) “Emergency landing field” means any locality, either on water or on land, which is adapted for taking-off and landing of aircraft located along an airway, and is intermediate to airports connected by the airways, but which is not equipped with facilities for shelter, supply, and repair of aircraft and is not used regularly for the receipt or discharge of passengers or cargo by air.

(l) “Airworthiness” means that condition in which an aircraft, its engines, propellers, and other components and accessories are of proper design and construction, and are safe for air navigation purposes, such design and construction being consistent with accepted engineering practice and in accordance with aerodynamic laws and aircraft science.

(m) “Airway” is a designated path in an air route identified by an area of specified width on the surface of the earth.

(n) “Appliances” means instruments, equipment, apparatus, parts, appurtenances, or accessories of whatever description which are used or are capable of being, or intended to be, used in the navigation, operation, or control of aircraft in flight (including parachutes and communication equipment and any other mechanism installed in or attached to aircraft during flight), and which are not a part or parts of aircraft, aircraft engines or propellers.

(o) The term “citizens of the Philippines” includes (a) those enumerated in Section one, Article six of the Constitution of the Philippines; (b) a partnership of which all the members are citizens as defined in the Constitution; (c) a corporation or association created or organized under the laws of the Philippines, of which the directing head and two-thirds or more of the members of the Board of Directors and other managing officers thereof, are citizens of the Philippines, and in which sixty-six and two-thirds per centum of the voting interest is owned or controlled by persons who are citizens of the Philippines.

(p) “Person” means and includes individuals, partnerships, joint enterprises, associations and/or corporations.

(q) “Foreign air carrier” means any person, not a citizen of the Philippines, who undertakes, whether directly or indirectly, or by lease or any other arrangements, to engage in foreign air transportation.

(r) “Mail” means Philippine mail and foreign-transit mail.

(s) “Navigation of aircraft” or “navigate aircraft” includes the piloting of aircraft.

(t) “Operation of aircraft” or “operate aircraft” means the use of aircraft for the purpose of air navigation and includes the navigation of aircraft. Any person who causes or authorizes the operation of aircraft, whether with or without the right of legal control (in the capacity of waiver, lessee, or otherwise) of aircraft, shall be deemed to be engaged in the operation of aircraft within the meaning of this Order.

(u) “Propeller” includes all parts, appurtenances, and accessories thereof.

Objectives of Civil Aeronautics Board and the Civil Aeronautics Administration

SECTION 137. In the exercise and performance of its powers and duties under this Executive Order, the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Civil Aeronautics Administration shall endeavor to attain, among others, the following objectives:

(a) The development and utilization of the air potential of the Philippines;

(b) The encouragement and development of an air transportation system properly adapted to the present and future needs of foreign and domestic commerce of the Philippines, of the postal service, and of the national defense;

(c) The regulation and control of air transportation in such manner as to insure the highest degree of safety, the fostering of sound economic condition and the coordination of air transportation;

(d) The promotion of adequate, economical, and efficient service by air carriers at reasonable charges, without unjust discriminations, undue preferences or advantages, or unfair or destructive competitive practices;

(e) Competition to the extent necessary to insure the sound development of an air transportation system properly adapted to the needs of the foreign and domestic commerce of the Philippines, of the postal service, and of the national defense;

(f) The encouragement and development of civil aeronautics.

Civil Aeronautics Board

SECTION 138. There is hereby created a Civil Aeronautics Board which shall be composed of the Secretary of Commerce and Industry, as Chairman, the Administrator of the Civil Aeronautics Administration, the Commander of the Philippine Air Force, and two other persons, as members, to be appointed by the President. They shall hold office at the pleasure of the President and shall be entitled to a per diem for each meeting actually attended at such amount as may be fixed by the President. During the absence or incapacity of the Secretary of Commerce, the Administrator shall act as Chairman. No member of the Board shall have any pecuniary interest or shall own any stock or bond in any civil aeronautics enterprise.

SECTION 139. The Chairman and at least two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum to transact business. A majority vote of the members constituting a quorum shall be necessary for a valid and enforceable decision or order of the Board.

SECTION 140. No person shall engage in air commerce nor shall any person be licensed as an airman unless he is a citizen of the Philippines: Provided, however , That the Civil Aeronautics Board may, for a period not exceeding ten years, authorize the grant of an air commerce permit or issue licenses for airmen to aliens whose country grants the same right and privilege to Filipino citizens, all laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

SECTION 141. The Board shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) To promulgate rules and regulations governing the issuance, denial, amendment, suspension, or revocation of any permit or certificate authorizing a foreign air carrier to engage in air transportation between the Philippines and foreign countries.

(b) To promulgate rules and regulations particularly relating to the economic aspects of air transportation, including the following specific powers and duties:

(1) To issue, deny, transfer, amend, alter, modify, cancel, suspend, or revoke any permit or the terms, conditions, and limitations contained therein, authorizing a person who is a citizen of the Philippines to engage in air commerce within or between the Philippines and another country;

(2) To require the submission of periodic and special reports by any person engaged in air commerce in such manner and form as the Board may prescribe; to require any person engaged in air commerce to file with the Board a true copy of each and every contract, agreement, understanding, or arrangement pertaining to air commerce transactions, between such person and any other person engaged in air commerce; to prescribe the forms of any and all accounts, records, and memoranda to be kept by persons engaged in air commerce including the accounts, records, and memoranda of the movements of the traffic, as well as the receipts and expenditures of money; and to transmit a report describing the shares of stock or other interest held by such persons engaged in air commerce with any person engaged in air commerce in any phase of aeronautics, and the holding of the stock in, and control of, other persons engaged in any phase of aeronautics;

(3) To inquire into the management of the business of any person in air commerce and, to the extent reasonably necessary for such inquiry, to obtain from such person engaged in air commerce, and from any person controlling or controlled by, or under common control with, such person engaged in air commerce, full and complete reports and other information;

(4) To approve or disapprove consolidation, merger, purchase, lease, operating contract or acquisition of control between persons engaged in air commerce; and

(5) To investigate, upon complaint or upon its own initiative, whether or not any individual or person engaged in air commerce is violating any of the provision of this Order, or the rules and regulations issued thereunder, and to take such action, consistent with the provisions of this Executive Order, as may be necessary to prevent further violation of such provision, rules and regulations.

(c) To review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal any administrative decision or order of the Administrator on matters pertaining to the —

(1) Grounding of airmen and aircraft;

(2) Revocation or suspension of any certificate or the denial by the Administrator to issue any certificate.

(d) To perform such acts, conduct such investigations, issue and amend such orders, and make and amend such general or special rules, regulations, and procedures, as it shall deem necessary in the exercise and performance of its powers and duties under this Executive Order.

SECTION 142. The Board shall submit an annual report to the President which shall contain such information and data collected by the Board which may be of value in the determination of questions connected with the development of civil aeronautics, together with such recommendation for additional legislation relating thereto as the Board may deem necessary.

Civil Aeronautics Administration; Administrator and Deputy Administrator

SECTION 143. There is hereby created the Civil Aeronautics Administration under the administrative supervision and control of the Department of Commerce and Industry. The Administration shall have one chief and one assistant chief to be designated Administrator and Deputy Administrator, respectively. The Administrator and the Deputy Administrator shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines, with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of the Congress. Until otherwise provided by law, the Administrator and the Deputy Administrator shall receive an annual compensation of seven thousand two hundred pesos and six thousand pesos per annum, respectively. The Administrator shall be the administrative head of the Civil Aeronautics Administration and shall have charge of the administration of all laws relating to civil aeronautics in the Philippines. He shall submit to the Secretary of Commerce and Industry a report in writing of the activities and transactions of his Office, annually or oftener as may be required. During the absence of the Administrator, the Deputy Administrator shall act as, and perform the duties of, the Administrator, in addition to his own duties.

Qualifications of Deputy Administrator

SECTION 144. No person shall be appointed Deputy Administrator unless he be a citizen of the Philippines and possesses at least one of the following qualifications:

(a) He must meet the qualifications and requirements prescribed for a pilot to hold an airline transport license or its equivalent;

(b) He must meet the qualifications of a command pilot of the Philippine Air Force; or

(c) He must have at least ten years’ experience in aeronautical engineering or in the operational phase of civil aviation or its equivalent.

Powers and Duties of Civil Aeronautics Administration

SECTION 145. Subject to the general control and supervision of the Secretary of Commerce and Industry, the Civil Aeronautics Administration is empowered:

(a) To promote safety of flight in air commerce by prescribing and revising from time to time:

(1) Minimum standards governing the design, materials, workmanship, construction, and performance of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, and appliances;

(2) Rules and regulations and minimum standards governing:

(aa) the inspection, servicing, and overhauling of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, and appliances;

(bb) the equipment and facilities for such inspection, servicing, and overhauling;

(cc) the periods for, and the manner in, which inspection, servicing, and overhauling shall be made including provision for examinations and reports by properly qualified private persons whose examinations or reports the Administrator may accept in lieu of those made by its officers and employees.

(3) Rules and regulations governing the reserve supply of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, appliances, and aircraft fuel and oil, required in the interest of safety, including the reserve supply of aircraft fuel and oil which shall be carried in flight;

(4) Rules and regulations governing the maximum hours or periods of service of airmen and other employees of air carriers;

(5) Such rules and regulations, or minimum standards, governing other practices, methods, and procedures, as the Administrator may find necessary; and

(6) Air traffic rules governing the flight, navigation, protection, and identification of aircraft, including rules as to safe altitudes of flight, the prevention of collisions between aircrafts, and between aircraft and land or water vehicles;

(b) To promulgate rules and regulations governing the minimum standards, examination, and rating of:

(1) Airmen;

(2) Airworthiness of aircraft;

(3) Air navigation facilities for use by aircraft;

(4) Civilian schools giving instruction in flying or in the repair, alteration, maintenance, and overhauling of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, and appliances, as to the adequacy of the course of instruction, the suitability and airworthiness of the equipment and the competency of the instructors;

(5) Repair stations or shops for the repair, alteration, maintenance, and overhauling of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, or appliances, as to the adequacy and suitability of the equipment, facilities and materials for, and methods of, repair, alteration, maintenance, and overhauling of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, and appliances, and the competency of those engaged in the work of giving any instruction therein; and

(6) Such other air agencies as may be necessary in the interest of the public;

and to issue the corresponding certificates, specifying and prescribing such terms, conditions and limitations as are necessary for public interest and safety: Provided , That any order suspending, cancelling, or revoking any such certificate, or denying the issuance of any certificate, by the Administrator may be appealed to the Civil Aeronautics Board whose decision shall be final.

(c) To promulgate rules and regulations governing the registration and recording of aircrafts;

(d) To collect and disseminate information relative to civil aeronautics; to study the possibilities of the development of air commerce and the aeronautical industry; to exchange with foreign governments, through appropriate governmental channels, information pertaining to civil aeronautics; to make arrangements and provide direct correspondence, transmittal and communication of matters relating to the technical and operational phase of aeronautics with the International Civil Aviation Organization and other international aeronautical agencies;

(e) Within the limits of available appropriation, to plan, acquire, design, construct, operate, improve, and manage all necessary airdromes, airways, and air navigation facilities;

(f) To impose and fix, as authorized in Republic Act Numbered One hundred twenty-five, and subject to the approval of the Civil Aeronautics Board, such reasonable charges and fees for the use of government air navigation facilities, and for services rendered by it in the rating of any air navigation facility;

(g) To promulgate rules and regulations governing notification and report of accidents in civil air navigation in the Philippines; to investigate such accidents involving aircraft including the facts, conditions, and attending circumstances relating to each accident and the probable cause thereof, and to submit a report to the Civil Aeronautics Board and such recommendation as will tend to prevent similar accidents in the future: Provided, That, when any accident has resulted in serious or fatal injury, it shall be the duty of the Civil Aeronautics Board to make public such report: Provided, further , That any such statement or any report of such investigation or hearing or any part thereof shall not be admitted as evidence or used for any purpose in any civil suit or action growing out of any matter referred to in any such statement, investigation, hearing or report thereof.

SECTION 146. The provisions of Chapter Five, Sections seven and eight of Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred sixty-eight, as amended, and the provisions of Chapter Four of Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred forty-six are herein incorporated: Provided , That charging a fare lower than the minimum rate fixed by competent authority shall be a cause for the revocation or suspension of any permit to engage in air commerce: Provided, further , That violation of any of the provisions of this Executive Order for which no penalty is imposed shall be a cause for the revocation or suspension of any permit to engage in air commerce or any certificate issued under this Order.

SECTION 147. In enforcing the provisions of this Order, the Civil Aeronautics Board, or the Administrator, or any officer of the said Board, or the Civil Aeronautics Administration, designated by it or by the Administrator in writing for such purpose is authorized and empowered to hold public hearings at such places and time as is convenient and practicable, and for the purpose of such hearings, such officer is hereby authorized to administer oaths, examine witnesses, require the preservation of evidence, and issue subpoena for the attendance and examination of witnesses, or the production of books, papers, documents, exhibits or other evidence, or the taking of depositions before any designated individual competent to administer oaths.

Exemptions

SECTION 148. (a) The conditions and requirements of this Order and the rules and regulations issued thereunder shall not apply to aircraft and airmen of the armed forces of the Philippines and of the United States of America.

(b) Foreign aircraft and airmen serving in connection therewith may, except with respect to the observance by such airmen of the air traffic rules, be exempted from the provisions of Section 140 of this Order to the extent, and upon such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed by the Civil Aeronautics Board and/or the Civil Aeronautics Administration as being in the interest of the public.

Civil Aeronautics Commission Abolished and Its Functions Transferred to Civil Aeronautics Board

SECTION 149. The Civil Aeronautics Commission created in Administrative Order Numbered Seven, dated July thirtieth, nineteen hundred and forty-six, as amended by Administrative Order Numbered Twenty-eight, dated March fifth, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, is hereby abolished and its functions and duties are transferred to the Civil Aeronautics Board herein created. The functions of the Bureau of Aeronautics as provided for in Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred sixty-eight, as amended, except the functions provided in subsection (b), section six of the said Act, the functions provided in section thirteen of Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred forty-six pertaining to the power of the Public Service Commission to fix the maximum passenger and freight rates that may be charged by airlines, the functions provided in Republic Act Numbered One hundred twenty-five are hereby transferred to and consolidated in the Civil Aeronautics Administration and/or Civil Aeronautics Board.

Bureau of Aeronautics Abolished

SECTION 150. The Bureau of Aeronautics is hereby abolished and all its personnel, records, property, equipment, funds, and appropriations are hereby transferred to the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

Radio Control Division Transferred

SECTION 151. The Radio Control Division now under the Department of National Defense, together with all its personnel, powers, functions, activities, records, equipment, and unexpended balances of funds or appropriations, is hereby transferred to the Department of Commerce and Industry.

Radio Activities Consolidated in Radio Control Board

SECTION 152. The Radio Board and the Radio Permit Committee, at present under the Office of the President, and the Radio Broadcasting Committee under the Department of National Defense are hereby abolished and all their personnel, functions, powers, activities, and unexpended balances of funds or appropriations are transferred to, and shall be assumed by, a board to be known as the Radio Control Board under the executive supervision of the Department of Commerce and Industry. The Radio Control Board shall be composed of the Undersecretary of Commerce and Industry, as Chairman, and the Press Secretary of the Office of the President, the Collector of Internal Revenue, the Director of Public Schools, and the Director of Posts, as members. The President may appoint additional members if the needs of the service require. The Chief of the Radio Control Division of the Department of Commerce and Industry shall be the Secretary of the Radio Control Board.

Sugar Quota Office

SECTION 153. The Philippine Sugar Administration under the Office of the President is hereby renamed “Sugar Quota Office” and transferred to the Department of Commerce and Industry together with its personnel, records, documents, supplies, equipment and appropriations. The Sugar Quota Office shall have a chief to be known as Sugar Quota Administrator whose salary, until otherwise fixed by law, shall be seven thousand two hundred pesos per annum.

SECTION 154. The Sugar Quota Office shall assume the functions, powers, and duties heretofore exercised by the Philippine Sugar Administration.

Division of Standards

SECTION 155. There is hereby created in the Bureau of Commerce a Division of Standards which shall have charge of inspection, classification, grading, standardization and licensing for export of copra and other agricultural products, as well as industrial, mineral, fish and all other exportable products of the Philippines, subject to such rules and regulations as the Secretary of Commerce and Industry may promulgate with the approval of the President.

Standardization of Products

SECTION 156. The Director of Commerce, through the Division of Standards, shall initiate the fixing and, upon approval of the President, the establishment of the grade, quality, and other standards for all agricultural, forest, mineral, fish, and industrial products of the Philippines (except sugar, abaca and other fibers, and tobacco) for which no standard has as yet been fixed by law, executive order, rules or regulations. The Institute of Science and other branches of the Government having the facilities for the purpose shall render the necessary assistance for the establishment of said standards. Chemical analyses, physical and biological tests necessary for the examination or standardization of products under the provisions of this Order shall be undertaken in the laboratories of the Institute of Science, except when there are other facilities available elsewhere.

Export of Philippine Products

SECTION 157. No product of the Philippines for which a standard has been prescribed in accordance with this Order, unless it is only in small quantity or is not for sale but for private consumption, shall be exported until it shall have been inspected by the Director of Commerce or his duly authorized representative and found to conform to the standards set for export. It shall be the duty and responsibility of all collectors of customs to enforce the prohibition on the exportation of any Philippine product herein imposed.

University of the Philippines

Philippine General Hospital Transferred to the University of the Philippines

SECTION 158. The Philippine General Hospital is hereby transferred from the Office of the President to the University of the Philippines, together with its personnel, powers, functions, duties, records, equipment, supplies and unexpended balances of appropriations. The appropriations for the Philippine General Hospital shall continue to be itemized in the annual general appropriation acts.

Reallotment of Funds

SECTION 159. From the total authorized appropriation of P226,356,306 consisting of —

the following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary, are reallotted for the operation of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines during the period from July first, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and forty-eight except where otherwise specifically provided:

A. — CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES

(Not Reorganized)

(1) Senate

I. — Salaries and Wages

Office of the President

Office of the President Pro-Tempore

Office of the Chairman of the Committee on Rules

(Floor Leader)

Office of the Minority Floor Leader

Office of the Chairman, Committee on Finance

Office of the Chairman, Committee on Accounts

Office of the Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations

Office of the Commission on Appointments

Office of the Electoral Tribunal

Office of the Secretary

Press Relations Office

Office of the Assistant Secretary and Chief Clerk

Bill Division

Journal Division

Committee Personnel Section

Minutes Division

Records and Mailing Division

Mailing Section

Disbursement and Property Division

Property Section

Accounting Division

Legislative and Reference Division

Clipping and Information Section

Office of the Sergeant-at-Arms

General Service

Miscellaneous

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. Any unexpended balance of the funds appropriated for the Senate may be used to cover a deficit in any item of the appropriation for the said Senate, including prior years’ expenses.

2. The appropriations in items 4, 6, 7 and 9, under “Sundry Expenses,” and that for “Furniture and Equipment” may be expended, respectively, for postage on correspondence and telegram fees for Senators, including freight, express and delivery service; for supplies and materials; for printing and binding reports, documents and publications; for subscriptions to newspapers; and for equipment for their use which shall be considered expended upon issue thereof to them, the total amount not to exceed one thousand pesos (P1,000) per annum for each Senator.

3. Any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the President of the Senate is authorized to suspend or otherwise stop the expenditure of any amount appropriated for the Senate for any purpose, or any portion thereof, whenever in his judgment the public interest so requires, and thereupon the funds affected by such action shall become available for any other expenditures authorized in this Order for the Senate as the President of the Senate may determine.

4. Any member of the Senate may assign his salary for a period not exceeding one year at a time to any banking or loan institution doing business in the Philippines, including the compensation to his family in the event of death, and upon his assignment being duly registered with the chief of the accounting division of the Senate, such officer shall issue treasury warrants from time to time as the salary or death compensation falls due directly in favor of the creditor banking or loan institution.

(2) House of Representatives

I. — Salaries and Wages

Speaker

Members

Secretary

Sergeant-at-Arms

Office of the Speaker

Press Relations Office

(Speaker’s Office)

Office of the Speaker Pro-Tempore

Office of the Majority Floor Leader

Office of the Minority Floor Leader

Office of the Electoral Tribunal

Office of the Committee on Appropriations

Office of the Secretary

Office of the Sergeant-at-Arms

Legislative Reference Division

Office of the Chief Clerk

Mailing Section

Accounting Division

Journal Division

Publication Section

Bills and Index Division

Translating Division

Records Division

Property Division

Committee Stenographers Division

Disbursement Division

Personnel of the Building

Miscellaneous

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. Any unexpended balance of the funds appropriated for the House of Representatives may be used to cover a deficit in any item of the appropriation for the said House and losses of the equipment through accident, fire or other calamity, including prior year’s expenses and losses.

2. Any Member of the House of Representatives may assign his salary for a period not exceeding one year at a time to any banking or loan institution doing business in the Philippines, including the compensation to his family in the event of death, and upon his assignment being duly registered with the chief of the accounting division of the House of Representatives, such officer shall issue treasury warrants from time to time as the salary or death compensation falls due directly in favor of the creditor banking or loan institution.

3. The Secretary of the House of Representatives shall receive the compensation herein fixed, the provisions of existing law notwithstanding.

4. The appropriations in items 3, 5, 6 and 10, under “Sundry Expenses,” and that for “Furniture and Equipment” may be expended, respectively, for postage on correspondence and telegram fees of the Members, including freight expenses and delivery service; for supplies and materials; for printing and binding reports, documents and publications; for subscription to periodicals; and for equipment including radio sets for their use which shall be considered expended upon issue thereof to them, the total amount not to exceed one thousand pesos (P1,000) per annum for each Member.

5. The Speaker of the House of Representatives is hereby authorized, within the limits of the appropriations authorized in this Order for the House of Representatives, to transfer items of appropriations, to abolish or consolidate items or positions, and to create new items or positions, as may be necessary to effect simplification, economy and efficiency in the service.

B. — OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

I. — Salaries and Wages

The President’s Private Offices

(a) Private Secretaries

(b) Aides-de-Camp of the President

(c) Provost Office

(d) Malacañan Household

(1) Executive Office

Administrative Division

Malacañan Clinic

Finance Division

Requisition Control Section

Accounting Section

Law Division

General Affairs Division

Library

Protocol Division

Buildings and Grounds Division

Records Division

(a) Bureau of the Census and Statistics

Office of the Director

Records and General Service Section

Tabulation Section

Accounting Section

Property and Disbursement Section

Division of Demography

Division of Agricultural Statistics

Division of Labor Statistics

Division of Business Statistics

Division of Foreign Trade Statistics

(b) Bureau of Printing

Layout Division

Composing Division

Proof Section

Press Division

Bindery Division

Photo-Engraving Division

Foundry and Delivery Division

Power Plant Division

Administrative Division

Stores Section

Building and Transportation Section

Accounting Division

(c) Institute of Science

Administrative Division

Property Section

Accounting Section

Records Section

Personnel and General Service Section

Division of Tests and Standards

Division of Chemical Research

Division of Industrial Technology

Division of Biological Research

Division of Engineering Research

Division of Food Technology

Scientific Library Division

Miscellaneous

(d) National Museum

(e) Social Welfare Commission

Office of the Commissioner

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Division of Child Welfare

Section of Institutions

(All with subsistence and quarters)

Division of Public Assistance

(f) National Urban Planning Commission

(2) Budget Commission

Administrative Division

Records Section

Budget Division

Service Inspection Division

Accounts and Expense Control Division

Expense Control Service

Accounting Supervisory Service

Fiscal Records

Accounting Section

(3) Bureau of Civil Service

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Examining Division

Investigation and Law Division

Personnel Classification and Appointments Division

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special and General Purposes

Salary

Sundry Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Office of the Secretary and Executive Officer

Administrative Division

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expense

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

(All with subsistence and quarters)

Accounting Section

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. Any deficit in the appropriations for the Office of the President of the Philippines may be covered from any unexpended balance of any other appropriation provided in this Order for the Executive Departments, but the total amount to be used for covering such deficits during the year shall not exceed P500,000.

2. The President is hereby authorized to grant furnished or unfurnished quarters in kind in any government or rented building under the jurisdiction of the Office of the President to the superintendent of the Malacañan buildings and grounds and to any employee of the Malacañan Household whom he may require to live in said building for the better performance of his duties. Likewise, the Executive Secretary is hereby authorized to grant, free of charge, quarters in kind in government-owned buildings to clerks and other employees assigned to dormitory duty, hospitals, training schools and other similar institutions in isolated places operated by the Social Welfare Commission.

C. — OFFICE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT

I. — Salaries and Wages

D. — DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

I. — Salaries and Wages

Office of the Secretary

Office of the Undersecretary

Board of Foreign Affairs Service

Personnel, Examinations and Review

Division of Protocol

Office of Political and Economic Affairs

Division of American Affairs

Division of European and African Affairs

Division of Asian and Pacific Affairs

Division of United Nations Affairs and International Conferences

Division of International Information and Cultural Activities

Division of Commercial and Monetary Policy and Trade Promotion

Office of Legal Affairs, Treaties, Intelligence and Research

Office of Administration, Budget and Controls

Division of Visas, Passports and Immigration

Division of Invoice, Shipping and Miscellaneous Services

Division of Administration and Personnel

Division of Communications, Cryptography, Files and Records

Division of Accounts

Accounting Section

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

(a) Philippine Embassy, Washington, D.C.

The Ambassador

Diplomatic Staff

Attaches and Advisers

Technical and Clerical Personnel

Miscellaneous and Emergency Employees

(b) Office of the Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Philippines to the United Nations

The Permanent Representative

Attaches and Advisers

Technical and Clerical Personnel Office in New York

Office in Washington

(Far Eastern Commission)

Miscellaneous and Emergency Employees

(c) Philippine Consulate General, New York City

Consular Staff

Technical and Clerical Personnel

Miscellaneous and Emergency Employees

(d) Philippine Consulate General, San Francisco

(With Vice Consulate in Los Angeles)

Consular Staff

Technical and Clerical Personnel

Miscellaneous and Emergency Employees

(e) Philippine Consulate General, Honolulu, Hawaii

Consular Staff

Technical and Clerical Personnel

Miscellaneous and Emergency Employees

(f) Philippine Consulate in Amoy, China

Consular Staff

Technical and Clerical Personnel

Miscellaneous and Emergency Employees

(g) Philippine Consulate in Hongkong

Consular Staff

Technical and Clerical Personnel

Miscellaneous and Emergency Employees

(h) Other Diplomatic and Consular Establishments

(i) Miscellaneous

(j) Sundry and Other Expenses

Diplomatic Posts

Consulates

(k) Furniture and Equipment

Summary

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs is hereby authorized to grant furnished or unfurnished quarters in any government or rented buildings in foreign countries under the jurisdiction of the Department of Foreign Affairs to the watchmen, caretakers and other officers or employees whom he may require to live in said buildings in foreign countries for the better performance of their duties.

2. Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, all officials, officers and employees whose salaries are payable from any appropriation for the operation and maintenance of the Foreign Service of the Republic of the Philippines shall be considered as personnel-at-large and are subject to assignment anywhere as may be directed by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs. Whenever any one thereof is assigned for duty to any permanent diplomatic mission or consular establishment, he and the members of his family, including dependent children below twenty-one years of age, shall be entitled at government expense to transportation, per diems and other necessary expenses incident to the travel for the purpose of assuming his duties at the place of assignment under such regulations as the Secretary of Foreign Affairs may prescribe: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That in no case shall the privilege be extended to members of families of officials, officers and employees who are not citizens of the Republic of the Philippines.

3. Any provisions of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the appropriations herein authorized for the operation and maintenance of the Foreign Service of the Republic of the Philippines, or so much thereof as may be necessary, is hereby authorized to cover expenditures in connection with the operation and maintenance of automobiles and other vehicles for the official use of foreign affairs officers whenever on duty in any foreign service establishment.

4. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs is hereby authorized to transfer, detail and assign foreign affairs officers without augmentation or decrease of salaries, in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order No. 18, dated September 16, 1946.

E. — DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Cash, Property and Service Section

Custodian Force

Records Section

Law Division

Provincial Division

Public Order Division

Board of Review for Moving Pictures

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

(2) Philippine Constabulary

Purpose I. — Personnel

A. Commissioned Officers

B. Regular Force — Enlisted Men

C. Civilian Employees

Commanding General

Office of the Chief of Staff

Office of the Adjutant General

G-1 Personnel

Accounting Division

Auditing Service

G-2 Intelligence

G-3 Operations, Organization and Training

G-4 Supply, Transportation and Finance

Supply Service Group

Finance Section

Ordnance Section

Engineer Section

Firearms, Games and Explosives Division

Medical

Office of the Inspector General

Judge Advocate General’s Office

Library

Signal

Headquarters Commandant

D. Gratuities and Contributions to the Government Service Insurance System

Purpose II — Maintenance of Personnel

Purpose III. — Transportation

Purpose IV. — Armament, Equipment and Supplies

A. Armament and Equipment

B. Supplies

Purpose V. — Miscellaneous Expenses

Summary

Special Provisions

127. The President shall have authority to transfer, at quarterly intervals during the fiscal year 1948, from Purpose I or II of the Philippine Constabulary to other Purposes as titled in this Order, such portions of unexpended balances of the appropriations authorized thereunder as may be necessary in order to assure balanced development of the Philippine Constabulary during that year, any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding.

128. The President shall have authority to transfer and expend not to exceed fifty per centum of the amount appropriated for any item in any purpose of the appropriations for the Philippine Constabulary to any other item or items in the same or any other purpose.

129. Officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Constabulary who may be transferred by competent authority from one station to another shall be allowed to have transported at government expense personally-owned possessions, household effects and baggage not to exceed such allowance as may be fixed by the President for the several grades.

130. Expenses of the Philippine Constabulary for unforeseen contingencies which cannot be paid for lack of appropriation in other purposes may be paid for from Purpose V.

131. The Secretary of the Interior is authorized with the approval of the President of the Philippines to use any savings in the appropriations authorized in this Order for the Philippine Constabulary for the payment of claims under section 699 of the Revised Administrative Code and section 91-a of the National Defense Act, whichever is applicable, to the heir or heirs of deceased officers and enlisted men of the former Philippine Constabulary, and of deceased trainees or reservists in active service or enlisted reserves, who died as a result of the war or in connection with their guerrilla activities during enemy occupation or while in active duty with the former Philippine Army and/or USAFFE.

132. Officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Constabulary detailed on duty with the Surplus Property Commission shall not during such detail receive pay, allowances, subsistence or other emoluments from the Philippine Constabulary but from the Surplus Property Commission: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That the savings thus realized shall not be available for expenditure for any purpose.

133. Officers, enlisted men and other personnel of the Philippine Constabulary who may not have received the three months advance pay (bonus) at the outbreak of the war and who have not received said advance pay under the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Six hundred and Twenty-six, shall be paid the same from the savings in the appropriations for the Philippine Army for the fiscal year 1947 or from the savings in the appropriations for the Philippine Constabulary for the fiscal year 1948.

Summary

F. — DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE

1. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

National Finance Division

Accounting Section

Division of Provincial and Municipal Finance

Assessment and Taxation Section

Financial Section

Personnel Section

Administrative Division

Records Section

Treasury Agents

Supplementary Force

(2) Bureau of Customs

Office of the Commissioner

Board of Marine Inquiry

Administrative Division

Property Section

Accounting Division

Hull and Boiler Division

Customs Patrol Service

Secret Service Unit

Harbor Police Unit

Arrastre Service Personnel

Manila Customhouse

Cash Division

Appraisers Division

Liquidation Division

Marine Division

Division of Protests and Appeals

Office of the Surveyor of the Port

Customs Launch Service

Piers and Inspectors Section

Cebu Customhouse

Launch Service

Iloilo Customhouse

Launch Service

Jolo Customhouse

Launch Service

Zamboanga Customhouse

Legaspi Customhouse

Davao Customhouse

Launch Service

Jose Panganiban Customhouse

Launch Service

Aparri Customhouse

Tacloban Customhouse

Supplementary Force

Allowances

(3) Bureau of Internal Revenue

Administrative Division

Cash Section

General Service Section

Property Section

Records Section

Law Division

Accounting and Statistical Division

Expense Accounts Section

General Section

Forestry Section

Alcohol Section

Tobacco Section

Correspondence Section

Checking of Reports Section

Revenue Accounts Section

Filing Section

Income Tax Division

Index and Assessment Section

Audits and Liquidating Section

Examiners

Assistant Examiners

Examiners of Accounts in Foreign Languages

Inspection Division

Supervising Agents

Provincial Revenue Agents

Agents

Assistant Agents

Drug Inspectors

Forest Products Inspectors

Examiners of Accounts in Foreign Languages

Clerical Force

Storekeepers

Helpers

Secret Service Division

Investigators

Treasury Agents

Miscellaneous Tax Division

Estate, Inheritance and Gift Tax Section

Mining and Amusement Tax Section

(4) Bureau of the Treasury

Cash Division

Teller’s Group

Treasury Warrants and Bookkeeping Section

Administrative and Public Debt Division

Personnel and Correspondence Section

Disbursing and Property Section

Public Debt Section

Treasury Guards Section

Allowance

Accounting Division

(5) Bureau of Banking

Inspection Division

Insurance Section

Benevolent Societies and Charitable Trusts Section

Division of Examination

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

(6) Procurement Office

Buying Division

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Division of Supplies

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

Other Expenses

(Philippine Mint)

(Money Counters’ Group)

Salaries and Wages

Project No. 1

(Bureau of Internal Revenue)

Project No. 2

(Bureau of Plant Industry)

Salaries and Wages

Administrative

Accounting Service

Collection

(Radio Registration Service)

(Radio Set Inspection)

V. — Summary

G. — DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Law Division

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Cash and Property Division

Records Division

Janitor Service

(a) Office of Pardons and Parole

Administrative Division

Investigation Division

Supervision Division

Technical Division

(2) Office of the Solicitor General

Solicitors

Provincial Fiscals Supervision Division

Administrative Division

Stenographers Section

Records Section

Accounting Section

Docket Division

(3) Courts of First Instance

First Judicial District

Cagayan

Batanes

Second Judicial District

Isabela

Nueva Vizcaya

Third Judicial District

Ilocos Norte

Ilocos Sur

Abra

Fourth Judicial District

La Union

Mountain Province (Benguet)

Mountain Province (Bontoc)

Fifth Judicial District

Pangasinan

Zambales

Sixth Judicial District

Tarlac

Nueva Ecija

Seventh Judicial District

Pampanga

Bataan

Bulacan

Eighth Judicial District

Cavite

Palawan

Cuyo

Ninth Judicial District

Tenth Judicial District

Rizal

Eleventh Judicial District

Laguna

Twelfth Judicial District

Batangas

Mindoro

Marinduque

Romblon

Thirteenth Judicial District

Quezon

Fourteenth Judicial District

Camarines Sur

Camarines Norte

Fifteenth Judicial District

Albay

Catanduanes

Sorsogon

Masbate

Sixteenth Judicial District

Capiz

Seventeenth Judicial District

Iloilo

Antique

Eighteenth Judicial District

Occidental Negros

Nineteenth Judicial District

Oriental Negros and Siquijor

Twentieth Judicial District

Samar (Catbalogan)

Samar (Borongan)

Twenty-First Judicial District

Leyte (Tacloban)

Leyte (Maasin)

Twenty-Second Judicial District

Cebu

Twenty-Third Judicial District

Bohol

Twenty-Fourth Judicial District

Surigao

Agusan

Oriental Misamis

Occidental Misamis

Lanao

Bukidnon

Twenty-Fifth Judicial District

Zamboanga

Zamboanga (Dipolog)

Sulu

Twenty-Sixth Judicial District

Davao

Cotabato

Judges-at-Large

Cadastral Judges

Stenographers-at-Large

Interpreters-at-Large

(4) Justice of the Peace Courts

Justices of the Peace

(5) Public Service Commission

Office of the Commissioner

Legal Division

Office of the Secretary

Records Section

Stenographers Section

Docket Section

Accounting Section

Transportation Division

Inspectors and Agents Section

Industrial Division

Office of the Assistant to the Commissioner

(6) Bureau of Prisons

(All with quarters in kind and prisoners’ service)

Administrative Division

Personnel Section

Documents Section

Identification Section

Classification Section

Records Section

Accounting Section

Cash and Property Division

Property Section

Commissary Section

Cash Section

Medical Division

New Bilibid Prison

Educational Section

Medical Section

Utilities Section

Correctional Institution for Women

Iwahig Penal Colony

San Ramon Prison and Penal Farm

Davao Penal Colony

Miscellaneous

(7) General Land Registration Office

Administrative Division

General Service Section

Personnel Section

Records Section

Cash Section

Accounting Section

Typewriting and Checking Section

Registry of Deeds

Abra

Agusan

Albay

Antique

Baguio and Benguet

Bataan

Batanes

Batangas

Bohol

Bukidnon

Bulacan

Cagayan

Camarines Norte

Camarines Sur

Capiz

Catanduanes

Cavite

(City and Province)

Cebu

(City and Province)

Cotabato

Davao

(City and Province)

Ilocos Norte

Ilocos Sur

Iloilo

Isabela

Laguna

Lanao

La Union

Leyte

Marinduque

Masbate

Mindoro

Misamis Occidental

Misamis Oriental

Mountain Province

Negros Occidental and Bacolod City

Negros Oriental

Nueva Ecija

Nueva Vizcaya

Palawan

Pampanga

Pangasinan

Quezon City

Quezon Province

Rizal

Romblon

Samar

San Pablo City

Sorsogon

Sulu

Surigao

Tagaytay City

Tarlac

Zambales

Zamboanga

Zamboanga City

Cadastral Personnel

Land Titles Division

Plan Examination Section

Drafting Section

Subdivision Plan Section

Publication Section

Ordinary Decree Section

Cadastral Decree Section

Judicial Division

Docket Division

Documents Section

Vault Section

Miscellaneous Section

Property Division

(8) Court of Industrial Relations

Office of the Judges

Law Division

Office of the Clerk of Court

Administrative Section

Finance Section

Accounting Section

Stenographers’ Section

Examining Division

(9) National Bureau of Investigation

Office of the Director

Investigation Division

Administrative Division

Statistics and Records Section

Stenographers’ and Typists’ Pool

Craft, Janitorial and Vigilance Section

Cash and Property Section

Photographers’ Pool

Accounting Section

Medico-Legal Division

Forensic Chemistry Division

Identification Division

Division of Questioned Documents and Ballistics

Anti-Usury Division

Administrative Section

Legal Section

Enforcement Section

(10) Bureau of Immigration

Office of the Commissioner

Board of Special Inquiry

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Cash and Property Section

Records Section

Bond Section

Cebu Immigration Station

Davao Immigration Station

Iloilo Immigration Station

Zamboanga Immigration Station

Aparri Immigration Station

Vigan Immigration Station

Legaspi Immigration Station

Tacloban Immigration Station

Puerto Princesa Immigration Station

Cotabato Immigration Station

Jolo Immigration Station

Mobile Unit

Immigration Division

Boarding, Investigation and Deportation Service

Certificate and Registration Service

Detention Service

Medical Service

Fingerprint Section

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

(All with quarters in kind and prisoners’ service)

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Judges

Office of the Clerk of Court and Administrative Officer

Accounting Section

Cash and Property Division

First Division

Second Division

Third Division

Fourth Division

Fifth Division

Service Division

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Special Prosecutors

Legal Research Division

Investigation Division

Administrative Division

Records and Docket Section

Stenographers Section

Transportation Section

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Legal Staff

Claims Section

Administrative and Records Section

Accounting Section

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Alien Registration Division

Manila Registration Station

Mobile Unit

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

(All with quarters in kind and prisoners’ service)

Cost Section

Sales Section

Purchase and Supply Section

Machine and Vehicle Repair Shop — Section A

Hardwood Furniture Shop — Section B

Maintenance and Repair Shop — Section C

Rattan and Bamboo Furniture Shop — Section D

Tailor Shop — Section F

Laundry Shop — Section G

Salvage Warehouse

Accounting Section

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. With the approval of the Secretary of Justice, any unexpended balance of any appropriation of the Department of Justice may be used to cover a deficit in the appropriation for postage stamps for mailing notices of land registration cases and for publication of such notices in the Official Gazette.

2. When a province or chartered city, by reason of financial stress, is forced to declare a general reduction of the salaries of its officials and employees, the difference between the salary authorized by law for the provincial or city fiscal and the amount made available therefor by virtue of said reduction may, with the approval of the President of the Philippines, be paid from the savings of the appropriations for the Department of Justice herein provided, any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding.

3. When the position of provincial sheriff is, or becomes, vacant in any province, the clerk of court shall automatically become ex officio provincial sheriff without additional compensation.

H. — DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Legal Division

Technical Division

Division of Publications

Editorial Section

Subscription and Mailing Section

Photographic and Illustrating Section

Duplicating Section

Bindery Section

Division of Soil Survey and Conservation

(2) Bureau of Plant Industry

Administrative Division

General Service Section

Records Section

Property Section

Cashier’s Office

Agricultural Reference Section

Accounting Section

Agronomy and Horticulture Division

Agronomy Research Section

Horticulture Research Section

Plant Breeding and Introduction Section

Agricultural Extension Division

Farmers’ Conferences and Agricultural Fairs Section

Field Service Section

Rural Improvement Section

Plant Pest and Disease Control Division

Plant Pathology Section

Entomology Section

Plant Quarantine Section

Cebu Plant Quarantine Office

Iloilo Plant Quarantine Office

Zamboanga Plant Quarantine Office

Davao Plant Quarantine Office

Farm Management and Seed Production Division

Seed and Plant Distribution Section

Experiment and Propagation Stations and Seed Farms

Agricultural Engineering Section

Plant Utilization Division

Food Preparation and Preservation Section

Home Extension Section

Food Technology Section

Miscellaneous

(3) Bureau of Animal Industry

Office of the Director

Administrative Division

Personnel and General Service Section

Property Section

Records Section

Accounting Section

Animal Disease Control Division

Animal Quarantine Section

Meat and Dairy Farm Inspection Section

Veterinary Research Division

Biological Products Section

Bacterial Diseases Section

Virus Diseases Section

Parasitic Diseases Section

Animal Husbandry Division

Large and Small Animals Section

Poultry Section

Animal Nutrition Section

Stock Farms and Breeding Stations

Alabang Stock Farm

Bongabon Stock Farm

Malaybalay Stock Farm

Cebu Breeding Station

Laguna Breeding Station

Sorsogon Breeding Station

Tarlac Breeding Station

Ubay Stock Farm

Abra Breeding Station

Batangas Breeding Station

Ilocos Norte Breeding Station

Ilocos Sur Breeding Station

La Carlota Breeding Station

La Union Breeding Station

Animal Products Division

Meat Section

Milk Section

Livestock Extension Division

(4) Bureau of Forestry

Administrative Division

Public Relations Station

General Service Section

Records Section

Property Section

Legal Section

Stenographers and Typists Section

Accounting Section

Division of Forest Investigation

Silvics and Silviculture Section

Forest Products Section

Forest Protection Section

Division of Forest Management

Working Plans Section

Special Uses Section

Forest Claims and Registration Section

Game and Wildlife Section

Division of Forest Engineering

Forest Reconnaissance and Land Classification Section

Forest Surveys and Maps Section

Forest Improvement Section

Forest Statistics Section

Division of Reclamation and Reforestation

Afforestation and Reforestation Section

Cooperative Planting Section

Division of Forest Concessions

License Section

Special Use Permits Section

Division of Sawmills and Utilization

Lumber Grading and Inspection Section

Sawmills and Scaling Section

Provincial Service

(5) Bureau of Lands

Office of the Director

Administrative Division

General Service Section

Cash and Collection Section

Property Section

Records and Documents Division

Section of Public Land Records

Section of Survey Records

General Records Section

Accounting Division

Public Lands Division

Sales and Leases Section

Homesteads and Free Patents Section

Miscellaneous Disposition Section

Law Division

Land Registration Section

Claims and Conflicts Section

Division of Surveys

Computing Section

Drafting Section

Survey Coordination and Costs Section

Surveying School

Provincial Service

(6) Bureau of Mines

Geological Survey Division

Mineral Lands Administration Division

Mineral Lands and Topographic Survey Division

Verification and Computation Section

Topographic Drafting and Mapping Section

Field Service

Mining and Metallurgical Division

Mining Section

Metallurgical Section

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Property Section

Records Section

General Service Section

(7) Bureau of Fisheries

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Division of Fish Culture and Fishery Biology

Division of Commercial Fisheries

Division of Fishery Technology

Division of Licenses, Regulation and Inspection

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Central Experiment Station

Maligaya Rice Experiment Station

La Granja Sugar Cane Experiment Station

Mindanao Experiment Station

Miscellaneous

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

Central Office

Accounting Section

Alabang Stock Farm

Boñgabon Stock Farm

Dumarao Stock Farm

Malaybalay Stock Farm

Ubay Stock Farm

Cebu Breeding Station

Ilocos Norte Breeding Station

Ilocos Sur Breeding Station

Laguna Breeding Station

La Union Breeding Station

Marinduque Breeding Station

Pangasinan Breeding Station

Sorsogon Breeding Station

Tarlac Breeding Station

Salaries and Wages

Animal Husbandry

(Dairy)

(Large and Small Animals)

(Alabang Stock Farm)

(Boñgabon Stock Farm)

(Dumarao Stock Farm)

(Abra Breeding Station)

(Batangas Breeding Station)

(Cebu Breeding Station)

(Ilocos Norte Breeding Station)

(Ilocos Sur Breeding Station)

(La Union Breeding Station)

(Marinduque Breeding Station)

(Nueva Vizcaya Breeding Station)

(Pangasinan Breeding Station)

(Sta. Barbara Breeding Station)

Animal Disease Control

Veterinary Research

Livestock Extension

Administration

Accounting Section

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Accounting Section

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Accounting Section

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Expenses

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Bulacan

Lolomboy Estate

Sta. Maria de Pandi Estate

Cavite

Imus Estate

Naic Estate

San Francisco de Malabon Estate

Sta. Cruz de Malabon Estate

Isabela

Isabela Estate

Laguna

Biñan Estate

Calamba Estate

Sta. Rosa Estate

Mindoro

San Jose Estate

Rizal

Muntinlupa Estate

Bulacan

Cavite

Cebu

Isabela

Laguna

Mindoro

(8) Fiber Inspection Service

Salaries and Wages

Administrative

Accounting Section

Inspection

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Purpose

Summary

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. Subject to the approval of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the sum appropriated for the intensification of the campaign for the control and eradication of agricultural pests and diseases may likewise be expended by the Director of Plant Industry, if deemed necessary, to carry out the purposes of section 23 of Act No. 2472: PROVIDED, That in the employment of locust scouts preference shall be given to graduates of agricultural high schools and colleges.

2. The itemization in this Order of appropriations for salaries and wages, sundry expenses, furniture and equipment, and special purpose of the Fiber Inspection Service shall not be construed as impairing the authority of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources to use, with the approval of the President, the unexpended balance of the Fiber Inspection Service Fund to carry out the provisions of section 1796-B (b) of the Administrative Code, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 603.

I. — DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND COMMUNICATIONS

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Records Section

(2) Bureau of Public Works

Administrative Division

Division of Highways

Division of Architecture

Mechanical and Electrical Division

Division of Ports and Harbors

Division of Irrigation

Accounting Division

Property and Disbursement Section

(3) Bureau of Posts

Administrative and Records Division

General Service Section

Appointment Section

Leave and Insurance Section

General Records

Filing and Issuing Section

Receiving and Mailing Section

Mimeographing Section

Building Custodian Force

Provincial Personnel Section

(Additional Compensation for Municipal Treasurers and other Government Employees Acting as Postmasters)

Accounting Division

General Service Section

Bookkeeping Section

Disbursement Section

Revenue Accounts Section

Inspection Division

General Service Section

Mail Permits Section

Complaint and Claim Section

Postal Service Section

Dead Letter Section

Investigation Section

Money Order Division

Cash Section

Duplicate Money Order Section

International Money Order Section

Stamp and Philatelic Division

Stamp Section

Philatelic Section (Reservations and Mail Orders for Stamps)

Cash Sales Section

Mail Transportation and Delivery Division

Mail Routes Section

Railway Mail Service Section

Provincial Free Mail Delivery Service Section

Mail Boat and Domestic Air Mail Service Section

International Mail Division

Property Division

Accountable and Blank Forms Section

Requisition and Shipping Section

Property Accounting Section

Equipment Section

Telegrah and Radio Supplies Section

Stationery Supplies Section

Manila Post-Office

Domestic Mail Division

General Service and Records Section

Mail Dispatching and Receiving Section

Registry Section

Motor Vehicle Section

Motor Vehicle Service

Foreign Mails Division

U. S. Mail Section

Foreign Mails Section

City Delivery Division

General Delivery Section

City Distribution Section

Letter-Carriers Section

Special Delivery Section

Lock Box Section

U. S. Ordinary Parcel Post Delivery Section

Cash Division

Accounts Section

Tellers’ Section

Disbursing Section

Clearing House Section

Miscellaneous

(4) Bureau of Telecommunications

Administrative and Traffic Division

General Service and Complaint Section

Personnel Section

Appointment Section

Leave and Insurance Section

Records Section

Manila Central Operating and Tuning Section

Message Receiving Section

Message Delivery Section

Provincial Personnel Section

Accounting Division

Bookkeeping Section

Disbursement Section

Property and Cash Division

Radio and Telegraph Division

General Service Section

Radio Planning and Construction Section

Maintenance, Provincial Section

Power Plant Section

Maintenance, Manila Section

Manila Central Receiving Station

Telegraph Planning and Construction Section

Maintenance Section

Miscellaneous

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

Marine and Service

Repair Shops

Engineering

Accounting Section

Materials and Property

Disbursement and Collection

Miscellaneous

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

Salaries and Wages

(5) Motor Vehicles Office

Salaries and Wages

Office of the Chief

Administrative Division

Registration and License Division

Law Enforcement, Investigation and Inspection Division

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Summary

(6) Postal Savings Bank

Salaries and Wages

Office of the Superintendent

Accounting Section

Depositor’s Accounts Control Section Under immediate supervision of Accounting Officer)

General Service Section

Deposit and Withdrawal Section “A”

Deposit and Withdrawal Section “B”

Deposit and Withdrawal Section “C”

File Section

Tellers Section

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Special Purpose

Summary

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provision

1. The Director of Posts is authorized to use from any unexpended balance of any appropriation authorized for the Bureau of Posts in this Order, a sum of not more than P15,000 for the prompt payment of claims arising from fraudulent encashment or wrong payment of money orders and telegraphic transfers.

J. — DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Administrative Division

Cash, Property and General Service Section

Accounting Section

Records Section

Division of Physical Education

Board on Textbooks

(2) Bureau of Public Schools

Personnel Division

Accounting Division

Curriculum Division

Instruction Division

Adult Education Division

Administrative Section

Promotion and Supervision Section

Research Section

Measurement and Research Division

Property and School Plant Division

Division of Publications

Editorial Section

Printing Section

Records Division

School Finance Division

Agricultural Education Section

Trade and Industrial Education Section

Home Economics Section

Offices of Superintendents of Divisions and National Schools

Instructional Staff

Division Office Supervisory Personnel

Normal and Technical Instruction Personnel

Normal Schools

Technical School Personnel

(Philippine School of Arts and Trades)

Philippine School of Commerce

School for the Deaf and the Blind

Secondary Instruction Personnel

Elementary Instruction Personnel

Miscellaneous

(3) Bureau of Private Schools

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Division of Supervision

(4) Bureau of Public Libraries

Administrative Division

General Service Section

Bookmenders and Binders

Personnel of the Building

Accounting Section

Property Section

Cash Section

Filipiniana Division

Manuscript and Publication Section

Local History and Folklore Compilation Section

Municipal Libraries Division

Research and Bibliography Division

Library Extension and Registration of Priests and Ministers Division

Branches and Traveling Library Section

Registration of Priests and Ministers Section

Division of Archives

Archives File and Cataloging Section

Reference and Office Section

General Reference Division

Reference and Public Reading Room Section

Public Documents Section

Indexing and Checklist Section

Circulation Division

Catalog Division

Classification and Cataloging Section

Typing, Labeling and Filing Section

(5) Institute of National Language

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Research and Translation Division

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. Any savings in the appropriation for salaries and wages authorized in this Order for the Bureau of Public Schools, including those for the maintenance and operation of normal, vocational, secondary and elementary schools, may be utilized for the temporary employment of substitute teachers to take the place of those subpoenaed to act as witnesses in court, of those with vacation service credit who go on leave of absence, of those granted vacation or sick leave and of temporary teachers assigned to duty during vacation.

2. In conjunction with section 7-II (24) of Commonwealth Act No. 246, the Secretary of Education may allow, free of charge, quarters in kind in government-owned buildings, to clerks and other employees assigned to dormitory duty and to agricultural schools, farm schools and special schools in isolated places under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Public Schools.

3. With the approval of the President of the Philippines, the Secretary of Education is authorized to use savings from the amount herein appropriated for salaries and wages of personnel under the Bureau of Public Schools for sundry expenses, including the purchase of supplies, textbooks and supplementary readers, and for the acquisition of furniture and equipment which may be needed for the opening of new or additional elementary classes, and for the repair or purchase of equipment for elementary classes, any provision of this Order or any other act to the contrary notwithstanding.

4. In order to encourage the printing of books in the Philippines, the Department, in using the appropriations provided in this Order for the purchase of textbooks and supplementary readers for the elementary grades, shall give preference to those locally prepared, printed and bound whenever such textbooks and supplementary readers can be obtained under terms and conditions not prejudicial to public interest.

5. The Secretary of Education is authorized to order the printing of textbooks and supplementary readers for the Bureau of Public Schools with local private printers and publishers by allowing the contractors reasonable margin of profit whenever the Bureau of Printing cannot guarantee the delivery of such textbooks and supplementary readers at the time they are required.

K. — DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Administrative Division

Records Section

Accounting Section

Cash and Property Section

(2) Bureau of Labor

Administrative Division

Personnel Section

Records Section

Accounting Section

Property Section

Cash and Disbursing Section

Janitor Service

Labor Inspection Division

Eight-Hour Labor Law Section

Women and Child Labor Law Section

Strikes and Lockouts Section

Labor Organization Section

Division of Public Defenders

Provincial Public Defenders Service Section

Workmen’s Compensation Division

Investigation and Research Section

Computation Section

Docket and Compilation Section

Wage Claims Division

Marine and Employment Division

Employment Section

Marine Section

Investigation Section

Medical Inspection Division

Labor Placement Division

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purpose

Salaries and Wages

Safety Engineering Division

Boiler Safety Inspection Service

Mine Safety Inspection Services

General Safety Inspection Service

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

V. — Summary

L. — DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Administrative Division

Cash and Property Section

Records Section

Miscellaneous

Accounting Section

(2) Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey

Purpose I. — Commissioned Officers and Cadets

Purpose II. — Enlisted Men

Division of Coastal Surveys

Ship “Fathomer”

Ship “Research”

Division of Topographic Survey

Purpose III. — Maintenance of Personnel

Purpose IV. — Civilian Personnel

Office of the Director and Liaison

Personnel Branch

Administrative and Personnel Division

Cash and Property Section

Accounting Section

Division of Geodesy and Geophysics

Cartographic Division

Chart Construction Section

Hydrographic Section

Geographic Section

Negative Cutting Section

Archives and Miscellaneous Section

Division of Photolithography

Nautical Division

Purpose V. — Special Purposes

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

(3) Armed Forces of the Philippines

(a) Philippine Ground Force

Purpose I. — Personnel

A. Commissioned Officers and Cadets

B. Regular Force — Enlisted Men

C. Reserve Officers Training Corps

D. Civilian Employees

Office of the Chief of Staff

National Defense General Staff

Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Personnel and Administration (G-1 Division)

Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence (G-2 Division)

Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Organization and Training (G-3 Division)

Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Service, Supply and Procurement (G-4 Division)

Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Plans and Operation

National Defense Special Staff

Office of the Inspector General

Research and Development Division

Budget Division

Public and Legislative Relations Division

Historical Division

Administrative Staff

The Adjutant General’s Office

Judge Advocate General’s Office

Educational and Recreational Service

Utilities Section, Headquarters Battalion

Courts Martial and Boards of Officers

Technical Staffs and Services

Office of the Chief, Corps of Engineers

Ordnance Service

Quartermaster Service

Signal Corps

Medical Service

Finance Service

Accounting Division

Philippine Military Academy

Military Training Command Headquarters

Army Ground Forces School

Reserve Officers Training Corps

General Depot Headquarters

Quartermaster Supply Section

Engineer Supply Section

Ordnance Supply Section

Medical Supply Section

Signal Supply Section

Utilities, Transportation and Labor Section

Acceptance Boards

Purpose II. — Maintenance of Personnel

A. Subsistence

B. Sanitation

C. Quartering

E. Welfare

Purpose III. — Transportation

Purpose IV. — Armament, Equipment and Supplies

A. Armament and Equipment

B. Supplies

Purpose V. — Miscellaneous Expenses

Summary

(b) Philippine Air Force

Purpose I. — Personnel

A. Commissioned Officers and Cadets

B. Regular Force — Enlisted Men

C. Civilian Employees

Purpose II. — Maintenance of Personnel

A. Subsistence

B. Sanitation

C. Quartering

D. Training and Education

E. Welfare

Purpose III. — Transportation

Purpose IV. — Armament, Equipment and Supplies

A. Armament and Equipment

B. Supplies

Purpose V. — Miscellaneous Expenses

Summary

(c) Philippine Naval Patrol

Purpose I. — Personnel

A. Commissioned Officers

B. Regular Force — Enlisted Men

C. Civilian Personnel

Central General Staff

Training Center

General Supply Depot

Carpentry Shop

Operating Base

Lighthouse Service

Revenue Cutter Service

Allowances

Purpose II. — Maintenance of Personnel

A. Subsistence

B. Sanitation

C. Training and Education

D. Construction and Maintenance

E. Welfare

F. Burial

Purpose III. — Transportation

Purpose IV. — Equipment and Supplies

A. Equipment

B. Supplies

Purpose V. — Maintenance and Operation of Vessels

Purpose VI. — Miscellaneous Expenses

Philippine Nautical School

Purpose VII. — Sundry Expenses for Lighthouse and Revenue Cutter Services

Purpose VIII. — Equipment for Lighthouse and Revenue Cutter Services

Purpose IX. — Maintenance and Repair of Lighthouses, Buoys, Beacons and Equipment

Salaries and Wages

Purpose X. — Aircraft Patrol Squadron

Summary

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. The President shall have authority to transfer, at quarterly intervals during the fiscal year 1948, from Purpose I or II of any of the three Major Commands to other Purposes as titled in this Order of the same or any other Major Command, such portions of unexpended balances of the appropriations authorized thereunder as may be necessary in order to assure balanced development of the National Defense during that year, any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding.

2. The President shall have authority to transfer and expend not to exceed fifty per centum of the amount appropriated for any item in any purpose of the appropriations for the Armed Forces of the Philippines to any other item or items in the same or any other purpose.

3. Officers and enlisted men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines who may be transferred by competent authority from one station to another shall be allowed to have transported at government expense personally-owned possessions, household effects and baggage not to exceed such allowance as may be fixed by the President for the several grades.

4. Funds appropriated under item 244, Philippine Ground Force, shall include representation and contingent expenses of the Chief of Staff and of such other officers of the Philippine Ground Force authorized by the Chief of Staff, which expenses shall be subject to the approval of the President.

5. Expenses for unforeseen contingencies which cannot be paid for lack of appropriation in other purposes may be paid for from Purpose V.

6. Expenses under items 227, Philippine Ground Force; 23, Philippine Air Force; and 131, Philippine Naval Patrol, shall include per diems of officers sent to the United States Army schools for training during the fiscal year 1948.

7. The Secretary of National Defense is authorized with the approval of the President of the Philippines to use any savings in the appropriations authorized in this Order for the Armed Forces of the Philippines for the payment of claims under section 699 of the Revised Administrative Code and section 91-a of the National Defense Act, whichever is applicable, to the heir or heirs of deceased officers and enlisted men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and of deceased trainees or reservists in active service or enlisted reserves, who died as a result of the war or in connection with their guerrilla activities during enemy occupation or while in active duty with the former Philippine Army, the Armed Forces of the Philippines and/or USAFFE.

8. The appropriations intended for subsistence, clothing, armaments, and other supplies, materials and equipment for the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall not be available for expenditure whenever such subsistence, clothing, armaments, and other supplies, materials and equipment are obtainable under the provisions of the Military Assistance Act between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Government of the United States.

9. Officers and enlisted men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines detailed on duty with the Surplus Property Commission shall not during such detail receive pay, allowances, subsistence or other emoluments from the Armed Forces of the Philippines but from the Surplus Property Commission: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That the savings thus realized shall not be available for expenditure for any purpose.

10. Officers, enlisted men and other personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines who may not have received the three months advance pay (bonus) at the outbreak of the war and who have not received said advance pay under the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Six hundred and seventy-six, shall be paid the same from the savings in the appropriations for the former Philippine Army for the fiscal year 1947 or from the savings in the appropriations for the Armed Forces of the Philippines for the fiscal year 1948.

11. When expressly authorized by the President, a revolving fund for the operation of the Philippine Naval Base Facilities may be created, not to exceed P1,000,000 for any fiscal year, out of funds transferred from any item or items and any purpose as provided for in paragraph 1 above.

12. Expenses for unforeseen contingencies of the Philippine Naval Patrol which cannot be paid due to lack of funds may be paid for under any item for Purpose VI of the appropriations for the Philippine Naval Patrol.

M. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

General Service and Personnel Section

Cash and Property Section

Records Section

Drug Inspection Service

Division of Laboratories

Cebu Biological Laboratory

Iloilo Biological Laboratory

Section of Social Hygiene

Epidemiology

Section of Tuberculosis Control

Section of Malaria Control

Nursing Service Division

(2) Bureau of Health

Administrative Division

District Health Officers

(One-half of salary is payable by the province concerned)

Personnel Section

Records Section

Property Section

Section of Nursing

Accounting Division

Division of Sanitation and Preventable Diseases

Section of Sanitary Engineering

Section of Factory Sanitation

Food Inspection Service

Section of Immunization

Vaccinating Parties

Section of Biostatistics and Epidemiology

Section of Cemeteries and Public Conveyances

Division of Health Education and Information

Health Education and Information

Physical Examination

School Health Supervision

Division of Inspection and Investigation

General Inspection

Investigation of Anomalies and Complaints

Investigation of Prevalence of Diseases

(3) Bureau of Quarantine

Administrative Division

Property Office

Accounting Unit

Quarantine Inspection Station Division

Iloilo Quarantine Station

Jolo Quarantine Station

Davao Quarantine Station

Zamboanga Quarantine Station

Legaspi Quarantine Station

Tacloban Quarantine Station

Rodent Control Division

Quarantine Detention Station Division

(All with subsistence, quarters, laundry and clothing)

Mariveles Quarantine Detention Station

Cebu Quarantine Detention Station

Launch Service Division

(All with subsistence and quarters)

Allowances

(4) Bureau of Hospitals

Administrative Division

Personnel Section

Records Section

Inspection Service

Property Division

Accounting Division

Leprosaria

Leprosy Section

Culion Leper Colony

Culion Proper

(Leper Assistants)

Medical Section

(Leper Assistants)

Pathological Section

Chemical Section

Administrative Section

Central Luzon Leprosarium

(Leper Assistants)

Regional Treatment Stations

Eversley Child’s Treatment Station

(Leper Assistants)

Cebu Skin Dispensary

Western Visayas Treatment Station

(Leper Assistants)

Bicol Treatment Station and Albay Skin Clinic

(Leper Assistants)

Mindanao Central Treatment Station

(Leper Assistants)

Lanao Sub-Treatment Station

(Leper Assistant)

Cotabato Sub-Treatment Station

Sulu Sub-Treatment Station

Ilocos Skin Dispensary

Hospitals

San Lazaro General Hospital

(Leper Assistants)

National Psychopathic Hospital

Southern Islands Hospital

Baguio General Hospital

Maternity and Children’s Hospital

Sibul Springs Sanatorium

Puericulture Centers

Miscellaneous

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provisions

1. The Secretary of Health may allow, free of charge, quarters in kind in government-owned buildings to clerks and other employees assigned to dormitory duty, hospitals, training schools and other similar institutions in isolated places operated by the bureaus or offices under the Department of Health.

2. Temporary officers and employees whose salaries are paid from appropriations provided in this Order under this Department and detailed for duty in the Culion Leper Colony and other leper treatment stations or leprosaria under the Bureau of Hospitals may be granted in the discretion of the Secretary of Health, 28 days’ vacation leave with pay for each year of service in the said leper institutions, which vacation must be enjoyed during the year in which earned, any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding.

3. Any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Director of Hospitals with the approval of the Secretary of Health, may use the unexpended balance of any appropriation authorized in this Order for the Bureau of Hospitals under sundry expenses, for the maintenance, alteration and repair of the buildings for lepers in Culion and other leper stations without the intervention of the Bureau of Public Works, the total amount that may be spent under this provision not to exceed P5,000.

4. The appropriation provided in this Order for the operation of the Maternity and Children’s Hospital and training of midwives in the City of Manila shall include expenses for graduation of midwives including diplomas not to exceed P400.

5. Part of the appropriation for “other services” of the Department of Health which may be allotted for the use of hospitals under the said Department, shall be available for the purchase of pins and diplomas for the graduating class of nurses and insignia for the officers of such hospitals, and for other expenses that may be incurred in connection with the holding of graduation exercises, as well as for expenses for refreshments, music and other items in connection with the annual Hospital Day Celebration, the total expenses thereof not to exceed P500; and shall also be available for incidental expenses in connection with the holding of scientific meetings or roundtable conferences on health matters, the total expenses for the latter not to exceed P1,000.

6. When necessary due to the presence of quarantinable diseases, any unexpended balance of the appropriations for “salaries and wages” and “sundry expenses” of the Bureau of Quarantine may be used, with the approval of the President, for payment of salaries and wages of temporary personnel, including assistant disinfectors and laborers, to assist the regular force in disinfection work or in handling supplies, and for the purchase of necessary equipment, supplies and materials and for subsistence of personnel, any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding.

7. From the various items of appropriations herein authorized for “sundry expenses” and “furniture and equipment” of the Department of Health, a total sum of not less than P120,000 and an amount of not less than P5,000 shall be allotted for sundry expenses and purchase of furniture and equipment, respectively, of the Bureau of Quarantine.

8. The Secretary of Health may authorize the officers and employees of the Department of Health engaged in the manufacture of anti-toxins, vaccine, sera and other biological products at the Alabang Laboratories and experiment stations whose salaries and wages are payable from the Alabang Laboratories Revolving Fund, to lodge free charge in government buildings situated at the Alabang Station and controlled by the Secretary of Health: PROVIDED, That the officers and employees herein mentioned shall not be allowed to lodge in rented buildings without requiring them to reimburse to the Government their corresponding reasonable share of the rent.

N. — DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

I. — Salaries and Wages

(1) Office of the Secretary

Civil Aeronautics Board

(2) Bureau of Commerce

Administrative Division

Records Section

General Service Section

Cash Section

Property Section

Accounting Section

Commercial Intelligence Division

Research Section

Trade Information Section

Industrial Promotion Division

Markets Division

Commodity Section

Market Quotations Section

Bonded Warehouse Section

Trade Regulation Division

Business Names Section

Commercial Brokers Section

Domestic Trade Division

Foreign Trade Division

Foreign Trade Information Section

Foreign Trade Survey Section

(3) Sugar Quota Office

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Cash and Property Section

General Service, Personnel and Records Section

Domestic and Export Sugar Division

Sugar Field Service Division

Luzon

Visayas

Other Quota Products Division

(4) Patent Office

Administrative Division

Patent, Trademarks, Designs and Copyright Division

(5) Securities and Exchange Commission

Securities and Corporation Division

Brokers and Exchanges Division

Examiners and Appraisers Division

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Records and Property Section

(6) Civil Aeronautics Administration

Office of the Administrator

Technical Staff

Administrative Division

Records Section

Cash and Property Section

Accounting Section

Safety Regulations Division

Aircraft and Components Section

Flight Operations Section

Airmen Section

Licensing Section

National Airways Division

Airports Division

(7) Weather Bureau

Administrative Division

Personnel and Records Section

Accounting Section

Property Section

Cash and Disbursement Section

Synoptics Division

Forecasting Section

Observations Section

Climatological Division

Statistics Section

Research and Publication Section

Geophysical Division

Astronomical Division

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

Accounting Section

V. — Summary

O. — GENERAL AUDITING OFFICE

I. — Salaries and Wages

Office of the Auditor General

Office of the Deputy Auditor General

Administrative and Fiscal Statistics Department

Accounting Service

Fiscal Reports Division

National Government Fiscal Statistics Section

Local Government Fiscal Statistics Section

Cash Audit and Warrant

Reconcilement Section

Administrative Division

Cash and Property Section

Personnel and Leave Section

Personnel

Leave

Janitor and Guard Service

Records Division

Indexing-Searching Section

Typing and Mailing Section

Filing Section

Law Department

National Division

Provincial Division

Investigation and Reports Division

Public Service and Field Examination Department

Public Service Audit Division

Franchise Tax Audit Section

Clerical Service

Provincial Audit Department

Central Office Division

Field Audit Division

Provincial Auditors

(One-half of salary is payable by the province concerned)

National Audit Departments “A” and “B”

Bureau Auditors

Senior Audit Clerks

Audit Clerks

Payable from Special Funds

(Payable from the Cadastral Survey Fund)

(Payable from the Postal Savings Bank Fund)

(Payable from the Bureau of Printing Revolving Fund)

Payable from Special Budgets

(Philippine Veterans Board)

(Payable from the Central Luzon Agricultural School Fund)

Property Inspection Department

Inspection Division

Inspection Section

Bidding Section

Inventory Section

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provision

1. Employees of the General Auditing Office drawing salaries from the appropriations provided in this Order and assigned in the Auditing Office for the Bureau of Prisons may be furnished quarters in kind and prisoner’s service inside the prison compound.

P. — UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

Office of the Director

Office of the Chief of Clinics

Department of Medicine

Department of Surgery

Department of Gynecology

Department of Obstetrics

Department of Pediatrics

Department of Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat

Department of Laboratories

Department of Physical Therapy

Rotation Service

Dental Clinic

Division of Pharmacy

Administrative Division

Personnel Section

General Service Section

Machinery, Repairing and Transportation Section

Records and Statistics Section

Dispensary Clerical Unit

Finance Division

Accounting Section

Cash Section

Property Section

Division of Nursing

Miscellaneous

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

Summary

Special Provision

(u-5) The appropriation for “other services”, item (s-5), may be used for the purchase of pins and diplomas for the graduating class of nurses and insignia for the officers of the Hospital, and such other expenses as may be incurred in connection with the holding of graduation exercises, as well as for expenses for refreshments, music and other items in connection with the annual hospital day celebration, the total expenses not to exceed P500.

VI. — Special Provisions

1. Any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the salary of the President of the University of the Philippines shall not exceed P12,000 per annum.

2. Students of the College of Agriculture, University of the Philippines, shall be exempt from the payment of any matriculation or tuition fees.

Q. — COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS

I. — Salaries and Wages

Office of the Commissioners

Administrative Division

Finance Section

Records Section

Accounting Section

Legal Staff

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

V. — Summary

R. — SUPREME COURT OF THE PHILIPPINES

(Not Reorganized)

I. — Salaries and Wages

Offices of the Justices

Judicial

Office of the Clerk of Court

Docket Section

Calendar Section

Judgment Section

Brief and Record Section

Bailiff Section

Reporter

Translation Section

Library and Digest Section

Stenographers Section

Section of Public Laws and Decisions

Published in the Official Gazette

Administrative

Bar Examination Section

Finance Section

Accounting Section

Mailing Section

Watchmen Section

Messengers and Janitors Section

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purposes

Salaries and Wages

Sundry Expenses

Furniture and Equipment

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provision

1. With the approval of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, any unexpended balance of the fund appropriated for the Supreme Court of the Philippines may be used to cover a deficit in any item of the appropriations for “sundry expenses” for the said Court.

S. — COURT OF APPEALS

(Not Reorganized)

I. — Salaries and Wages

Office of the Justices

Office of the Clerk of Court

Administrative Division

Accounting Section

Cash and Property Section

Service Section

Legal Research Division

Reporter and Publication Division

Docket and Receiving Division

Calendar and Brief Division

Judgment and Record Division

II. — Sundry Expenses

III. — Furniture and Equipment

IV. — Special Purpose

V. — Summary

VI. — Special Provision

1. With the approval of the Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeals, any unexpended balance of the fund appropriated for the Court of Appeals may be used to cover a deficit in any item of the appropriations for “sundry expenses” for the said Court.

T. — CONTINGENT FUNDS

Grand Total of the Appropriations Authorized in this Order:

Allotment of Appropriations

SECTION 160. The appropriations for sundry expenses, furniture and equipment, and special purposes for the Office of the President shall be allotted by the President among the bureaus and offices under his direct control; those for the Executive Departments, by the Heads of Departments among the bureaus and offices under their respective control, as the needs of the service may require.

Authority to Use Savings in Appropriations for “Salaries and Wages,” for “Sundry Expenses,” and for “Purchase of Furniture and Equipment” to Cover Deficits

SECTION 161. Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, any savings in the regular appropriations authorized in this Order for salaries and wages, except the amounts of the “savings to be made” herein provided, for sundry expenses, and for purchase of furniture and equipment of the bureaus and offices under any Department may, with the approval of the President, be used to cover a deficit in any other item of the regular appropriations, except for salaries and wages, under the same Department. Likewise, any savings in the appropriations for salaries and wages, except the amounts of the “savings to be made” herein provided, for sundry expenses, and for purchase of furniture and equipment of any item under “Special Purposes” may, with the approval of the President, be used to cover a deficit in any other item of appropriations, except for salaries and wages, under the same purpose.

Authority to Use Savings

SECTION 162. The President of the Philippines is authorized to use any savings in the appropriations authorized in this Order, except the amounts of the “savings to be made” herein provided, (1) for paying compensation differentials that may be granted pursuant to the provisions of section seven of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two; (2) for adjustment to P960 per annum of the salaries of elementary school teachers who are graduates of Bureau of Public Schools collegiate normal schools and the teacher’s curriculum in the collegiate schools of arts and trades, graduates of private junior normal schools and colleges offering two years of normal work above the secondary level, and holders of the degrees of bachelor of science in education, bachelor of science in home economics, high school teacher’s certificate, bachelor of science in agriculture with certificate in agricultural education, and any bachelor’s degree with at least eighteen units in education; for adjustment to P840 per annum for those teachers who are graduates of Bureau of Public Schools secondary normal schools and of private secondary normal schools and holders of any bachelor’s degree not herein mentioned and of the title of associate in arts; and for all teachers not falling under the foregoing classification, to P720 per annum, the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and two, as amended by this Order, to the contrary notwithstanding: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That elementary school teachers with the above educational qualifications who are already receiving salaries in excess of the amounts above indicated will not have their salaries reduced; (3) for the payment of claims under section 699 of the Revised Administrative Code and the Workmen’s Compensation Act, whichever is applicable, to officers, employees and laborers who died or were injured in line of duty during the war in areas not occupied by the enemy; (4) for the commutation of the money value of the additional leave, extended leave, and accrued leave earned by American and deceased Filipino officers and employees for service rendered prior to November twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six; (5) subject to rules and regulations that the President may prescribe, for the payment of automatic salary increases to employees who have completed and rendered one year of continuous, faithful and satisfactory service before July first, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, the rate of such increases to be P10 per month to employees with basic salaries below P80 per month or P960 per annum until their basic salaries and allowances for subsistence, quarters and laundry plus the automatic salary increases shall reach P80 per month or P960 per annum: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That in case of promotion, an employee who has earned and been receiving the automatic salary increase shall continue receiving the same on condition that his basic salary plus the automatic increase shall not exceed P80 per month or P960 per annum; (6) for any unforeseen contingencies; and (7) for covering, any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, any deficits in the special funds or receipts of the various special services provided for in this Order whose operating expenses are payable from their respective funds or receipts.

Authority to Fill New Positions Required

SECTION 163. No new positions authorized in this Order shall be filled without the previous approval of the President of the Philippines. The provision of this section shall not apply to the Congress of the Philippines, the Supreme Court, and the Court of Appeals.

Authority for Renting Automobiles, Jitneys, or Trucks for a Continuous Period Exceeding One Month Required

SECTION 164. No appropriation provided in this Order may be used for renting automobiles, jitneys, or trucks on the monthly basis nor on the daily basis for a continuous period exceeding one month, unless authorized by the President.

Suspension of Expenditures of Appropriations

SECTION 165. Any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the President of the Philippines is authorized to suspend or otherwise stop the expenditure of any amount herein appropriated for any purpose, or any portion thereof, whenever in his judgment the public interest so requires, and thereupon the funds affected by such action shall become available for any other expenditures authorized in this Order as the President may determine. This provision shall not apply to the appropriations for the Congress of the Philippines, the Supreme Court, and the Court of Appeals.

Purchase of Furniture and Equipment

SECTION 166. All appropriations for the purchase of furniture and equipment authorized in this Order shall be available only for locally manufactured furniture and equipment whenever available.

Authority for Officers and Employees to Receive Payment from the Government of the United States for Services Rendered Thereto

SECTION 167. Officers and employees of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines who may be entitled to receive payment from the Government of the United States for services rendered thereto shall not be barred from receiving any salaries or payments that may be due them from the Republic of the Philippines as provided in this Order, any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provision Making Positions Formerly Occupied by Employees Now in Active Service with the Armed Forces Available for Such Employees

SECTION 168. All the positions authorized in this Order formerly occupied by persons who may still be in active service with the armed forces of the United States, the Armed Forces of the Philippines, or any recognized deserving guerrilla organizations in the Philippines, shall be made available to said incumbents upon the latter’s reporting for duty in their respective bureaus or offices: PROVIDED, That, in the interest of the service, the corresponding Department Head may fill the said positions temporarily until the said regular incumbents shall have reported for duty: AND PROVIDED, FURTHER, That the right herein reserved shall lapse six months after such persons have been mustered out, honorably discharged or otherwise reverted to civilian status.

Provision for “Excess of Actual Salary”

SECTION 169. The item of appropriation for “excess of actual salary” provided in this Order under “Salaries and Wages” shall be paid to the incumbent of the position to which said “excess” pertains who is actually receiving the same “excess” as part of the salary granted to him upon his appointment to the said position before the reduction of the basic pay thereof to the amount provided herein: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That if the position be vacated and the successor to its previous incumbent shall have previously received an equal salary plus the “excess of actual salary” in the same or any other branch of the Government service such excess shall be allowable to him: PROVIDED, FURTHER, That positions authorized in this Order the corresponding items of which in Commonwealth Act No. 654 had appropriations for “excess of actual salary” but which have been eliminated in this Order shall, when filled by the original incumbents thereof as of 1941 entitled to such excess, be provided for with the necessary amount to pay said “excess of actual salary” chargeable against the savings from the appropriations for salaries and wages of the corresponding departments, bureaus and offices.

Authority to Purchase Motor Vehicles and Restriction on the Use Thereof

SECTION 170. No appropriation authorized in this Order shall be used for the operation and maintenance of automobiles, jitneys, jeeps and other motor vehicles, or purchase or lease thereof, except those for the President of the Philippines, the Vice-President of the Philippines, the President of the Senate, the President Pro-tempore, the Majority Floor Leader; the Chairman, Committee on Finance; and the Chairman, Committee on Accounts, of the Senate; the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Speaker Pro-tempore, the Majority Floor Leader, the Chairman, Committee on Accounts; and the Chairman, Committee on Appropriations, of the House of Representatives; the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeals, the Department Heads, the Auditor General, the Commissioner of the Budget, the Undersecretaries of Departments, the Ambassadors and Ministers Plenipotentiary, the Chief of Staff of the Philippine Ground Force, the Chief of Constabulary, the members of the latter two organizations when on active military operations or on active duty in the restoration and maintenance of peace and order, of the Office of Special Prosecutors and of the National Bureau Investigation when on investigation, of the Harbor Police Unit and the Secret Service Unit of the Customs Patrol Service of the Bureau of Customs, the agents of the Department of the Interior when on active duty in pacification campaign or in the restoration of peace and order, the Motor Vehicles Office for use in the enforcement of the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Law, the personnel of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey whenever used on field operations, the personnel of government hospitals whenever used for purposes of such hospitals, the postal personnel whenever used for the transportation of strictly mail matters, the personnel of the Bureau of Telecommunications for the construction, repair and maintenance of telegraph and radio circuits, and the delivery of telegrams, the Prisons personnel whenever used for purposes strictly official of this institution, and the personnel of vocational schools whenever used for instructional purposes of these schools: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That, the provisions of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, chiefs and assistant chiefs of bureaus and offices shall be paid transportation allowance at the rate of P100 and P50 per month, respectively, and, with the approval of the President, officers and employees with rank equivalent to that of a bureau chief may be paid the corresponding allowance.

Appropriations for Expenditures from July First, Nineteen Hundred and Forty-Seven

SECTION 171. The expenses incurred from July first, nineteen hundred and forty-seven up to the promulgation of this Order chargeable against the appropriations authorized in Republic Act Numbered One hundred fifty-six, shall be charged against the items of appropriations provided in this Order.

Repealing Clause

SECTION 172. All Acts, Executive Orders, Administrative Orders, or Proclamations or parts thereof inconsistent with any provision of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Partial Invalidity

SECTION 173. If any provision of this Order should be held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby.

Effective Date

SECTION 174. This Order shall take effect as of July first, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, except where otherwise stated.

DONE in the City of Manila, this fourth day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Forty-Seven and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

Source: CDAsia