MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 82

ORGANIZING INTO TEN MUNICIPALITIES ALL, EXCEPT THREE, MUNICIPAL DISTRICTS IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO AND ANNEXING THE SAID THREE MUNICIPAL DISTRICTS TO THE MUNICIPALITY OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato, concurred in by the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, all the municipal districts in the Province of Cotabato, except the municipal districts of Gambar, Kalanganan, and Tumbao, together with the unexplored areas, and certain barrios or sitios of the municipality of Dulawan, all in the Province of Cotabato, are hereby organized into ten independent municipalities under the names of Pagalungan, Parang, Nuling, Kiamba, Buluan, Kidapawan, Kabakan, koronadal, Buayan, and Dinaig, with the seats of government at Pagalungan, Parang, Nuling (km. 12-13), Kiamba, Buluan, Kidapawan, Kabakan, Marbel, Dadiañgas and Upi, respectively; and the municipal districts of Gambar, Kalanganan and Tumbao are hereby annexed to the municipality of Cotabato. The three municipalities in the Province of Cotabato, as established by section forty of the Administrative Code and Executive Order No. 66, series of 1936, are therefore, increased to thirteen.

The municipalities as constituted under this Order shall consist of the territory hereunder specified:

1. The municipality of Pagalungan shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Pikit-Pagalungan, Silik and Balatikan. The boundary of the municipality of Pagalungan in the Kabakan, shall begin from the northeast corner of the municipal district of Pikit-Pagalungan following a straight line northwesterly, crossing the National highway and Pulangi River to the junction of the Maridagao and Malitubog Rivers.

2. The municipality of Parang shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Parang, Bugasan, Buldun and Basira and the island of Bongo.

3. The municipality of Nuling shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Nuling, Gubpañgan and Balut.

4. The municipality of Kiamba shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Kiamba, Kling and Lebak.

5. The municipality of Buluan shall consist of the territory comprised in the municpal districts of Buluan and Liguasan and the barrios or sitios of Lambayong and Barurao of the municipality of Dulawan. The boundary which separates the municipality of Buluan as herein constituted from the municipality of Dulawan shall begin from Butilen following the crest of Reina Regente mountain Range to Pidsandawan along the Dansalan River, following the Dansalan River to Sapakan, thence following the Alah River to a point at Kapingkong, thence in a straight line eastward from Kapingkong, passing through San Felipe and crossing the National highway to the unexplored territory of Malasila where it intersects the Cotabato-Davao boundary on the east.

6. The municipality of Kidapawan shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Kidapawan together with the unexplored region north of this municipal district to the boundary of Davao province on the east and Bukidnon province on the north, and Pulangi River on the west, and Mlang which is at present a part of the municipal district of Buluan. The boundary between the municipality of Kidapawan and the municipality of Kabakan shall begin from the northeast corner of the municipal district of Liguasan direct to Km. 105 on the Cotabato-Davao road and from there it follows a straight line to where the old boundaries of the municipal districts of Kabakan and Kidapawan meet in the north along the Pulangi river.

7. The municipality of Kabakan shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Kabakan, Carmen, Kitubud, and Banisilan.

8. The municipality of Koronadal shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Koronadal and Sebu, together with the southern tip of the unexplored territory of Malasila which has not been included in the territory of the municipality of Buluan.

9. The municipality of Buayan shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Buayan and Glan.

10. The municipality of Dinaig shall consist of the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Dinaig, Awang, and Salaman.

11. The territiory of Cotabato shall consist of its present territory plus the territory comprised in the municipal districts of Kalanganan, Tumbao and Gambar. The municipality of Cotabato is bounded on the north by the Rio Grande River and Libungan River and the Labas Lake, on the east by the municipalities of Dulawan and Midsayap, on the south by the Tamontaka River and the Butiren River to its headwaters at Talayan and on the west by the Illana Bay.

12. The municipality of Dulawan shall consist of its present territory minus the barrios or sitios of Lambayong and Barurao.

This Executive Order shall take effect on this date.

Done at the city of Manila, this 18 th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M (1947). Executive Order No. 82 : Organizing into ten municipalities all, except three, municipal districts in the province of Cotabato and annexing the said three municipal districts to the municipality of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 43 (9), 3567-3569.