MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 113

ORGANIZING CERTAIN PORTIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES OF CUYAPO, GUIMBA, MUÑOZ, AND LUPAO, ALL OF THE PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF TALUGTUG

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the twenty-seven municipalities of the Province of Nueva Ecija as established in section 38 of the same Code are hereby increased to twenty-eight by segregating the barrios of Buted, Patola, Nangabulan and the sitios of Talugtug, Balite and Santo Domingo from the municipality of Cuyapo, the barrios of San Isidro (otherwise known as Talugtug), Gral. Tinio (locally known as Mayamut I and Mayamut II, Saguing and Alzate (otherwise known as Baybayabas) and the sitios of Pangit and Tandoc, from the municipality of Guimba, the barrios of Alula, Calisitan, and Saverona from the municipality of Muñoz, and the barrios of Sampaloc and the sitio of Maasin from the municipality of Lupao, all of the Province of Nueva Ecija, and organizing them into an independent municipality under the name of Talugtug, with the seat of government at the barrio of San Isidro (otherwise known as Talugtug).

The territory of the municipality of Talugtug as herein organized shall comprise the area included in the following boundaries:

From the monument on the provincial boundary of the Province of Nueva Ecija with the Province of Pangasinan, which is also the west boundary of the municipality of Lupao, Nueva Ecija, which is referred to by the district engineer in the map submitted by him under his letter to the provincial board dated June 13, 1947, of a portion of the Province of Nueva Ecija showing the proposed town of Talugtug including the mother towns (scale 1:62,500.00) running in a straight line S. 29 ° 35’ E., 4,250.00 m. to its intersection with the present Lupao-Muñoz boundary line which is marked by Lupao-Muñoz boundary monument, thence S. 2 ° 40’ E., 6,817.50 m. to a point somewhere between the barrios of Kalisitan and Rangayan; thence S. 54 ° 55’ W., 3,812.50 m. to a point where it touches the north bank of the Kalisitan Creek; thence S. 85 ° 50’ W., 2,175.00 m. to a point where the Trona Creek empties into a stream without a name in the barrio or sitio of Tandok;  thence N. 20 ° 30’ W., 2,125.00 m. to the point where it intersects the boundary line between Mayamut and Bayabas; thence N. 76 ° 55’ W., 3,125.00 m. to the intersection thereof with the present boundary line between the municipalities of Guimba and Cuyapo; thence N. 33 ° 00’ W., 5,250.00 m. to the concrete monument on the top of Mount Bankay; thence N. 70 ° 25’ E., distance not determined, to its intersection with the Atta-ray Creek; thence northward following the course of the Atta-ray Creek to where it touches the provincial boundary line of Nueva Ecija and Pangasinan; thence following the present Nueva Ecija-Pangasinan boundary line to the point of beginning.

The municipalities of Guimba, Muñuz, Cuyapo and Lupao shall continue to have the same territories which they respectively have at present, minus the portions thereof included in the area above described.

The organization herein made shall take effect on January 1, 1948.

Done at the City of Manila, this 20th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 113 : Organizing certain portions of the municipalites of Cuyapo, Guimba, Muñoz, and Lupao, all of the Province of Nueva Ecija, into an independent municipality under the name of Talugtug. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (1), 9-11.