MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 108

REORGANIZING THE LIGHTHOUSE BOARD

In order to systematize and coordinate the rehabilitation, establishment and improvement of lighthouses and other aids to navigation in the Philippines, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby reorganize the Lighthouse Board to be composed of the Director of Coast and Geodetic Survey, as Chairman; and the Commander, Philippine Naval Patrol; the Lighthouse Supervisor, Lighthouse Service, Philippine Naval Patrol; the Surveyor of Port, Bureau of Customs; the Supervising Port Works Engineer, Bureau of Public Works; the President of the Philippines Ship Owner’s Association, or his representative; and the President, Ocean-going Steamship Lines Association in the Philippines, or his representative, as members.

The duties of this Board shall be as follows:

1. To determine upon the location and type of lighthouses, buoys, or beacons to be established or constructed in the Philippines.

2. To prescribe and recommend the standards and orders of lights and other aids to navigation in the Philippines.

3. To pass upon all applications for the establishment or improvement of lighthouses and other aids to navigation.

4. To prescribe and recommend operating procedures and testing of lighthouse equipment and other aids to navigation.

5. To study and submit recommendations regarding electronic aids to navigation and similar new devices.

6. To prescribe and recommend the establishment of electronic aids to navigation and similar new devices.

7. To recommend operating procedures regarding the establishment, servicing, and maintenance of lighthouses, electronic devices, and other aids to navigation.

8. To study and submit recommendations to the Office of the President for the improvement of aids to navigation and the lighthouse service in general.

9. To prepare recommendations to the President as to the ways and means to accomplish the decisions reached by the Board.

Executive Order No. 125 and all other Orders or Regulations in conflict herewith are hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Baguio, this 3rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 108 : Reorganizing the Lighthouse Board. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 43 (12), 5012-5013.