MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 37

REORGANIZING THE DEPORTATION BOARD

For the purpose of conducting investigations of undesirable aliens residing in the Philippines in the manner prescribed in section 69 of the Revised Administrative Code, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law; do hereby reorganize the Deportation Board to be composed of—

1. The Board shall conduct all investigations in accordance with the following rules and regulations:

(a) The Deportation Board, motu propio or upon complaint of any person, is authorized to conduct investigation in the manner prescribed in section 69 of the Revised Administrative Code to determine whether a subject of a foreign power residing in the Philippines is an undesirable alien or not, and thereafter to recommend to the President of the Philippines the deportation of such alien.

(b) Every person complained against before the Deportation Board shall be informed of the charge or charges against him and shall be allowed not less than three days from notice thereof for the preparation of his defense. He shall have the right to be heard by himself or counsel, to produce witnesses in his own behalf and to cross-examine the opposing witnesses.

(c) The proceedings before the Board shall be reduced to writing, and a full record of the proceedings shall be kept in all cases and shall include a statement of the findings and conclusions of the Board signed by the members thereof. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a vote of three of the m shall be necessary to arrive at a decision. Any dissent from the majority opinion shall also be reduced to writing and filed with the records of the proceedings.

(d) The investigation of any case shall be finished within fifteen days, unless extended by the President. The findings and recommendations of the Deportation Board, with a full record of the proceedings, shall be transmitted to the Office of the President within ten days after the termination of the investigation. Final order of deportation shall be issued by the President of the Philippines.

2. The assistance of all law-enforcement agencies and other offices of the Government should be made available to the Deportation Board at the request of the Chairman thereof.

3. Executive Order No. 33, dated May 29, 1936, as amended, and all other Orders inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Manila, this 4 th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1947). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.