MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 104

FIXING AT FIFTY PESOS PER MONTH THE MINIMUM PAY OF EMPLOYEES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ENJOYING SUBSISTENCE AND/OR QUARTERS ALLOWANCES

WHEREAS, in raising the minimum basic salaries of employees of the National Government to P50 per month in Executive Order No. 94, current series, those enjoying subsistence and/or quarters allowances have not been included on the assumption that if the money value of their allowances is considered their total compensation would exceed P50 per month;

WHEREAS, further studies have shown that employees of the National Government who are enjoying subsistence and/or quarters allowances should also be paid a basic salary of at least P50 per month because of the still prevailing high cost of living and the fact that their allowances are limited to themselves and cannot be enjoyed by their families, thereby compelling them to incur considerable expenses for the latter.

WHEREAS, the Government, as a measure of social justice, should always endeavor to pay its employees at least a living wage;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby fix at P50 per month the minimum basic salary of all positions authorized at lower rates in Executive Order No. 94, current series, and in the special budgets covering lump sum appropriations provided in the said Executive Order, even if such positions carry allowances for subsistence and/or quarters, with the exception of positions for leper assistants under the Bureau of Hospitals and the apprentice surveyors of the Bureau of Lands: Provided , That the bonus paid to said leper assistants and apprentice surveyors shall be maintained at per P50 per month.

The amount necessary for this purpose shall be taken from Item T-Contingent Funds, 2, of  Executive Order No. 94, current series, and from any savings in the appropriations authorized in the said Order.

This Order shall apply also to positions paid from special funds, provided that the amounts necessary to increase the minimum rate of pay to P50 per month shall be covered from such special funds.

This Order shall take effect as of July 1, 1947.

Done at the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) N. ROXAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1947). Executive Order No. 104 : Fixing at fifty pesos per month the minimum pay of employees of the national government enjoying subsistence and/or quarters allowances. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 43 (12), 5008-5009.