MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE GRANTING AND ISSUING OF PASSPORTS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel Roxas, President of the Philippines, do hereby prescribe the following rules and regulations for the granting and issuing of passports:

WHO CAN ISSUE PASSPORTS

1. Only the Secretary of Foreign Affairs may grant and issue passports in the Philippines.

2. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs is hereby authorized to cause passports to be issued and verified abroad by such diplomatic or consular officers of the Philippines as he shall designate under these and such additional rules and regulations as may subsequently be issued relative thereto.

TO WHOM PASSPORTS ARE ISSUED

3. Passports may be granted and issued only to citizens of the Philippines. A minor may, upon his own application, be issued a passport, unless his natural or legal guardian requests that the application be denied.

PERSON WHO MAY BE INCLUDED IN ONE PASSPORT

4. Only persons who are citizens of the Philippines shall be included in a passport. A passport issued to husband or wife may include his or her spouse, and that issued to a parent, his or her unmarried minor children or step-children. A minor brother or sister may be included in the passport of an older brother or sister. A minor grandchild, niece, or nephew of tender years may be included in the passport of the minor’s relative when the application therefore is accompanied by a request from the minor’s parental or legal guardian. Adopted children who are citizens of the Philippines may be included in a passport issued to their adoptive parents. A minor child who will attain majority within two years may be included in a passport issued to the minor’s parent under conditions stated above, but such passport shall be limited in validity to the date when such minor shall attain majority. A passport which includes a minor child who will attain majority within a period not exceeding three months prior to the date of the expiration of the usual two-year period for which a passport is issued may be exempted from the last mentioned limitation.

APPLICATION FOR PASSPORTS

5. Before a passport is issued to any person, such person shall subscribe to and submit a written application duly verified by his oath before an official of the Department of Foreign Affairs or a Filipino diplomatic or consular officer abroad authorized by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs to receive and/or act on applications for passports, or before a person in the Philippines authorized by law to administer oaths. For this purpose, said official or diplomatic or consular officer is authorized to administer oaths. If application is filed with a diplomatic or consular officer abroad, the same should be made in duplicate, the original to be retained by the receiving office and the duplicate forwarded to the Department of Foreign Affairs at Manila.

6. Each application shall contain the following:

(a) the name of the applicants;

(b) his place and date of birth;

(c) his occupation;

(d) his permanent residence;

(e) his present citizenship and citizenship at birth;

(f) name and nationality of father and mother;

(g) whether the applicant has been naturalized as a citizen of a foreign state or has taken an oath of allegiance to a foreign state:

(h) whether the applicant has accepted a commission in the military, naval, or air service of a foreign country and, if so, state what country and date of commission;

(i) if the applicant’s father was naturalized as a citizen of the Philippines, the date of such naturalization;

(j) if the applicant is a woman, whether she has ever been married, if, so, the date of her marriage, name, date , and place of birth of her husband, nationality of husband and place of his residence, her maiden name, whether she was previously married and, if, so, the name and place of birth and nationality of her former husband, and the date and place of her former marriage, and whether the former marriage was terminated by death or divorce and, if, so, the date thereof;

(k) if the present or former husband was naturalized as a citizen of the Philippines, the date and place of his naturalization, or if naturalized through his father, the father’s name and date and place of his naturalization;

(l) the name of the port from which, the name and date of sailing of the vessel upon which, the applicant intends to depart from the Philippines;

(m) names of the countries the applicant intends to visit and the object of the visit to each; (The Secretary of Foreign Affairs may, in his discretion, require an applicant to submit satisfactory documentary evidence of the object of his visit to each country named in his applicant.)

(n) the period within which applicant intends to return to the Philippines;

(o) description of the applicant;

(p) the names and dates and places of birth of other persons to be included in the passport; and

(q) such other pertinent information as the Secretary of Foreign Affairs may require.

7. The application must be executed in person by the applicant and must include an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines.

8. Children may execute applications in their behalf when of sufficient intelligence to understand the statements and the meaning of the oath or affirmation of allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines contained in the applications. As a rule, children of fourteen years of age or more should be required to execute their own applications for passports. If the circumstances warrant, a parent or guardian may execute applications for passports on behalf of minors of any age. In such cases, the application be signed as in the following example: “Juan Reyes by Jose Reyes, the father,” and the oath or affirmation of allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines need not be administered.

EVIDENCE OF CITIZENSHIP TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATIONS FOR PASSPORTS

9. An applicant must submit documentary proof of Philippine citizenship as well as evidence of Philippine citizenship of any person included in the application.

10. Birth certificates should be submitted when one is obtainable. It must bear the name, date, and places of birth of his parents and their citizenship.

11. If the birth certificate is not obtainable, a baptismal certificate should be obtained from the official in charge of the records of the church where the baptism took place. It should contain the same information required for birth certificates.

12. When the birth or baptismal certificate is not obtainable, an affidavit by some reputable person, preferably a close blood relative, should be submitted, stating briefly the place and date of birth of the applicant, his legitimacy, the birthplace and citizenship of the parents of the applicant, the relationship existing between affiant and the applicant, and how and through what source the knowledge of the birth and parentage of the applicant was acquired.

13. A citizen, who is naturalized, must submit his own naturalization certificate or a certified copy thereof.

14. A person claiming citizenship through naturalization of husband or parent must submit the naturalization certificate of the husband or parent, or a certified copy thereof.

15. A married woman or a widow must submit, in addition to her birth or baptismal certificate, her marriage certificate and whatever evidence she may have regarding her husband’s Philippine citizenship.

NAMES AND TITLES

16. The passport application shall contain the full name of the applicant, without his title or titles, thus “Jose Roldan Cruz,” or “Jose R. Cruz, not “Atty. J.R. Cruz.” A married woman’s name should ordinarily be written thus: “Leticia Gonzales Reyes,” not “Mrs. Pedro eyes.” An applicant whose name has been changed by order of a court should submit with his application a certified copy of such order or decree.

PHOTOGRAPHS OF APPLICANT

17. The applicant must submit with his application three identical photographs not more than 3 by 3 inches and not less than 2 ½ by 2 ½ inches in size, unmounted, printed on thin paper, on a light background, showing the full front view of the features of the applicant and taken not more than six months before the date they are submitted. Snapshot, newspaper or full-length photographs will not be accepted. One photograph must be signed by the applicant whose signature should correspond with the signature on the application, which photograph should be affixed to the passport to be issued. The unsigned photographs should be affixed to the application to be filed in the records of the Department or of the receiving office abroad. An applicant who desires that members of his family be included in his passport should submit three identical photographs of the members of his family. In such cases, a group photograph is preferable.

AFFIDAVIT OF SUPPORTING WITNESS

18. When the applicant applies for passport, he should be accompanied by one credible witness who must be a citizen of the Philippines, has known the applicant for not less than two years, and has a definite place of residence. The witness must give a statement to the effect that he is a citizen of the Philippines that he knows the applicant to be a citizen of the Philippines, that the allegations contained in the application are true to his knowledge and belief, and that he has known the applicant for a definite period of time. If no Filipino citizen is available as witness,, an alien known to the issuing office may act as witness. The witness should subscribe and swear to his statement before any of the officials or persons referred to in paragraph No. 5 above.

19. No lawyer or other person who expects to receive a fee in connection with the application for passport will be accepted as supporting witness.

AMENDMENT OF PASSPORTS

20. Passports may be amended by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs or by diplomatic or consular officers abroad duly authorized to issue or amend passports. They may be amended to include only those persons who are citizens of the Philippines and who could have been issued a passport in accordance with these rules and regulations. A request for the amendment of a passport to include any person should be in writing and accompanied by documentary evidence that such person is a citizen of the Philippines, and by three identical photographs of the person to be included meeting the requirements of these rules and regulations. No passport should be amended to include a person to whom a valid passport was previously issued in his or her name unless such passport is first submitted for cancellation. No passport should be amended to include a person who is included in another valid passport unless the latter is submitted for amendment to exclude such person.

PERIOD OF VALIDITY OF PASSPORT AND THE RENEWAL AND EXTENSION THEREOF

21. The original period of possible validity of a passport is restricted to two years; Provided, that the passport may be renewed for a period of not more than two additional years under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs; And, provided, further, that the Secretary of Foreign Affairs as well as any diplomatic or consular officer duly authorized by him, may restrict the original or renewal period of a passport to less than two years.

FEES FOR THE EXECUTION OF AN APPLICATION, ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF PASSPORTS, AND EXEMPTIONS FROM THE PAYMENT OF THE FEE FOR THE ISSUANCE OF PASSPORTS.

22. A fee of P2 shall be collected for the execution of each application for a passport; P25 for the issuance of a passport; and P10 for the renewal thereof.

23. No fee shall be collected for the issuance of passports to government officials going abroad in the discharge of their official duties, or for those issued to immediate members of their families.

AFFIDAVITS

24. Any affidavit which may be required under these rules or shall be submitted in support of an application for a passport or the renewal, extension, or amendment of a passport, shall be considered as, and become, a part of the application.

ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS

25. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs as well as any diplomatic or consular officer duly authorized by him, is authorized, in his discretion, to refuse to issue a passport, to restrict a passport for use only in certain countries, to withdraw or cancel a passport already issued, and to withdraw a passport for the purpose of restricting its validity or use in certain countries.

26. Should a person to whom a passport has been issued knowingly use or attempt to use it in violation of the conditions or restrictions contained therein, or of the provisions of these rules and regulations, the protection of the Philippines may be withdrawn from him while he continues to reside or travel abroad.

27. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs as well as any diplomatic or consular officer duly authorized by him is authorized, in his discretion, to require an applicant for a passport, or for the renewal or amendment thereof, to submit satisfactory evidence of the object of his journey abroad.

28. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs is authorized to prescribe regulations on the subject of issuing, renewing, extending, amending, restricting, or withdrawing a passport, additional to and not inconsistent with these rules.

EFFECTIVITY

29. This Order shall take effect as of July 4, 1946.

Done at the City of Manila, this 4 th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 127]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.