MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 44

CALLING THE CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES TO A SPECIAL SESSION

Whereas, the public interest requires that the Congress of the Philippines be convened in a special session in order to consider urgent legislative measures;

Now, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby call the Congress of the Philippines to a special session for such number of days as may be necessary, but not to exceed thirty days, commencing at ten o’clock in the morning of the nineteenth day of July, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, to consider the enactment of the following legislative measures:

1. An Act appropriating funds for Public Works and amending Republic Act No. 920.

2. An Act creating the Court of Agrarian Relations, prescribing its jurisdiction, and establishing its rules and procedure.

3. An Act to provide for the Civil Defense in time of war or other National Emergency, creating a National Defense Administration, and for other purposes.

4. An Act to govern the relation between Landlord and Tenant on Agricultural Lands under any system of tenancy.

5. An Act authorizing the expenditure during the period from January first to June thirty, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, of the income accruing to the general, special, trust and other funds in the Philippine Treasury during the same period.

6. An Act to amend section 178-A of Act Numbered 2427, otherwise known as the Insurance Act, as amended by Republic Act No. 488, and to add another section to be known as section 197-A, and for other purposes.

7. An Act to amend and repeal certain sections of the Charter of the City of Manila in order to provide for two additional judges in the Traffic Court and five additional Assistant City Fiscals.

8. An Act to amend Republic Act Numbered Six hundred and ninety-eight entitled “An Act to limit the importation of Foreign Leaf tobacco.”

9. An Act appropriating the sum of Three hundred thousand pesos for the expenses of a Trade Mission to the United States.

10. An Act to demonetize Treasury certificates and Central Bank notes of over one hundred-peso denominations, and for other purposes.

11. An Act amending Republic Act Numbered Six hundred sixty-three entitled “An Act to develop and improve the rice and corn industries, to stabilize the price of rice and to promote the social and economic conditions of the people engaged in the production of these staple foods.”

12. An Act to create the positions of Special Prosecutors in the Office of the Solicitor General for the purpose of investigating and prosecuting graft, corruption, abuses and other violations of laws in the Government and/or Government owned or controlled corporations.

13. An Act to further amend section two of Republic Act Numbered Six hundred one, as amended by Republic Act Numbered Eleven seventy five (re special excise tax on foreign exchange).

14. An Act to amend certain sections of Republic Act Numbered Two hundred ninety-six otherwise known as the Judiciary Act of 1948, as amended, so as to provide for additional branches of the Court of First Instance, and to authorize a district Judge of First Instance to decide cases heard and submitted to him for decision even after his appointment to another district.

15. An Act to amend the title and sections one, two and three of Republic Act Numbered Six hundred and fifty-seven entitled “An Act to promote the production of cassava flour, to regulate the importation of wheat flour and for other purposes” and to regulate the production, manufacture, sale and distribution of cassava flour and starch, and for other purposes.

All persons entitled to sit as members of the Congress of the Philippines are requested to take notice of this proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(SGD.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives