MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 9

RESERVING FOR THE USE OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPS (EDCOR) A CERTAIN PARCEL OF THE PUBLIC DOMAIN SITUATED IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF KABACAN AND KIDAPAWAN, PROVINCE OF COTABATO, ISLAND OF MINDANAO

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and pursuant to the provisions of section 83 of Commonwealth Act No. 141, as amended, I hereby withdraw from sale and settlement and reserve for the use of the Economic Development Corps (EDCOR) under the administration of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, subject to private rights, if any there be, the following described parcel of land of the public domain situated in the municipalities of Kabacan and Kidapawan, Province of Cotabato, Island of Mindanao, to wit:

Beginning at a point marked 1 on Bureau of Forestry sketch plan, C. E. 17, being along the Davao-Cotabato Provincial boundary line N. 16° E. approximately 36 km. from the municipality of Kidapawan, Cotabato; thence S. 54° W. about 3,350 meters to point 2, a white lauan tree, 40 cm. in diameter, marked B. F. 420 (1006/12), on the west bank of Anoling Creek; thence following the northern boundary of the proposed Cotabato Land Classification Project No. 42-K, in a northerly and westerly directions about 18,400 in. to point 3, Balobo tree, 30 cm. in diameter, marked B. F. 422 (1024/32), on the west bank of Malohimit Creek; thence N. 41° 30′ W. about 15,900 m. to point 4, a point at the junction of Pulangi and Arakan Eivers; thence following Pulangi River upstream in a northeasterly direction about 12,400 m. to point 5, a point at the junction of Pulangi and Kulaman River; thence following Kulaman River upstream in a southeasterly direction 9,650 m. to point 6, a point at the junction of Kulaman and Tinanan Rivers; thence following Tinanan River upstream in a southeasterly directon about 8,000 m. to point 7, a point at the junction of Tinanan and Miocan Rivers; thence following Miocan River upstream in a southeasterly direction about 3,500 m. to point 8, a point at the intersection of Davao—Cotabato Provincial boundary line in a southerly drection about 6,100 m. to point 1, the point of beginning, containing an area of approximately 27,440 hectares.

The reservation of this parcel of land is subject to the following conditions and restrictions:

1. That the area covered by the reservation shall be subject to classification by the Bureau of Forestry; 2. That the portions thereof which will be segregated and delimited by the Bureau of Forestry as timberlands shall remain under the control and administration of the said Bureau and excluded from the reservation; 3. That there are Reserved as timberlands a strip of 15 meters in width on each side of any public trail therein used as outlet for timber and other forest products, and a strip of 40 meters in width from the highest bank on each side of any stream for stream bank protection in such areas as will be released and not needed for forest purposes. 4. That the utilization of forest products existing in such areas as will be released and not needed for forest purposes shall remain subject to the Forest and Internal Revenue Laws and Regulations, and the present licensees, or future holders of licenses which may be granted by the Director of Forestry covering such areas as may be occupied under the authorization of the Secretary of National Defense, for purposes of such utilization, shall have preferential right in the utilization of existing timber and also the right to construct and maintain logging trails as timber outlets.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and firty -four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President: FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives