MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 14*

RESERVING CERTAIN AREA OF THE PHILIPPINE WATERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF QUEZON PROVINCE FOR A MARINE BIOLOGICAL STATION TO BE ESTABLISHED AND OPERATED BY THE LUZONIAN COLLEGES, UNDER THE CONTROL AND SUPERVISION OF THE DIRECTOR OF FISHERIES, FOR SCIENTIFIC AND EDUCATIONAL STUDIES OF MARINE AND ESTUARINE FAUNA AND FLORA AS WELL AS THE OCEANOGRAPHY OF THE WATERS OF THE RESERVATION PRINCIPALLY FOR THE WISE UTILIZATION AND CONSERVATION OF THE AQUATIC RESOURCES OF THE AREA

Upon recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and pursuant to the provisions of section 73 of Act Numbered Four thousand and three, as amended, I hereby reserve for a marine biological station to be established and operated by the Luzonian Colleges under the supervision and control of the Director of Fisheries, subject to private rights if any there be, a certain marine area of Philippine waters situated in the Municipalities of Lucena and Padre Burgos, Quezon Province, Islands of Luzon, and more particularly described and delimited as follows:

“Starting from the coastline off Tayabas Point (13′ 53′ 30″ N. 121° 30′ 45″ E.), Lucena, Quezon Province, Luzon Island and follow­ing the line due south to a position (13° 51′ 00″ N. 121° 36′ 45″ E.) about 2% miles from Tayabas point, thence along the line due east to a position (13° 51′ 00″ N. 121° 52′ 12″ E.) about 15⅓ miles distant from the immediately preceding position, thence along the line due north to its intersection with the coastline of the mainland of Luzon Island, and thence along the coastline to the starting point.”

The use of the said reservation shall be subject to the following rules; and regulations;

1. That commercial fishing shall be limited to the use of the following fishing appliances with certain limitations: baklad, kawil, pevnte, Mixing, pukot laot, pukot tabi, pahila, pabahay, dayakus, sapyaw, basnig, salambao, bintol, bomb on, katigbi, kubkob, and Muro-ami. However, all forms of subsistence fishing gear, such as bingwit, dala, sakag, pana, subsod, and the like, shall be allowed without restriction at any time of the year. Provided, however, That baklads shall be constructed with a distance of not less than 200 meters from each other and hot less than 100 meters if owned by the same owner. Provided, further, That baklad set across straits, channels, streams, and rivers shall leave open one third of the passage to allow free navigation and migration, to and from, of estuarine and catadromous fishes.

2. Sapyaw, basing, talacop, cubcob, largarete, and muro-ami shall only be allowed to operate during the southwest and northerly period (May to. February, inclusive of each year) and closed during the rest of the year (March and April).

3. That the catching of bangas fry (katvag-kawag) and sugpo fry shall be allowed; provided, that the fry of other commercial fishes shall be returned into the water unharmed.

4. That the catching of the bañgos breeders (sabalo) shall be prohibited from February 1 to July 31, inclusive of each year.

5. That the catching of the fry of banak, sardines, herrings, mackerel, caranx, samaral, alimasag, and alimango shall be prohibited at all season of the year in the reservation.

6. That the destruction of coral reefs and other natural habitats of aquatic animals, except in the interest of safe navigation, shall be prohibited. The commercial gathering of coral rocks, sand, and gravel for construction purposes shall be subject to special permits to be issued by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

7. That the operation of trawls of any kind (beam, otter, paranzella and Danish) shall be entirely prohibited at all times of the year within the reservation.

8. The gathering of edible seaweeds, mollusks, and echinoderms shall be limited for home consumption and subject to permit issued by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

9. The gathering of commercial shells shall be subject to the following regulations:

It shall be; unlawful for any person to take, sell, transfer, or have in possession for any purpose whatsoever shells or valves smaller than the minimum sizes hereinbelow described:

(a) Pinctada maxima (Jameson)—commonly known as the goldlip pearl shell or “concha blanca”; nineteen centimeters maximum outside long axis measurement, taken at right angles to the base. (See diagram)

(b) Pinctada margaritifera (Linneaus)—commonly known as the black-lip pearl shell or “concha negra”; eleven centimeters maximum outside long axis measurement, taken at right angles to the base. (See diagram.)

(c) Trochus niloticus Linneaus—commonly known as the smooth top shell, “simong” or “trocha” smooth variety; eight centimeters across the least diameter of the base, measured at right angles to the axis. (See diagram.)

(d) Trochus noduliferus Lemarck— commonly known as babae or female and in the export trade as “hirose” shells; five centimeters across the least diameter of the base, taken at right angles to the axis. (See diagram.)

[Diagram]

(e) Turbo marmoratus Linneaus—commonly known as green snail shell, turban shell, “lalohg” or “bolalo,” nine centimeters across the least diameter of the base, measured at right angles to the axis. (See diagram.)

Any undersized shell or valve removed from the water through accident, or in ignorance of its size, shall be returned to the water immediately without being opened; otherwise, the offender will be penalized, in accordance with the provisions of. the law and this Order, and such offense shall be sufficient; cause, for the cancellation of the license.

10. Except for scientific and educational purpose, or for propagation, it shall be unlawful to take or catch fry except those prescribed in No. 3 of this regulation or fish eggs of all forms of aquatic animals in the reservation.

11. That all technical installations such as propagation and culture ponds, scientific instruments, live cages, etc. shall not be removed, destroyed or otherwise tampered by any fisherman or individual within the reservation.

The words and terms used in this Proclamation shall be construed as follows:

1. “Baklad” or fish corral means a stationary weir or trap devised to intercept and capture fish, consisting of rows of stakes or bamboo, palma brava or other materials fenced with either split bamboo mattings or wire nettings with one or more enclosures usually with easy entrance but difficult exit, and with or without leaders to direct the fish to the catching chambers or purse.

2. “Bashig”—originally, a Visayan term for a conical or box-like bag net of sinamay or cotton webbing, operated from an outrigger or motorboat as a huge dip-net with the aid of light.

3. “Sapyaw”—a round-haul seine made of cotton netting, operating from two boats with the aid of lights.

4. “Dayakos”—a sinamay filter net operated in river mouths for taking alamang (small shrimps) and hipon (larger shrimps) during flood tide. In Batangas and Laguna de Bay it also refered to beach seines of sinamay of cotton webbing.

5. “Pante”—drift, set, gill, or entangling type of nets.

6. “Kawil”—handlines or drop lines operated with or without lights.

7. “Pahila”—or “sibid sibid”—a troll line towed by an outrigger or motorboat.

8. “Kitang”—a set long line with branching lines (gangings) each provided with a hook.

9. “Pabahay” a floating fish trap consisting of a semi-circular enclosure of bamboo mattings, provided with a one-way entrance for fish, and buoyed up by bamboo raft; anchored at from 10 to 50 fathoms and operated usually with a light in the evening.

10. “Salambao”—a huge lift net operated on a lower platform with or without the aid of light.

11. “Bintol’—a small, shallow, square baited lift net for catching crabs.

12. “Bingwit”—a general term for pole and line.

13. “Dala”—a general term for cast net.

14. “Bumbon”—a fish shelter made by tying or piling together bunches of twigs, bushes, branches of trees, shrubs, and anchoring these on a . desired spot.

15. “Sakag” a push’.net ; for faking shrimps and other shallow-water form of fish. It is either made, of sinamay or cotton netting mounted on a collapsible, triangular frame.

16. “Largarete” a set gill net of cotton twine hung like a curtain from an anchored banca by two bamboo poles attached fore and aft.

17. “Katigbi”—a drive-in net made of a rectangular piece of fine-meshed cotton netting held by two men. Fish are driven by a line of coconut or banana leaves strung along a chain leadline.

18. “Pukot”—a general term for various types of nets operated from the, beach to deep watei. This includes pukot panggilid (beach seine), pukot panulingan, and similar kinds of pukot laot.

19. “Talacop” or “kubkob”—a purse or stop seine, the capture being effected by enclosing, pursing, and/or impounding.

20. “Trawl”—any kind of bottom drag net pulled by a motor vessel, either opened by a beam, a pair of other doors, or two towing vessels.

21. “Muro-ami”—a drive-in net made of coarse cotton webbing and operated in submerged reefs. Fish are driven by divers each provided with weighted rope and coconut leaf stringers.

22. “Spawning banak”—shall mean mullets which are sexually mature and which carry ripe eggs and milt and are making seaward migration for the purpose of breeding.

23. “Spawning sabalo”—shall mean the breeder bañgos which carry ripe eggs and milt and are ready to spawn.

24. “Kawag-kawag”—are the fry of bañgos (Chanos chanos) measuring not more than 15 millimeters long.

25. “Aligasin”—shall mean the fry and fingerling or young of mullets (banak) belonging to the family Mugilidae.

26. “Siliniasi”—shall mean the fry of herrings and sardines measuring less than three centimeters long.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

*Published in Off. Gaz. Vol. 50, No. 4, 1954. Republished as requested due to discrepancies in the technical description of an area reserved for a marine biological station in Quezon Province.

Source: University Library, Far Eastern University