PROCLAMATION NO. 734

PUBLISHING THE INTERPRETATION MADE BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE OF ITS INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING THE PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE EXCHANGE OF COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE AUTHORITIES OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES, ON THE ONE HAND, AND FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICIALS IN THE PHILIPPINES, ON THE OTHER.

Whereas, on September sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, the President of the Philippines issued Proclamation Numbered One hundred ninety-eight, publishing the instructions issued by the Department of State of the United States defining the procedure to be followed in the exchange of communications between the authorities of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, on the one hand, and foreign consular officials in the Philippines and American diplomatic and consular officers, on the other hand; and

Whereas, in order to avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation of the procedure as set forth in said instructions of the Department of State, that Department has made certain interpretation thereof reading as follows:

I. Foreign consular officers stationed in the Philippines may appropriately address and appeal to the local authorities, throughout the extent of their consular districts, for the purpose of protecting the rights and interests of their nationals which are specifically provided, for in any treaty, law or regulation. However, consular communications to the Commonwealth authorities, whether formal or informal, should be limited to requests for the consideration of individual cases leaving matters deemed to affect the general interests of foreign nationals to be dealt with as provided in paragraph III. Requests for routine information may be sent directly to the Commonwealth authorities.

II. Questions relating to exequaturs, visits of foreign war vessels and other formal matters’ should be dealt with as usual through diplomatic channels, i. e. through the embassy or legation at Washington of the country concerned. Questions relating to visits of foreign airplanes should also be dealt with through diplomatic channels save where a different procedure has been authorized by the Department of State.

III. All matters involving questions of, policy, whether arising out of the administration of laws or regulations or relating to proposed amendments thereof, which may be deemed to affect the general interests of the nationals of any foreign government, should be referred to the Government of the United States through the embassy or legation at Washington of the country concerned, or through the High Commissioner. When a consular officer intends to refer matters through his country’s mission at Washington he may at the same time care to inform the High Commissioner of the general nature of his contemplated communication to that mission, in- order to facilitate the handling of the case. In any case which may reasonably be regarded as requiring urgent attention the appropriate foreign consular representative at Manila may bring the matter to the attention of the United States High Commissioner who, if he deems such action appropriate, will refer the case directly to the Commonwealth authorities. Otherwise he will bring the matter to the attention of the Department of State and so inform the foreign consular officer concerned.

Whereas, subject to the foregoing interpretation, the procedure published in Proclamation Numbered One hundred ninety-eight is still in effect.

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the interpretation above made by the Department of State of the United States, for the information and guidance of all concerned.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this second day of July, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library