MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 511

PUBLISHING REGULATIONS ISSUED BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE UNITED STATES ON NOVEMBER 10 AND 25, 1939, UNDER SECTION 2 (c ) AND (i) OF THE JOINT RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS APPROVED NOVEMBER 4, 1939, AND DEPARTMENTAL ORDER NO. 831.

Whereas the Secretary of State of the United States did on November 10 and 25, 1939, issue the following regulations:

“November 10, 1939

No. 857

1. “REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 2 (c) AND (i) OF THE JOINT RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS APPROVED NOVEMBER 4, 1939.

“On November 4, 1939, the President issued a proclamation under the authority of section 1 of the joint resolution of Congress approved on that same day finding that a state of war exists between Germany and France; Poland; and the United Kingdom, India, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the Union of South Africa and thereby making applicable to the export or transport to those countries of any articles or materials (except copyrighted articles or materials) the provisions of section 2 (c), (d), ( e). (f), (g), (h), (i) and (l) of the said joint resolution.

“The President’s proclamation of November 4, 1939, provides in part as follows:

‘”And I do hereby delegate to the Secretary of State the power to exercise any power or authority conferred on me by the said joint resolution as made effective by this my proclamation issued thereunder, which is not specifically delegated by executive order to some other officer or agency of this Government, and the power to promulgate such rules and regulations not inconsistent with law as may be necessary and proper to carry out any of its provisions”

“By virtue of the authority vested in him by the President’s proclamation quoted above to promulgate such rules and regulations not inconsistent with law which may be necessary and proper to carry be provisions of section 2 (c) and (i) of the joint resolution of Congress approved November 4, 1939, as made effective by this proclamation, the Secretary of State prescribes the following rules and regulations:

“(1) The provisions of section 2 ( c ) do not apply to personal effects and household goods or any other articles or materials intended for the personal use of any United States citizen traveling on a valid passport.

“(2) The provisions of section 2 ( c ) do not apply to any articles or materials exported for relief purposes by the American Red Cross or by any person or organization authorized to solicit and collect contributions under the rules and regulations issued by the Secretary of State pursuant to section 8 of the Neutrality Act of November 4, 1939.

“(3) The provisions of section 2 ( e ) do not apply to the transport to any of the countries named in the President’s Proclamation of November 4, 1939, referred to above, of arms and ammunition intended exclusively for sporting or scientific purposes, when carried on the person of an individual or in his baggage.

“(4) Articles and materials the shipment of which originated outside the geographic United States and which are shipped through the United States in bond or which arrive at a port in the United States merely as an incident of transit between two foreign points, whether or not transshipped in a port of the United States, need not be covered by the sworn declaration as to transfer of title required by section 2 ( c ) of the Neutrality Act of 1939 if the shipper is outside the geographic United States and is not a citizen of the United States, or an agent of such citizen, and the articles and materials are not consigned to a citizen of the United States, or an agent of such citizen.”

“November 25, 1939

No. 620

2. “REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 2 ( c ) AND ( i ) OF THE JOINT RESOLUTION OP CONGRESS APPROVED NOVEMBER 4, 1939.

“By virtue of the authority vested in him by the President’s Proclamation of November 4, 1939 to promulgate such rules and regulations not inconsistent with law as may be necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of section 2 ( c ) and (i) of the joint resolution of Congress approved November 4, 1939, as made effective by that proclamation, the Secretary of State hereby prescribes the following regulation supplementary to those prescribed on November 10, 1939:

“(5) ‘The shipper’s declaration (oath) required by section 2 ( c ) of the Neutrality Act of 1939 must be filed with the Collector of the Port from or through which articles or materials are exported prior to the exportation from the United States of such article. or materials. If the required declarations (oaths) have not been filed with regard to all articles and materials on any vessel before clearance thereof, the vessel may nevertheless be cleared if, but only if, the Collector of Customs to whom request for clearance is made is satisfied that the transfer of right, title and interest required by section 2 ( c) has been made as to all such articles and materials. All failures by shippers to file the declarations (oaths) as required by this regulation shall be referred t the United States Attorney having jurisdiction.’”

And whereas the Secretary of State of the United States did on December 14, 1939, issue the following Departmental Order:

3. “REGULATIONS RELATING TO TRAVEL INTO AND THROUGH COMBAT AREAS AND ON BELLIGERENT TO VESSELS

“DEPARTMENTAL ORDER NO. 831

“Pursuant to the authority contained in the President’s Proclamations Nos. 2374 and 2376 issued on November 4, 1939, pursuance of sections 1 and 3, respectively, of the Neutrality Act of 1939, approved November 4, 1939, I, Cordell Hull, Secretary of State of the United States, hereby prescribed the following regulation, amending the regulations issued on November 6, 1939, as amended by regulation issued on November 17, 1939, relating to travel on belligerent vessels, and also amending the regulations issued on November 17, 1939, relating to travel into or through combat areas.

“Individuals who possess both American nationality and a foreign nationality, and who habitually reside in the foreign state of which they are nationals, and who are using passports of such foreign state, may, while en route to and from such state, travel on a belligerent vessel across the English Channel, the Irish Sea or St. George’s Channel without obtaining scpecific authority and without an American passport endorsed as valid for such travel. Individuals who undertake travel under the conditions indicated shall do so on the understanding that they will look for protection to the foreign state whose passport they carry.

“CORDELL HULL

“ December 14, 1939.”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the above regulations and Departmental Order for the information and guidance of all concerned. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of he Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this ninth day of February, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library