PROCLAMATION NO. 23

CALLING UPON ALL YOUNG MEN, CITIZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES, WHO SHALL ATTAIN THE AGE OF 20 YEARS IN THE CALENDAR YEAR 1936 AND SUCCEEDING YEARS, TO REGISTER FOR MILITARY INSTRUCTION.

I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power conferred upon me by sections fifty-four and fifty-five of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, entitled “The National Defense Act,” do hereby call upon all young men, citizens of the Philippines, who shall attain the age of twenty years during the calendar year nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and succeeding years, to register for military instruction in the city, municipality, or municipal district government in which they reside.

The following rules and regulations shall be followed in the registration and selection of trainees for military service:

(a)     Members of the Philippine Scouts and the Philippine Army.

(b)     Young men, citizens of the Philippines, who are residing abroad. These persons shall register within five days after their return to the Philippines in order to determine their obligation for military training.

If under thirty year of age on their return, they shall be liable for military service, and shall enter thereon if drawn at the next national drawing following their return.

(c)     Persons who, because of incarceration awaiting trial or undergoing sentence of a court of law, are prevented from registering. They shall, upon their release from custody, register for military trainee instruction with the president of the municipality or township in which they reside. If under thirty years of age at the time of release, they shall be liable for trainee instruction; if over that age, they shall not be required to serve with the colors.

(a)     Name.

(b)     Address.

(c)     Date and place of birth.

(d)     Civil status (single or married).

(e)     Name of each dependent and degree of dependency.

(f)      Employment, nature of the same, and the name of employer.

(g)     Educational attainments, special aptitudes or qualifications.

(h)     Preference for branch of service that is Infantry, Cavalry, Artillery, Engineers, Air Corps, Medical Service. Quartermaster Service, Ordnance Service.

(i)       Preference for place of service, that is, with element of the Regular Force at either Manila, Cebu, or Camp Keithley; or with a training cadre in his own province. The period of service with the Regular Force shall be for one year; with training cadres the period of service shall be for five and one-half months.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this eleventh day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

[SEAL]

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary of the Interior