MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 204

DESIGNATING THE PERIOD FROM NOVEMBER 6 TO 30, 1937, AS THE PERIOD FOR THE NATIONAL FUND CAMPAIGN OF THE BOY SCOUTS OF THE PHILIPPINES.

Through its splendid accomplishments in character development and in promoting the moral and bodily welfare of, Filipino youth the Boy Scout organization has earned for itself a high place in the respect and esteem of our people. In recognition of its effective and disinterested services the National Assembly, on October thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, enacted a law creating a public corporation to be known as the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. The altruistic purposes of the organization are enumerated in section three of that Law, which reads as follows: “The purpose of this corporation shall be to promote, through organization and cooperation with other agencies, the ability of boys to do things for themselves and others, to train them in scoutcraft, and to teach them patriotism, courage, self-reliance, and kindred virtues, using methods which are now in common use by boy scouts.”

To carry on this work effectively proper facilities for administration and control are essential. The central offices of the Boy Scouts are temporarily but inadequately housed in the Rizal Memorial Stadium. A permanent and suitable home must be provided. Since the formal inauguration of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, successors to the Philippine Branch of the Boy Scouts of America, will take place in January, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, it is particularly desirable, that its headquarters be permanently located before that date. To provide funds for this purpose the Boy Scout executives have decided to appeal to the public, which is the direct beneficiary of all their work.

Being convinced of the worthiness of the Boy Scout organization, of the value of its efforts to Filipino welfare, and of the urgency of its needs for adequate facilities;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, hereby designate and set aside the period from November sixth to thirtieth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, as a special one for the conduct of an intensive campaign to raise the necessary funds for this purpose. Further, I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines in every section of the country and in every walk of life to assist in this campaign and to give their special and general support so that the organization may be insured of adequate funds to prosecute vigorously and continuously its work throughout the nation.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-first day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the interior

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives