PROCLAMATION NO. 63

DECLARING THE PERIOD BETWEEN INDEPENDENCE DAY, JULY 4TH, AND JULY 31ST, AS THE TIME FOR THE ANNUAL ROLL CALL OF THE RED CROSS IN THE PHILIPPINES.

I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period between Independence Day, July thirty-first, as the time for the Annual Roll Call of the Red Cross in the Philippines.

During the last calendar year the Red Cross has cooperated with the Government in dealing with problems that have to do with the welfare and happiness of our people. Over two hundred twenty thousand victims of disaster have received relief in one form or another; five hundred thousand of our children have been given dental care and attention by Junior Red Cross dentists. Red Cross nurses rendered kindly and efficient service to over two hundred thousand school children, and have blessed ninety thousand by their ministrations. The Leper Relief and Rehabilitations Service of the Red Cross has benefited over four hundred fifty individuals and families directly or indirectly affected by the dread disease. These are only a few of the varied and widespread services and this great society.

In time of calamity and need the Government will continue to look to the Red Cross for the prompt and adequate assistance it has always given in the past. Through the Red Cross, and inspired by its ideals, our people have accepted their part of the responsibility when the Government has been confronted by great emergencies. They have contributed their money and their time to aid their unfortunate fellow citizens. I appeal to all our people in all walks of life, to support the Red Cross by their services and contributions, according to their ability, and thereby assist in building up, in these Islands, one of the strongest Red Cross societies in the world.

Our vision of service should not be narrowed to our own land and people. We should be prepared to extend a helping hand when calamity strikes and distress prevails beyond our borders. The Red Cross knows no race, creed nor boundary lines.

I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, our business interests, all insular, provincial, and municipal officials, and other public spirited individuals and institutions, to actively assist in the organization and conduct of the Roll Call, and to give generous and special support this year in order that the Red Cross may be able to meet all its responsibilities.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirteenth day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

[SEAL]

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Under Secretary of the Interior