MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 323

AERIAL NAVIGATION IN PHILIPPINE TERRITORY

Whereas, it has been found necessary and expedient to exercise effective supervision and control over aerial navigation in the Philippines;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby issue the following regulations governing aerial navigation in Philippine territory:

1. Except as hereinafter provided, no aircraft other than those of the United States and Philippine Governments shall fly over any Philippine territory.

2. No flying by any aircraft other than those of the United States and Philippine Governments shall be allowed within the distance of:

( a ) Fifteen miles from the perimeter of the following-named areas:

(1) Corregidor Island, Manila Bay, (2) Subic Bay, Island of Luzon.

( b ) Six miles from the perimeter of the following area:

(1) Cavite Peninsula, Manila Bay, except that such aircraft authorized to fly by paragraph three of this proclamation and desiring to enter or leave Manila Bay through the entrance may do so, provided that it shall follow a course along the center of the South Channel between Caballo Island and Fraile Island at an altitude of not greater than three hundred feet.

3. Aircraft on goodwill trans-oceanic flight which have previously obtained permission as provided in section seven of Aeronautics Bulletin Number Three of the Bureau of Aeronautics shall be escorted upon entering Philippine territory through a definite route by army planes.

4. Aircraft owned by private corporations or individuals may be operated or navigated in Philippine territory only after securing a license duly issued by the Director of Aeronautics in accordance with the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred and sixty-eight and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

5. Aerial photography of any part of Philippine territory is prohibited, except such as is officially made by the United States and Philippine Governments and by agencies expressly authorized by the President of the Philippines.

6. No aircraft other than those of the United States and Philippine Governments shall carry any apparatus, instrument or device which can be used for aerial photography without securing special written permission from the President of the Philippines.

7. Any violation of any provision of this proclamation shall be dealt with in accordance with law.

All proclamations and executive orders or part thereof previously issued which are in conflict with any of the provisions hereof are hereby revoked.

The above regulations shall become effective from the date hereof.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library