MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 774

PUBLISHING PROCLAMATION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, ISSUED ON OCTOBER 22, 1941.

Whereas the President of the United States did, on October twenty-second, nineteen hundred and forty-one ; issue the following proclamation:

“Whereas on May 20, 1941, with a view to ensuring the most effective correlation and use of the instruments of civilian defense, I established by Executive Order the Office of Civilian Defense; and

“Whereas by my Proclamation of May 27, 1941, I declared that an unlimited national emergency confronted this country, which requires that its military, naval, air, and civilian defenses be put on a basis of readiness to repel any and all acts or threats of aggression directed toward any part of the Western Hemisphere; and

“Whereas it is the manifest duty and desire of every person in the United States to participate in measures essential to a civilian defense;

“Now, therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, do hereby designate the period commencing on Armistice Day, Tuesday, November 11, 1941, and continuing through Sunday, November 16, as a time for all persons throughout the nation to give thought to their duties and responsibilities in the defense of this country, and to become better informed of the many vital phases of the civilian defense program and of the opportunities which it offers for the participation of every individual American in the defense of our priceless heritage, and I request the Governors of the several states, territories, and possessions of the United States to issue similar proclamations.

“In witness whereof, I have hereupon set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to be affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington, this 22nd day of October, in the year of our Lord 1941, and of the Independence of the United States of America the 166th.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT.”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby give publicity to said proclamation and enjoin observance of its provisions upon all citizens of the Philippines and other persons residing or being therein.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this fifth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library