MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 58

DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL RICE AND CORN CORPORATION AS A RELIEF ORGANIZATION TO IMPORT RICE, FREE OF DUTY

Whereas, official reports show that there exists a serious shortage of rice and there is imminent danger of inflation of prices as a result of manipulations resorted to by those in control of the limited stock at present available for the local needs;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare, under the provisions of Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred ninety-eight, an emergency to exist, and do hereby designate the National Rice and Corn Corporation as a relief organization for the purpose of importing rice, free of duty, in such quantities as may be necessary to relieve the situation, in accordance with Proclamation Numbered Eleven, dated November thirtieth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five.

The duties and responsibilities of the Director of Commerce as prescribed by Executive Order Numbered Twenty-one, dated March fifth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, with reference to the issuance of rules and regulations regarding the purchase, sale, and hoarding of palay and rice are hereby transferred to the National Rice and Corn Corporation.

All Government officials and employees, particularly the Director of Commerce and provincial and municipal treasurers, are hereby enjoined to extend to the National Rice and Corn Corporation such assistance as the latter may require for the proper execution of its relief work.

All executive orders and proclamations inconsistent with the provisions of this proclamation are hereby repealed.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: LEON G. GUINTO Under Secretary of the Interior

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives