MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 718

DECLARING THE PERIOD BETWEEN INDEPENDENCE DAY, JULY 4, AND JULY 31, 1941, AS THE TIME FOR THE SIXTH COMMONWEALTH ROLL CALL OF THE RED CROSS OF THE PHILIPPINES.

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period between Independence Day, July fourth, and July thirty-first, nineteen hundred and forty-one, the time for the Sixth Commonwealth Roll Call of the Red Cross of the Philippines.

In these dark and critical days, the symbol of the Red Cross has been kept alive in every nation. This most humanitarian organization has ministered, on a vast scale, to the whole range of human suffering. Our Philippine Red Cross has rendered every form of help to thousands of women and little children who have sought refuge in the Philippines. Our women have gathered together daily to send aid to the wounded and the destitute on the battlefields and in bomb-shattered cities. Materials and funds have gone forth from the Philippines in a steady stream.

We are now faced with the task of preparing measures at home for the prevention of suffering should the exigencies of war reach our shores. Under such conditions, civilian relief work is tremendously increased by problems of evacuation, provision of shelter, care of the destitute, care and treatment of the sick and wounded, rationing of food, and the prevention of epidemics. The Philippine Red Cross has been called upon to work hand in hand with the Government through the Civilian Emergency Administration. The responsibilities placed upon the Red Cross will be heavy and difficult. As a voluntary service society, organized and set up by law, its capacity to serve will in a large measure depend upon the moral and financial support of all our people. In accepting these new responsibilities, the organization should continue its regular peacetime services without abatement.

I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines to assist actively in the organization and conduct of the Roll Call, and to increase their contributions manifold, so that the Red Cross may face the future with assurance and perform its ministries to prevent and alleviate suffering promptly and efficiently.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Baguio, this second day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library