PROCLAMATION NO. 729

DESIGNATING THE CIVILIAN EMERGENCY ADMINISTRATION AS A RELIEF ORGANIZATION TO IMPORT CORN FREE OF DUTY.

Whereas it has been reported that there is an impending corn shortage for the current year as a result of the prolonged drought which not only delayed planting in many places but also greatly affected areas which have already been planted, especially in the Visayan Islands;

Whereas it is necessary to provide adequate means for a steady and sufficient supply of this commodity so as to stabilize the prices thereof at a level within the reach of the masses; and

Whereas on April first, nineteen hundred and forty, the Chief Executive declared through Proclamation Numbered Five hundred thirty-three that a state of emergency exists in the Philippines under the provisions of Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred ninety-eight, and that such emergency continues to exist until now;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate the Civilian Emergency Administration as a relief organization under said Act Numbered Four thousand one hundred ninety-eight for the purpose of importing corn, free of duty, for distribution among distressed people, in such quantities as may be necessary to relieve the situation, subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by the Insular Collector of Customs, with the approval of the Secretary of Finance.

This designation shall be subject to the condition that no importation of duty-free corn, as authorized in this proclamation, shall be made without the previous specific approval of the President in each instance.

All Government officials and employees particularly the Director of Commerce and provincial, city, and municipal treasurers, are hereby enjoined to extend to the Civilian Emergency Administration such assistance as the latter may require for the proper execution of its relief work.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library