MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 533

DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL RICE AND CORN CORPORATION AS A RELIEF ORGANIZATION TO IMPORT RICE FREE OF DUTY.

Whereas it has been reported that there is an impending rice shortage for the current year as a result of the flood last December which destroyed a portion of the crop, especially in Central Luzon; and

Whereas, it is necessary to provide adequate means for a steady and sufficient supply of this commodity so as to stabilize the prices thereof at a level within the reach of the masses;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare an emergency to exist under the provisions of Act No. 4198, entitled “An Act amending section eleven of the Act entitled ‘An Act to raise revenue for the Philippine Islands, and for other purposes,’ approved by the Congress of the United States on August fifth, nineteen hundred and nine, as amended, for the purpose of admitting free entry of certain merchandise in time of emergency,” and do hereby designate the National Rice and Corn Corporation as a relief organization for the purpose of importing rice, free of duty, for distribution among distressed people, in such quantities as may be necessary to relieve the situation, subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by the Insular Collector of Customs, With the approval of the Secretary of Finance.

This designation shall be subject to the condition that no importation of duty-free rice as authorized in this proclamation shall be made without the previous spec.fic approval of the President in each instance.

All government officials and employees, particularly the Director of Commerce and provincial, city and municipal treasurers, are hereby enjoined to the National Rice and Corn Corporation such assistance as the latter may require for the proper execution of its relief work.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed

Done at the City of Manila, this first day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library