MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 359

DECLARING SATURDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1938, A SPECIAL PUBLIC HOLIDAY

A petition has been received from, and on behalf of the associated banks in Manila, requesting that the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, be declared a bank holiday so as to enable the banking houses to deal with the heavy work incidental to the cloisng of their books at the end of the year. The banking, houses have agreed that negotiable papers which .would fall due on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, if the same were not a holiday, shall not be protested until the sunset of the following Tuesday, January third, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine. The said petitioners have further agreed that they will receive moneys’ from the business community on the said thirty-first day of December for safe-keeping, provided that such moneys shall not be entered on the banks accounts until the third day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine.

It appearig to the Chief Executive that, inasmuch as the thirtieth day of December, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and the second day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, are public holdiays, the said thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, tan be declared a special public holiday to; the great advantage of the banking houses and no disadvantage will result to the public in general;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, virtue of the authority in me vested by section thirty of, the Revised Administrative Code, and there being in my judgment sufficient reasons therefor, do hereby proclaim Saturday,: December thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, as a special public holiday.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused, the seal of the Commonwealth, of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twentieth day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library