PROCLAMATION NO. 248

PROCLAIMING THE FIRST WEEK OF MARCH OF EVERY YEAR AS FIRE PREVENTION WEEK

In order to arouse the inhabitants of the Philippines to the necessity of preventing the tremendous waste resulting from unnecessary fires and to impress upon them their individual responsibility for this economic loss and to induce them to take more interest in devising methods of fire prevention, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate and proclaim the first week of March of every year as Fire Prevention Week. This week shall be observed in every municipality and chartered city in the Philippines.

I request every inhabitant to examine his own home and remove any conditions likely to start or spread fire. I urge the daily newspapers and periodicals to give special attention to the subject of fire prevention so that its importance may be brought to the attention of all. I urge storekeepers to have fire prevention displays in their windows or other prominent places and transportation companies to have suitable placards in their cars, trains, and stations.

I urge upon all officials of provincial, municipal, and city governments where fire departments are not provided, to form voluntary fire brigades in their respective communities and to enlist the cooperation of all Government employees to achieve the purpose for which this movement has been organized and thus impress upon the lessons that it intends to teach.

Proclamation Numbered Fourteen, series of nineteen hundred and twenty-four, and Proclamation Numbered Four hundred and thirty-seven, series of nineteen hundred and thirty-two, are hereby, revoked.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twentieth day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

{SEAL}

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary to the President