MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES PROCLAMATION NO. 802

DECLARING WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1941, A SPECIAL PUBLIC HOLIDAY

A petition has been received from and on behalf of the associated banks in Manila, requesting that the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and forty-one, be declared a public holiday so as to enable the banking houses to deal with the heavy work incidental to the closing of their books at the end of the year. The banking houses have agreed that negotiable papers which would fall due on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and forty-one, if the same were not holiday, shall not be protested until the sunset of the following Friday, January second, nineteen hundred and forty-two. The said petitioners have further agreed that they will receive moneys from the business community on the said thirty-first day of December for safekeeping, provided that such moneys shall not be entered on the banks’ accounts until the second day of January, nineteen hundred and forty-two.

It appearing to the Chief Executive that, inasmuch as the thirtieth day of December, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and the first day of January, nineteen hundred and forty-two, are public holidays, the said thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and forty-one, can be declared special public holiday to the great advantage of the banking houses and no disadvantage will result to the public in general.

NOW THEREFORE, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority in me vested by section thirty of the Revised Administrative Code, and there being in my judgment sufficient reasons therefor, do hereby proclaim Wednesday, December thirty-first, nineteen hundred and forty-one, as a special public holiday.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 27 th day of December, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON

By the President: (Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library