MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 776

PUBLISHING PROCLAMATION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES DESIGNATING THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1941, AS THE THANKSGIVING DAY

Whereas, the President of the United States did, on November 8, 1941, issue the following proclamation:

“A PROCLAMATION

I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, do hereby designate and set aside Thursday, the 20th day of November, 1941, as a day to be observed in giving thanks to the heavenly source of our earthly blessings.

“Our beloved country is free and strong. Our moral physical defenses against the forces of threatened aggression are mounting daily in magnitude and effectiveness.

“In the interest of our own future we are sending succor at increasing pace to those peoples abroad who are bravely defending their homes and their precious liberties against annihilation.

“We have not lost our faith in the spiritual dignity of man, our proud belief in the right of all people to live out their lives in freedom and with equal treatment. The love of democracy still burns brightly in our hearth.

“We are grateful to the Father of us all for the innumerable daily manifestations of His Beneficent mercy in affairs both public and private, for the bounties of the harvest, for opportunities to labor and to serve, and for the conveyance of those homely joys and satisfactions which enrich our lives.

“Let us ask the divine blessings on our decision and determination to protect our way of life against the forces of evil and slavery which seek in these days to encompass us.

“On the day appointed for this purpose, let us reflect at our homes in places of worship on the goodness of God and, in giving thanks, let us pray for a speedy and to strife and the establishment on earth of freedom, brotherhood, and justice for enduring time.

“In witness whereof, i have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to be affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington, this 8th day of November, in the year of our Lord, 1941, and of the independence of the United States of America the 156th.

“Franklin D. Roosevelt.”

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines do hereby give publicity to said proclamation and enjoins observance of its provisions upon all citizens of the Philippines and other persons residing or being therein.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the city of Manila, this 12 th day of November, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON

By the President: (Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library