MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 609

DESIGNATING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER FOURTEENTH TO OCTOBER FIFTEENTH, NINETEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY, AS THE PERIOD FOR THE JOINT CITIZENSHIP FUND CAMPAIGN OF THE BOY SCOUTS AND GIRL SCOUTS OF THE PHILIPPINES.

Whereas, in recognition of the splendid accomplishments of the Boy Scouts in character development and in promoting the moral and physical welfare of the Filipino youth, the National Assembly, on October 31, 1936, enacted Commonwealth Act No. 111, creating a public corporation to be known as the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. The altruistic purposes of the organization are enumerated in section 3 of that law which reads as follows: “The purpose of this corporation shall be to promote, through organization and cooperation with other agencies, the ability of boys to do things for themselves and others, to train them in scout-craft, and to teach them patriotism, courage, self-reliance, and kindred virtues, using the methods which are now in common use by boy scouts.”

Whereas the National Assembly, on May 26, 1940, enacted Commonwealth Act No. 542, creating a public corporation to be known as the Girl Scouts of the Philippines. The purpose of the organization is set forth in section three of that law, which reads as follows: “The purpose of this organization is to help girls from seven to eighteen years of age to realize the ideals of womanhood, as a preparation for their responsibilities in the home and service to the community and in the realization of this purpose the corporation shall be the directing and coordinating head of the Girl Scout Movement in the Philippines, and shall fix maintain standards for the movement which will inspire the rising generation with the highest ideals of citizenship, character, conduct, and attainment.”

Whereas the aforementioned organizations need financial aid with which to provide adequate administrative offices, and to carry out the manifold activities in health, directed citizenship training and other necessary instruction to thousands of boys and girls in the country who should be rolled in the said organizations;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate and set aside the period from September fourteenth to October fifteenth, nineteen hundred and forty, as a special one for the conduct of an intensive campaign to raise the necessary funds for the purposes of the Boy Scouts and the Girl Scouts of the Philippines. Further, I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines in every section of the country and in every walk of life to assist in this campaign and to give their special and general support so that these two organizations may be insured of adequate funds to prosecute vigorously and continuously their work throughout the nation.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-first day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

MANUEL L QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library