MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 395

PUBLISHING THE PROCLAMATION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES DECLARING APRIL 6, 1939, AS ARMY DAY

Whereas the President of the United States issued on March fifteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, the following proclamation, declaring April sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, as Army Day:

“Whereas Senate Concurrent Resolution 5, 75th Congress, first session (50 Stat., 1108) provides:

” ‘That April 6th of each year be recognized by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America as Army Day, and that the President of the United States be requested, as Commander in Chief, to order military units throughout the United States to assist civil bodies in appropriate celebration to such extent as he may deem advisable; to issue a proclamation each year declaring April 6th as Army Day, and in such proclamations to invite the Governors of the various States to issue Army Day proclamations: Provided, That in the event April 6th falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be recognized as Army day.’

“Now, therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, pursuant to the aforesaid concurrent resolution, do hereby declare April 6, 1939, as Army Day, and I hereby invite the Governors of the several States to issue Army Day proclamations; and, acting under the authority vested in me as Commander in Chief, I hereby order military units throughout the United States, its territories and possessions, to assist civil bodies in the appropriate observance of that day.

“In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to be affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington this 15th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and sixty-third.”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the above-quoted proclamation of the President of the United States and also declare April sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, as Army Day in the Philippines. As commander-in-chief of all the armed forces of the Philippines, I enjoin the Philippine Army, the Philippine Constabulary and the Reserve Officers’ Training Units of colleges and universities to assist civil bodies in the appropriate observance of that day.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirtieth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives