TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1109

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND ASEAN FORUM ON CHILD AND ADOLESCENT PSYCHIATRY.

The Philippine Psychiatric Association will host the Second ASEAN Forum on Child and Adolescent Psychiatry on February 11-13, 1979 at the Philippine Plaza Hotel.

This will be a gathering of scientific mind from Asia, Australia and other parts of the world to discuss the psychological experiences and problems of children and youth, thus necessitating the involvement of not only the professional group of psychiatrists but also the para-psychiatric professionals such as psychologists, social workers, nurses, teachers and counsellors.

Heads of ministries, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) representatives, who are members of the Association, to the seminar on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a seminar fee of P300.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and seminar fees only. Meals included in the seminar fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the forum as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, January 9, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff