TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 846

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SESSION OF THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION TO REVIEW THE CODE OF FILIPINO MUSLIM LAWS.

The Presidential Commission to Review the Code of Filipino Muslin Laws created under Executive Order No. 442 dated December 25, 1974, will hold a series of sessions with Filipino Muslims the first of which will be at the U.P. Law Center in Diliman, Quezon City, on June 20, 1975, and the rest on a later dates and places to be specified by the Commission.

The aim of the sessions is to secure and encourage active participation and involvement of Filipino Muslims, both from the public and private sectors, in the Codification of Muslim Laws Project.

In view of the relevance of the foregoing to the national development efforts of government, all Filipino Muslims in the Supreme Court of the Philippines, Department of Justice, Armed Forces of the Philippines, and national offices or institutions, including government-owned or controlled corporations, who may be invited in writing by the Commission are hereby authorized to participate in the said sessions on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation and per diems pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 3847, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, and as implemented by Commission on Audit (COA) General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, chargeable against the funds of their respective offices, subject to the availability thereof and the visual accounting and auditing requirements.

It is understood that the participants who are residing or stationed within the city, municipality or province where the sessions will be held shall be entitled to transportation expenses only.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance/participation in the session within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, June 18, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff