Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 732-A

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL-SEMINAR WORKSHOP ON THE ROLE OF RURAL BROADCASTERS IN MASAGANG MAISAN AND MASAGANA 99 PROGRAMS.

The Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the National Food and Agriculture Council, the Department of Public Information, the National Media Production Center, the Rural Broadcasters Council and the Department of Agricultural Communications, U.P. College of Agriculture, will conduct a seminar-workshop on rural broadcasting and the MASAGANA 99 rice production program and Masaganang Maisan (white corn and feedgrains) production program at the U.P. College of Agriculture, Los Bañoz, Laguna, on May 2-6, 1974.

The seminar-workshop is aimed to provide hack-ground knowledge and understanding of governmental policies related to the implementation of Masaganang Maisan and Masagana 99 Production Programs, identify and recommend solutions to field problems in rural broadcasting and to provide the rural broadcasters effective tools and techniques for efficient broadcasting service.

In view of the significance of the seminar-workshop in the development efforts of the government which heavily rely on radio as a major means of communicating with the rural sectors, all officially designated Masaganang Maisan and Masagana. 99 broadcasters in the provinces and members of the Rural Broadcasters Council are hereby authorized to attend said seminar-workshop with reasonable expenses for ordinary actual transportation, subsistence, lodging, and seminar fees chargeable against the appropriation of the National Food and Agriculture Council and the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance in the seminar within fifteen (15) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, April 24, 1974

Source: Malacañang Records Office