OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 217

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE FIRST NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ON PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION

The National Coordinating Center for the Study and Development of Filipino Children and Youth (NCCSDFCY), in cooperation with the Presidential Arm on Community Development. Philippine National Committee of the Organization Mondiale Pour l’Education Prescolaire (World Organization for Early Childhood Education), National Federation of Women’s Clubs, UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines, Philippine Association of Pre-School Educators, Philippine Society for Curriculum Development and the Nutrition Foundation of the Philippines, Inc., will sponsor the First National Assembly on Pre-School Education on January 3-5, 1969, in Manila or Quezon City, in consonance with its responsibilities in the development and proper upbringing of the Filipino Youth, and in preparation for the Organization Mondiale Pour l’Education Prescolaire (OME) Regional Assembly on Pre-School Education in 1970.

The NCCSDFCY, having observed in foreign countries the advantages of early childhood education especially through the organization and operation of nursery and kindergarten schools, wishes to build a national awareness of this importance in our system of education and its impact on the future adults of our country. The scheduled conference aims: (1) to disseminate the significance of preschool education in childhood and its impact on adulthood; (2) to discuss means of organizing and operating nursery and kindergarten schools; (3) to determine the problems of pre-school education and the possible solutions to them.

All heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices concerned with early childhood education are hereby authorized to send to the Assembly two (2) delegates each on official time, plus expenses for direct transportation, lodging, subsistence and conference fee, chargeable against their respective agencies, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

The participants shall submit to their respective heads a report on their participation within ten (10) days after the Assembly.

The NCCSDFCY is also authorized to request private educational institutions, professional groups, socio-civic associations, mass media agencies and others concerned, to participate in this Assembly provided the expenses of such participants shall be borne by them or their respective agencies.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, November 27, 1968

Source : Presidential Management Staff