Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1147

IN-COUNTRY TRAINING COURSE ON NON-FORMAL EDUCATION BROADCASTING

TO: PROD Officers,

Director, National Media Production Center President, Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster sa Pilipinas Regional Directors:

Ministry of Education and Culture Ministry of Agriculture Ministry of Agrarian Reform Ministry of Health Ministry of Natural Resources Ministry of Social Services and Development Ministry of Local Government and Community Development Ministry of Public Information Provincial/City Schools Superintendents

1. An In-Country Training Course on Non-Formal Education Broadcasting will be held from 20 August to 7 September, 1979 at the Hiyas Convention Center, Malolos, Bulacan, with emphasis on exposing producers to a variety of systems components such as identification of audience, needs, objectives, planning, implementation, evaluation and feed-back as they relate to programming.

2. The Office of Non-Formal Education, Ministry of Education and Culture, will sponsor the training course jointly with the Asia-Pacific Institute for Broadcasting Development (AIBD).

3. The specific objectives of the Training Course are:

a.) Acquaint the participants on the mechanics involved in radio production and on devising effective feedback and evaluation techniques;

b) Expose producers to a variety of radio production components to make them practical radio producers;

c) Provide utilization and evaluation experience, to practicing NFE educational broadcasters.

4. The participants to this training course are the following:

5. The training course shall be held for 17 days and will involve lecture/discussions, field trips, practicum, workshops and actual studio practice and radio programme production.

6. Every participant, is requested to bring a radio broadcast recorder and at least 2 sample Lingap broadcast produced in the region.

7. Every participant is entitled to all expenses incident to the attendance in the seminar which will be borne by the Office of Non-Formal Education, Ministry of Education and Culture, subject to the usual auditing and accounting procedures.

8. All expenses incurred by AIBD foreign consultants in connection with their attendance at the training course shall be charged against AIBD funds.

9. All participants are expected to check in at the Hiyas Convention-Center in the afternoon of August 19.

10. Inclosed is the tentative program of activities. It is requested that this Memorandum Circular be disseminated immediately.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, June 29, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff