TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1181

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND CONFERENCE OF ENGINEERING INSTITUTIONS OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS.

The Philippine Technological Council (PTC) will host the second Conference of Engineering Institutions of Southeast Asian Nations at the Philippine Plaza Hotel on February 4-5, 1980, to where the papers from five Asean countries dealing with conventional and non-convention energy, atmosphere, water, land soil and infrastructure, minerals, chemicals, forestry food and manpower skill will be presented and discussed.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not wore than two (2) chemical, electrical, mechanical, civil, sanitary, agricultural, electronics, communications, mining metallurgical and/geological engineers; naval architects and marines, chemists, and/or master plumbers, each who are members of their respective accredited associations and have not attended within the two years period conventions/workshops/seminars with substantiality the same type or organized activity, on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems, and a conference fee of not exceeding ₱200.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds, the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to conference fees only. Meals included in the conference fees shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No.987 dated June 10, 1977 Likewise the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating: their respective offices.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 5, 1980

Source: Presidential Management Staff