Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 931

AUTHORIZING GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS INVOLVED IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM TO ATTEND REGIONAL SEMINARS TO BE SPONSORED BY THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE IN COOPERATION WITH THE NATIONAL POLICE COMMISSION.

The Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police, in cooperation with the National Police Commission, is sponsoring a series of two-day seminars from September 16 to October 15, 1976, on the subject: “The Regional Efforts to Curb and Prevent Crime in the Region.” The seminar schedule is attached hereto as Annex “A”.

The objectives of the seminars are: (1) To provide a forum for the exchange of ideas on the various aspects of the criminal justice system and its relation to the regional efforts to curb and prevent crime; (2) To foster better understanding and comprehension of the roles of the agencies or organizations involved in the criminal justice system; (3) To identify problem areas in the region on the various pillars or components of the criminal justice system and arrive at solutions therefor; and (4) To forge closer coordination and cooperation among concerned agencies, and elicit maximum community involvement in the drive to curb and prevent, crime.

All heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices and local governments concerned are hereby authorized to send a reasonable number of their key officials involved in the criminal justice system to the aforementioned seminars in the region where they are assigned on official time with expenses for transportation, subsistence, and lodging as well as seminar fees provided that the participants residing or stationed within the seminar site shall be entitled to transportation expenses only, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements and as an exception to the provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 593, series of 1972.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report of their attendance in the seminar within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 6, 1976

Source: Presidential Management Staff