TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1097

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE FIRST NATIONAL CONVENTION ON STATISTICS SPONSORED BY THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) will sponsor the First National Convention on Statistics at the Philippine International Convention Center on December 4-5, 1978.

The convention will serve as a vehicle to apprise statisticians in the government and private sectors of developments in Philippine statistics and to elicit their active support and cooperation towards a well coordinated statistical system responsive to the .statistical needs of government programs and private enterprise planning and management.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants each, who are at least supervising or senior statisticians^ regional or provincial census officer and other officers of equivalent rank, to the convention on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a convention fee of not more than P300.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344.dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to convention fees only. Meals covered by the convention fee shall be deducted from per diems.

Each participant shall submit to his agency head a complete report on his attendance or participation in the convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the Government sector indicating their respective offices.

(SGD.) JUAN C. TAVERA Presidential Assistant

Manila, November 3, 1978

Source: Presidential Management Staff