TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1173

URGING ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICES, AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES TO PARTICIPATE IN ACTIVITIES IN OBSERVANCE OF THE NATIONAL METRICATION-MONTH.

Pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 187, as amended by-Presidential Decree No. 748 and Batas Pambansa Blg. 8, the Metric System (SI) shall be the sole measurement system to be used in the Philippines for all products, commodities, materials, utilities, services and commercial transactions in all contracts, deeds and other official and legal instruments and documents effective January 1, 1983.

In order to enhance nationwide awareness of metric conversion in all sectors of our society and facilitate the necessary adjustment from the current usage of different standard of weights and measures (such as the English system, the American system and the Philippine customary units), Batas Pambansa Blg. 8, in its Section 7.b, has provided that the “National Metrication Month shall be observed in November each year until 1983.”The said provision also requires the Metric System Board to manage appropriate activities, including the preparation, production and nationwide dissemination of information matters about the metric system and conversion. The said Board, in turn, created an executive committee to take charge of the observance of National Metrication Month this November, 1979, which has for its theme: “Go Metric for Progress.”The immediate goal is for every Filipino to know his height and mass (weight) in metric units (centimeters and kilograms, respectively).

Those in the government service should take the lead and show the way in enhancing nationwide awareness of the metric conversion among our people. Accordingly, all ministries, bureaus, offices and agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments, are hereby urged to actively participate in the activities in observance of the national metrication month, particularly as follows:

1. To hold convocations, symposia and/or participate in other appropriate activities which will acquaint their personnel with the metric system (SI) and the progress of metric conversion of the Philippines and secure their active cooperation and assistance in metrication;

2. To require their personnel to know their height and mass (weight) in metric units;

3. To enable their personnel in the Metro Manila area to view the informative Metrication Exhibits sponsored by the Metric System Board to be held at the Virra Mall, San Juan, Metro Manila every day from November 13, 1979;

4. To display metrication posters in appropriate places in their premises.

Resource speakers, posters and metric conversion tables may be requested from the Metric System Board, 100 Quezon Avenue, Quezon City, Metro Manila.

All entities concerned are hereby required to submit to the Metric System Board within 15 days after November 30, 1979, a report of their participation in the observance of the National Metrication Month.

Faithful compliance herewith is enjoined.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 12, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff