OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 75

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE FIRST NATIONAL PARENT EDUCATION CONGRESS.

The National Coordinating Center for the Study and Development of Filipino Children and Youth (NCCSDFCY), with the full support and all-out assistance of its Planning Advisory Committee, an interdepartmental body composed of heads or representatives of 17 major governmental an non-governmental child-youth coordinating agencies, will sponsor the First National Parent Education ‘Congress on December 8 and 9, 1966, in Manila.

Parent education, a relatively new concept in the Philippines, is an organized cooperative effert on the part of parents and those interested in and working with children and youth to increase their understanding of child growth and development, of parent-child relationships, of family life, and of family-community relationships, and to improve their ability to carry on their roles in these relationships. The Congress aims to stimulate and encourage active participation in parent education among parents of both in-school and out-of-school children; to emphasize the significance and far-reaching effects of parent education; and, to discuss ways and means of organizing and operating parent education classes on the city, municipal and barrio levels.

All heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as division and city superintendents of schools, regional superintendents of private schools, andheads of provincial, city and municipal governments are hereby authorized to send not more than one (1) delegate each to the Congress. This limitation as to the number of representatives does not apply to the officials of the Congress. The delegates’ attendance shall be on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, subsistence, lodging and Congress fees chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. The delegates shall submit to their respective agency heads a report of their attendance and participation in the Congress.

The NCCSDFCY is hereby authorized to ask the heads of parent-teacher associations, educational institutions, professional groups, socio-civic, religious and cultural organizations, welfare and service agencies, youth and student associations, mass media agencies, and all others concerned with the all-round development of children and youth to send participants to this Congress, provided that their expenses in connection therewith shall be borne by them.

Further particulars regarding the Congress may be obtained from the National Coordinating Center for the Study and Development of Filipino Children and Youth.

By authority of the President

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, September 19, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff