OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 171

AUTHORIZING THE HOLDING OF, AND URGING PARTICIPATION IN, YEAR-ROUND PARENT DIALOGUES IN EVERY CAPITAL TOWN AND CITY IN THE PHILIPPINES.

As a follow-up to the First National Parent Education Congress hold on December 8-9, 1966, the holding of continuing parent dialogues in every capital town and city in the country on any non-working day is hereby authorized under the sponsorship and supervision of the National Coordinating Center for the Study and Development of Filipino Children and Youth (NCCSDFCY).

It is expected that, through these dialogues, relationships between parents and children would greatly improve; enhancement of conditions and provisions for children in the community would be realized; and juvenile delinquency would be reduced to the minimum, if not altogether eliminated.

Participants in t dialogues shall be parents, children and other adults with the inspiration and guidance of knowledgeable members of the community, including those who attended the First national Parent Education Congress.

Division and city superintendent of schools, regional superintendents of private schools, superintendents of normal schools, heads of provincial, city and municipal governments and all other government officials concerned are hereby requested to extend their wholehearted support, cooperation and assistance in ensuring the success of the dialogues.

The NCCSDFCY is hereby authorized to ask the heads of private schools, colleges and universities, parent-teacher associations, professional groups, socio-civic, religious and cultural organizations, welfare and service agencies, youth and student associations, mass media agencies, all others involved in the promotion of the all-around development of children and youth for their participation in the dialogues.

Additional information regarding this year-round, continuing program of parent dialogues may be secured from the NCCSBFCY, 312 Quezon Boulevard Extension, Quezon City.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, March 27, 1968

Source: Presidential Management Staff