MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1015

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE FIRST ANNUAL CONVENTION AND FIFTH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION OF THE MATERIAL AND CHILD HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES.

The Maternal and Child Health Association of the Philippines will hold its first annual convention and fifth anniversary celebration on November 28-30, 1977 at the Philippine International Convention Center (PICC).

The objective of this conference is to help health practitioners and those whose concern is the health of mothers and children, to keep abreast of what is new in the health care of mothers and children who constitute approximately 66% of our population.

The attendance of not more than three (3) members of the association or thrthreeoe delegates from each government office or provincial office under the Department of Health involved in maternal and child health, is hereby authorized on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems, and a registration fee of ₱100.00 per participant, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593, of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Greater Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and convention fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, within the same period, the Chairman of the convention shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, including a list of participants indicating their respective positions and agencies.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 25, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff