Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1199

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND NATIONAL CONVENTION ON STATISTICS SPONSORED BY THE NATIONAL ECONOMICS AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.

The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) will sponsor the Second National Convention on Statistics at the Philippine International Convention Center on December 2-3 1980.

The convention will serve as a vehicle to influence the future direction of statistical activities in the government, private and academic sectors and to elicit the active support and cooperation of statisticians in the government and private sectors towards a well coordinated, statistical system responsive to the statistical needs of government programs and private enterprise planning and management.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants each, who are at least supervising or senior statisticians, regional or provincial census officer end other officers of equivalent rank, to the convention on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation and a convention fee of not more than ₱500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds, the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Agencies sending participants to the said convention must have identified/generated the 10 savings as mandated under par 1.2 of LOI 981. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to convention fees only, Meals covered by the convention fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Senior Presidential Assistant

Manila, September 25, 1980

Source: Presidential Management Staff