Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1201

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE OF GOVERNMENT RECORDS OFFICERS IN THE CONFERENCE-WORKSHOP ON RECORDS MANAGEMENT.

The Philippine Records Management Association, Inc. will hold jointly with the Association of Records Managers, a conference-workshop on December 11-13, 1980, at the Manila Midtown Ramada Hotel, on the theme: “Records Management in the 80’s and Beyond”.

The conference will serve as a fitting vehicle to influence the future direction of records management activities in the government and private sectors including financial institutions and to elicit the active support of records officers and records managers towards a well coordinated cost-reduction-conscious records management system that’s responsive to the documentary, reference and information needs of government programs and private enterprise planning and management.

Heads of ministries, chiefs of bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments are hereby authorized to send not more than one (1) participant each, who is a records officer or at least involved in records-keeping activities and/or a member of the Philippine Records Management Association, Inc. to the conference-workshop on official time with reasonable travelling and transportation allowance and per diems and a conference fee of not exceeding ₱300.00 per participant to cover meals, snacks, kits, handouts and other miscellaneous expenses, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of PD No. 344, series of 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds, the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum circular No. 593, of his Office dated August 2, 1972. Meals included in the conference fee shall be deducted from the per diems and participants living in Metro Manila shall be allowed reasonable transportation allowance only. Agencies sending participants to the said conference must have identified/generated the 10% savings as mandated under paragraph 1.2 of LOI No. 981.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads within 30 days after the conference, a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference-workshop as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices and positions.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 6, 1980

Source: Presidential Management Staff