TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 936

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEMINAR ON LOSS CONTROL MANAGEMENT SPONSORED BY THE WORLD SAFETY ORGANIZATION.

The World Safety Organization is sponsoring a seminar on Loss Control Management to be conducted by the International Loss Control Institute on September 27-50, 1976, at the Development Academy of the Philippines, Tagaytay City. The seminar includes such topics as “Cost reduction in operating/managing establishments, managing and controlling losses brought about by fires, injuries deaths from accidents, illness from unfavorable working environment, sabotage, liability, property damage, drug abuse, employee poor health, and the like.

Since the objectives if the course dovetail with the national efforts towards maximum utilization of resources and prevention of wastage in any form, heads of departments and agencies mentioned in the attached list are hereby authorized to send not more than one (1) participant each to the seminar, who is a senior staff member in the department/agency and has the capability of conduction echo seminars in their own office, on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation and per diems and seminar fees, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

The Participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report with recommendations on how loss control management concepts can be applied in their department/agency and a plan for the conduct of echo seminars therein within thirty (30) days after the termination of the seminar.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 27, 1976

Annex: List of Departments and Agencies

Source: Presidential Management Staff