Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1235

AMENDING MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1074 AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN AGENCY CRASH PROGRAM IN MASTER IN PUBLIC AND BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION TO REORIENT THE COURSE IN A MANNER THAT WOULD ENABLE IT TO SUPPORT THE KILUSANG KABUHAYAN AT KAUNLARAN (KKK).

The second paragraph of Memorandum Circular No. 1074 is hereby amended to read as follows:

The MPBM course aims to enhance the managerial capability of participants, develop them for higher responsibilities, and promote among them attitudes and values more conducive to development efforts through self-help and self-reliance in preparation for better opportunities, so that they will not become burdens to the government and the society after their retirement from the public service.

The MPBA program management is hereby required to see to it that the contents of the course are revised to include topics or subjects which would enable it to support the KKK programs and objectives provided under Section 1 of Executive Order No. 715, dated August 6, 1981.

Apart from this amendment, other new features of the course will include the following:

1. The De La.Salle University shall provide free remedial classes, consultations, library facilities for participants found to be deficient in Accounting, Economics, Finance, Mathematics and Statistics prior to the start of any agency class.

2. The International Management Executive Center (IMEC) shall provide P300 subsidy per participant out of P400 needed to pay for the cost of the MPBA Introductory Program, with the participant paying only the balance of P100. The Introductory Program aims to introduce the necessary professional skills needed by the participants in the MPBA program such as research skill, analytical skill, monitoring skill, communication skill, decision-making skill, diplomatic skill, innovation skill, time management skill, and group dynamic skill.

3. The course shall be for a period of more or less two (2) years including the period for thesis completion, and shall be conducted in-agency for at least six (6) non-working hours per week, for a minimal fee of four thousand pesos only per participant with all the materials needed free of charge, the amount to be advanced by the agency to be paid later on by the participants through salary deductions or through approved MEC Educational Loan. A participant who continually maintains high scholastic record of 1.5 shall not be required to refund the money advanced by the agency as a form of recognition for his exemplary academic performance.

The training staff of this Office shall coordinate with the De La Salle University, University of the Philippines and the Civil Service Commission in the implementation of this amendment, and shall see to it that the herein new requirements are strictly complied with.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 17, 1982

Source: Presidential Management Staff