Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1270

AUTHORIZING THE HUMAN SETTLEMENTS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (HSDC) TO FORM AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE (IAC) FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LUNGSOD SILANGAN.

In line with the mandates set forth by Presidential Decree No. 1396 to develop Lungsod Silangan as a Bagong Lipunan Site, an Inter-Agency Committee shall hereby be created to assist the Human Settlements Development Corporation (HSDC) in the preparation and implementation of development plans for the area.

Composition of the Inter-Agency Committee shall include representatives from:

Human Settlements Development Corporation Ministry of Natural Resources and its attached Bureaus Ministry of Agrarian Reform Ministry of Budget Ministry of Transportation and Communications Ministry of Public Works and Highways Ministry of National Defense Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System Metropolitan Manila Commission Office of the Solicitor General

The Inter-Agency Committee shall:

1. Plan, coordinate, program, and implement basic infrastructure projects such as water, power, telecommunications, and major roadways in Lungsod Silangan.

2. Ensure the necessary programming and budgeting of medium and long range infrastructure development projects in Lungsod Silangan.

3. Provide all the necessary information for the development of a Capital Investment Folio for Lungsod Silangan in order to monitor, program and prioritize development projects in the area.

4. Regulate and control influx of squatters and illegal developments in Lungsod Silangan by initiating the necessary legal control mechanisms.

5. Resolve or cause to resolve all land tenural problems and/or disputes within the Lungsod Silangan area through appropriate recommendations, if necessary, to the President of the Philippines.

6. Define, formulate, and implement necessary and appropriate land policies and guidelines for the overall development of Lungsod Silangan.

An honoraria from ₱250.00 to ₱1,000.00 per member per attended meeting shall be appropriated. Funds for this purpose shall be drawn from the funds of the Human Settlements Development Corporation.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 29, 1984

Source: Presidential Management Staff