OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 478

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE SYMPOSIUM ON MINERAL RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT AND MINE SAFETY.

The Bureau of Mines, with the cooperation of the Philippine Mine Safety Association and the Philippine Society of Mining, Metallurgical and Geological Engineers, will hold a symposium on mineral resources development and mine safety at the National Science Development Board Pavilion, Manila, on November 25-26, 1971, on the theme “The Challenge to Mining.”

This symposium aims to review and gather technical information on mining technology, mineral dressing and other related activities for dissemination to all sectors of the mineral industries, as well as the general public. It intends to find ways and means of conserving the mineral wealth and manpower of the country, through judicious utilization and adoption of safety practices in the mines.

The heads of the departments, bureaus, government agencies and government-owned or controlled corporations named hereunder are hereby authorized to send to the symposium not more than two (2) delegates each, except the Bureau of Mines which may send on representative from each of its major units directly involved in mining but not to exceed fifteen (15) delegates: (1) Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, (2) Department of Public Works and Communications, (3) Department of Labor, (4) Bureau of Mines, (5) Bureau of Lands, (6) Bureau of Forestry, (7) Bureau of Plant Industry, (8) National Power Corporation, (9) CEPOC Industries, Inc., (10) Manila Gas Corporation, (11) Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, (12) Board of Technical Surveys and Maps, (13) Bureau of Public Works, (14) Air and Water Pollution Commission, (15) Metals Industry Development Center, (16) National Shipyard and Steel Corporation. Their attendance shall be on official time with reimbursement of actual transportation expenses and symposium fee of ₱10.00 for each delegate, chargeable against their respective agencies, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

The delegates shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance within 30 days after the symposium.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, June 28, 1971

Source: Presidential Management Staff