MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR No. 14

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE EIGHTH NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PUBLIC PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION.

The Personnel Officers Association of the Philip pines, Inc. (POAP), with the technical assistance of the Civil Service Commission, will hold its Eighth National Conference on Public Personnel Administration on March 23-25, 1966, at the Social Security System Social Hall, East Avenue, Quezon City, on the theme: “The Civil Service and the Rule of Law.”

One of the basic elements of a strong and efficient civil service is a corps of competent and honest public servants, the development and maintenance of which, as an effective instrument in upholding the supremacy of the rule of law, is a continuing concern of government. In this respect, the search for reforms in the public service is an unrelenting process in which the POAP has always been an active participant. The conference of this Association of dedicated public personnel administrators aims to explore and discuss ways and means by which the energy and resources of public servants can be further harnessed towards that end.

All heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, chartered cities, provincial and municipal governments, including government owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) of their officials and employees responsible for personnel work, preferably those who are members of the POAP, to attend the conference. Their attendance shall be on official time and their expenses for transportation, subsistence, lodging and conference fees in connection therewith shall be chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

Delegates shall submit to their respective agency heads a report of their attendance and participation in the conference.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, February 4, 1966

Source : Supreme Court Library