TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 921

AMENDING MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 912 AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE AT THE 4TH WORLD CONGRESS ON MEDICAL LAW TO BE HELD IN MANILA ON 16-19 JULY 1976.

Memorandum Circular No. 912 dated June 10, 1976 authorizing attendance at the 4th World Congress on Medical Law to be held on 16-19 July 1976, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“President Ferdinand E. Marcos and the First Lady, Mrs. Imelda Romualdez Marcos, will act as patrons of the 4th World Congress on Medical Law to be held on 16-19 July 1976 at the Philippine Village Hotel. The Congress is organized by the World Association for Medical Law.

”The Congress aims to promote scholarship and research in medico-legal fields of current issues, as well as to encourage public participation in the dialogue on vital medico-legal issues of the day. This year’s Congress will feature papers by Philippine and foreign participants on such topics as family planning and fertility control; compulsory sterilization and human rights; contraception and sterilization of female patients; artificial insemination; ethical and legal aspects of genetic engineering; rights of the dying and criteria of death; dysthanasia, euthanasia, and the right to die; medicare; national health insurance policy and legislation; and new dimension on medical jurisprudence.

“All heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices, including regional offices, government-owned and controlled corporations and local governments, are hereby authorized to send their medico-legal officers, and other officials involved in medico-legal work to the Congress on official time with expenses for transportation, subsistence, and lodging as well as seminar fees, all chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements and as an exception to the provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 593, series of 1972.

“Participants should register as soon as possible with the Office of the Director, National Bureau of Investigation, Manila.”

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, July 9, 1976

Source: Presidential Management Staff