TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 908

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 15TH NATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE RADIOISOTOPE SOCIETY OF THE PHILIPPINES, INC.

The Radioisotope Society of the Philippines, Inc. (RSP), and organization of nuclear scientists, technologists, engineers and other radiation workers, will hold its 15th National Convention at St. Louis University, Baguio City, on May 21-23, 1976, on the theme: “Paunlarin Ang Bayan Sa Lakas Atomika.”

The main feature of the convention will be the scientific meetings and forums where papers on the use of radioisotopes in research, medicine, agriculture and industry will be presented by nuclear scientists and researchers. The scientists will discuss the various studies they have made on how radioisotopes and radiation had helped in hastening the advancement of science and technology in the country.

All heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as chartered cities and provinces, are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) of their employees, who re members of the Radioisotope Society of the Philippines, Inc., to the convention. This limitation as to number shall not apply to convention officials. The attendance of the participants shall be on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and convention fees, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973 subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

It is understood that participants residing or stationed within Baguio City sall be entitled to rasonable expenses for transportation and convention fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance in the convention within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, May 14, 1976

Source: Presidential Management Staff