OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 175

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE REGIONAL SEMINARS ON PROPER AND ADEQUATE UTILIZATION OF RESEARCHES FOR CHILD-YOUTH DEVELOPMENT.

The National Coordinating Canter Tor the Study and Development: of Filipino Children and Youth (NCCSDFCY), with the assistance of its Planning Advisory Committee, will sponsor a series of .Regional Seminars on Proper and Adequate Utilization of Researches for Child-Youth Development as indicated below:

Region

Site

Dates

The seminars are designed to disseminate the results of researches on Filipino children and youth; to arouse interest in and encourage the use of results of research; and to find out from people engaged in child-youth work the priority needs regarding further researches.

Heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, division and city superintendents of normal schools, heads of provincial, city and municipal governments, as well as heads of private colleges and universities are hereby requested to extend their wholehearted support to this undertaking. They are authorized to send to the seminars not more than one (1) participant each, preferably one who is not only competent but also willing to carry on the dissemination of child-youth research results for the benefit of all concerned. This limitation as to the number of participants does not apply to the seminar organizers and lecturers or resource persons. The attendance of the seminar officials and participants, except those from the private sector, shall be on official time with expenses for transportation, subsistence, lodging and seminar fees, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds, the usual accounting and auditing requirements, and the condition I that the aggregate expenses for all seminars shall not exceed P7,888, of which P6,747 shall be borne by the participating provinces and cities at an average of P70 per participant and the remaining balance of P1,141 shall be charged to the NCCSDFCY for the expenses of its resources persons and other official. The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report of their attendance and participation in the seminars.

Nominations to the seminars must be submitted, together with each nominee’s curriculum vitas, to the National Coordinating Center for the Study and Development of Filipino Children and Youth (NCCSUFCY) , 312 Quezon Boulevard Extension, Quezon City, not later than April 5, 1968, for processing and evaluation.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, April 1, 1968

Source: Presidential Management Staff