TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 825

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 1975 ANNUAL CONVENTION OF THE PHILIPPINE LIBRARY ASSOCIATION, INC. ON MAY 29-31, 1975.

The newly integrated Philippine Library Association, Inc. (PLAI), the national coordinating body and general spokesman of Philippine Librarianship for some fifteen special library associations, will hold its 1975 Annual Convention at the University of the Philippines, Los Baños, Laguna, on May 29-31, 1975 on the theme “THE FILIPINO LIBRARIAN IN THE SEARCH OF IDENTITY.”

The aims of the Convention are to stimulate the members towards greater and more effective service under the New Society; to provide the venue to reassess and strengthen the functions and motivations of the Filipino librarians; to re-evaluate library science education and training in the Philippines as requisites to professionalization; and to examine and disseminate the recent trends and developments in the light of the pressing demands for new and relevant knowledge and skills in order to cope with the information explosion be it in science, technology, economics, education, sociology, humanities, or the other areas of human activities.

In view of the relevance and significance of the Convention in the developmental and educational efforts of government, all heads of departments, bureaus and offices, both national and local, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than three (3) of their librarians who are members and/or affiliated with the PLAI, to attend the said Convention on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging, chargeable against the funds of their respective agencies, subject to the availability thereof and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. It is understood that participants who are residing or who are stationed in Los Baños, Laguna, shall be entitled to reasonable transportation expenses only.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance and attendance in the convention within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, April 24, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff