TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 978

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION.

The University of the Philippines College of Public Administration, its Alumni Association and the Philippine Society for Public Administration will jointly hold a National Conference on Public Administration in Manila on June 9-11, 1977.

The conference aims to assess and evaluate the teaching and practice of public administration; explore the administrative requirements of national development goals thereby designing alternative institutions; and identify administrative strategies for submission to policy makers and administrators.

All officials and employees of the government who hold a degree in Public Administration, either graduate or undergraduate level, or a Certificate in Governmental Management from the University of the Philippines, as well as graduates of the Career Executive Service Development Board (CESDB), Philippine Executive Academy (PEA), Local Administration and Development Program (LADP), and the National Defense College of the Philippines (NDCP), are authorized to attend the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of ₱300.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No.127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

It is understood that the participants residing or stationed within the Greater Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report on their attendance in the conference within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof. Likewise, within the same period, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Budget Commission, including a list of participants and observers indicating their respective offices. The report thereon shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organizers.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, April 22, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff