TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 900

ENJOINING STRICT COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROHIBITION AGAINST HANDCARRYING AND FOLLOW-UP OF OFFICIAL PAPERS.

In a brief span of about 14 years in the recent past, three memorandum circulars were issued by this Office-Memorandum Circular No. 1 on February 12, 1962, Memorandum Circular No. 2 on March 29, 1962, and Memorandum Circular No. 26 on March 25, 1966, against the handcarrying end personal follow-up of official communications. These Circulars all seek to prevent—

1. Infidelity in the custody of official documents 2. Loss of official papers 3. Exercise of improper or undue influence 4. Delay in the disposition of other papers 5. Loss of manhours of work

The handcarrying or personal follow-up of official correspondence would also indicate to a certain extent lack of confidence in the capacity of an office for expenditious action-

For the foregoing, the prohibition against handcarrying and personal follow-up of official correspondence is hereby reiterated. Any government official or employee violating the prohibition shall be subject to administrative disciplinary action.

All heads of departments, bureaus and offices, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to see to it that the provisions of this circular and of the circulars mentioned above are brought to the attention of, and strictly complied with by, the officials and employees under then, and to strictly enforce the sanction contained herein. For the purposes hereof, all departments, bureaus and offices, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, are hereby required to keep a register of all persons who come and visit then, which shall show their names and signatures, the positions and offices in which they are employed, whether government or private, the nature or purpose of their visit, and the description of the papers or correspondence they handcarry or are following up. Such register should be kept by all units of an office which receive visitors or callers.

As a concomitant hereto, attention is invited to Memorandum Circular No. 11 of this Office dated August 13, 1962, entitled, “Requiring Prompt Action on Official Papers by All Agencies of the Government.” Compliance therewith is also hereby enjoined, for there is no reason for the delay in consideration or dispatch of official papers.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Manila, March 26, 1976

Source: Presidential Management Staff