Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1255

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENT CIVIL ENGINEERS (AGCEP).

The Association of Government Civil Engineers will hold its National Conference in Metro Manila on April 21-23, 1983 on the subject: “The Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK) Livelihood Program and Presidential Decree No. 1594, as amended.”

Considering the relevance of the Conference’s objective to the KKK Program of the Government, all heads of ministries, chiefs of bureaus, offices, chartered cities and provincial governments, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants each to the Conference, exclusive of conference officials, who are bonafide members of the Association. Attendance shall be on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and conference fee per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the conditions set forth in the joint approval by the Ministry of the Budget and the Civil Service Commission In their joint letters dated July 23, 1981 and January 25, 1983, as follows:

1. The conference fee shall not exceed ₱300 per participant pursuant to LOImp No. 129 which limits the fee to ₱100 per day.

2. Participation shall be limited to 2 per agency, exclusive of the officials of the AGCEP, who are bonafide members of the Association and are actually employed as civil engineers.

3. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the conference, the participants shall submit a report on the conference to their respective heads of office. A copy of the report shall be furnished the Ministry of the Budget and the Civil Service Commission.

4. The usual constraints on availability of funds and accounting and auditing requirements shall apply.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, March 11, 1983

Source: Presidential Management Staff