TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1115

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEMINARS ON SMALL ENTREPRENEURALSHIP FOR PROSPECTIVE RETIREES.

The International Management Executive Center, an educational organization of Filipino Management Executives devoted in helping the New Society, in cooperation with the Office of the President, Civil Service Commission, Government Service Insurance System, Social Security System, University of the Philippines Institute for Small Scale Industries, Cottage Industries, Board of Investment, Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry and the Ministry of National Defense, and in support of the Human Resources Development program of the Government, will conduct seminars on Small entrepreneuralship for prospective retirees starting February, this year.

The program is designed to give sufficient and practical training to prospective retirees on how to manage and operate profitably small business enterprises and thus prepare them for gainful occupation during retirement henceforth, helping themselves and their community. Hopefully, instead of becoming burdens to the government and society, retirees will continue to contribute to the social, economic and political development of the New Society by being productive and serving as agents of change in their respective areas.

The course will be conducted for a period of three weeks, two weeks to be devoted to the different management aspects of Small entrepreneuralship and one week for practicum or on the job training and observations in selected enterprises. The first two weeks of the seminar will be conducted from 5:30 to 8:30 p. m. daily while the third week will be scheduled during working hours to enable participants to train on the job and to observe the operation of selected enterprises. While thus on the job training or observation, the participants shall be authorized on official time.

Seminars may be conducted during regular office, hours for participants from the provinces. Regional seminars at the regional centers may be conducted also after regular office hours by the sponsoring organization for participants from the different regions.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, both national and local, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send their officials and employees who are on their last year of service prior to retirement, whether compulsory or optional, to the seminar with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a seminar fee of ₱500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No, 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the city or site of the seminar shall be entitled to seminar fees only.

The participants shall submit to their office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the seminar, copy furnished this Office, as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10 1977.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, January 29, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff