Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1214

DIRECTING ALL REGIONAL DIRECTORS TO PURSUE A VIGOROUS INFORMATION CAMPAIGN ON THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE NEW SOCIETY

In line with the normalization process and to pave the way for participatory democracy, all Regional Directors are hereby directed to pursue a vigorous information campaign and gather from the people feedback on the achievements of the New Society.

The Presidential Regional Officer for Development (PROD) shall act as overall coordinator provided that in Regions IX and XII, the duly designated representative of the Office of the President shall act as coordinator; provided further that the Ministry of Public Information and the National Media Production Center shall oversee all mass media activities; and, provided furthermore that the Ministry of Local Government and Community Development and the Ministry of Education and Culture shall oversee inter-personal campaign activities, including pulong-pulong, workshops and assemblies.

The PROD, together with the Regional Directors, shall devise and implement a scheme whereby each regional office shall act as lead agency on an assigned date. The lead agency will be in charge of organizing and conducting community discussions in the region. Furthermore, the discussion leaders shall be required to submit a report of the discussion to the national secretariat through the PROD.

The participating agencies are hereby authorized to incur expenses in the implementation of this Memorandum Circular subject to availability of funds and to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Attached are the organizational set-up, list and schedule of activities which are hereby incorporated to be part and parcel of this Memorandum Circular.

For strict compliance.

By Authority of the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, May 12, 1981

Reference: Organizational set-up, list and schedule of activities

Source: Presidential Management Staff