OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM ORDER. 56

PRESCRIBING A NEW POLICY GOVERNING OFFICIAL TRAVEL ABROAD OF GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.

Effective immediately and until further notice, no official travel abroad of government personnel shall be allowed, except in the following cases:

(1) Where the trip will not involve the expenditure of government funds . – Trips under this category shall be those on official time only that is, at no government expense except salary. They shall, however, be carefully screened with a view to determining whether or not the purpose thereof would eventually serve the public interest. Unless direct benefits are clearly shown, more observations in fields of study or work allied to one’s official duties shall not be considered sufficient justification.

(2) Where the trip is for the purpose of complying with an international commitment of the Philippine Government. – This covert trips relating; to Philippine Government commitments to international bodies or organizations, especially the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Under this category, only the minimum number of officials shall be proposed, and where necessary, additional participants or delegates shall be enlisted from the Philippine diplomatic and consular missions abroad.

(3) Where the trip would directly redound to the financial benefit of the country . – Among those falling under this category are trips the purpose of which is to solicit funds or negotiate loans needed for vital public improvement projects.

(4) Where the trip is connection with a scholarship, fellowship or training grant. – Under this category are trips in connection with scholarships, fellowships and training grants secured, arranged or sponsored by the Philippine Government or any of its instrumentalities, or those offered by outstanding foreign universities and foundations, and others of similar nature, in fields of study or work allied to the grantee’s official duties and where the Government will incur the least expense.

It is emphasized that approval does not necessarily follow just because a proposed trip abroad falls under any of the abovementioned exceptions. Those falling under the first three exceptions are subject to approval by this Office, and those under No. 4, by the Special Committee on Scholarships under the Chairmanship of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs. Proposals for travel abroad shall, henceforth, be submitted for the consideration of the Office or the Special Committee on Scholarships, as the case may be, not later than ten (10) days before the expected departure date. Failure to comply with this requirement may be sufficient ground for the disapproval of the proposed trip.

No passport shall b issued unless written authority is submitted with the passport application.

A.s a matter of procedure, the Department of Foreign Affairs is hereby directed to forward to this Office such requests and/or invitations as may be received iron any foreign government or entity for the Philippine Government or any of its instrumentalities to send representatives or delegates to, or participants in, conferences, seminars, conventions and the like, for prior determination as to whether or not the same should be approved or accepted, as case may be.

In view of the imperative need to effect district economy in the expenditure of public funds and considering that official trips abroad constitute one of the biggest drains on the national coffers, all heads of  departments, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to strictly observe the policy enunciated above.

By authority of the President

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, June 29, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff