Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 997

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SERIES OF SEMINARS ON SUPPLY MANAGEMENT BEING CONDUCTED BY THE BUREAU OF SUPPLY COORDINATION.

To disseminate information on specific phases of supply operations and to attain uniformity of supply procedures la the government-wide supply system, the Bureau of Supply Coordination has been conducting a series of seminars on supply management in the different regions of the country. Already completed are the seminars held in Davao City on March 14-19, and in Cebu City on May 9-14, 1977. Presently going on is the seminar in Baguio City on July 18-25, and the remaining seminars are scheduled in Cagayan de Oro City September 5-10, and Quezon City on November 7-12, 1977.

The attendance of newly-appointed government supply officers or property custodians who have not undergone any training on supply management in the seminar schedule at the region nearest their office is hereby authorized on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems, and a seminar fee of not exceeding ₱250.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and budgeting requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the site of the seminar shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and seminar fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the seminar as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 967 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, within the same period, a report and evaluation of the seminar, copy furnished the Budget Commission, shall be submitted to this Office, including a list of participants showing their respective positions and offices.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, July 25, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff