TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1154

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 9TH CONFERENCE OF THE CONFEDERATION OF ASIAN AND PACIFIC ACCOUNTANTS (CAPA).

The Philippines and the Philippine Institute of Certified Public Accountants will host the 9th Conference of the Confederation of Asian and Pacific Accountants at the Philippine International Convention Center on October 14-20, 1979, to be attended by accountants from 28 accounting organizations in 21 countries in Asia and the Pacific Basin.

Considering the benefits that will accrue to Filipino accountants in meeting and discussing with foreign accountants new concepts and trends in the practice of the profession, Chief Accountants or Assistant Chief Accountants ‘ of the various ministries, the Commission on Audit, the Central Bank of the Philippines, the various government-owned or controlled corporations and one or two faculty members of the University of the Philippines and of the state colleges and universities offering accounting as a major field of study, and the members of the Board of Accountancy, are hereby authorized to attend the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of ₱700.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to, Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to conference fees only. Meals covered by the conference fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 Sated June 10, 1977, furnishing this Office a copy thereof. Likewise, the PICPA shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants indicating their respective -positions and offices, and a statement of fees collected and expenditures incurred.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, August 21, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff