TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1130

REQUIRING ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICES TO INSTITUTE AND IMPLEMENT A CONTINUING PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAM FOR THEIR OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

In line with the pronouncement of the President that physical fitness must necessarily be a part and parcel of the on-going program of human resources development, and in order to draw government officials and employees into a modest regimen of physical conditioning as well as provide a wholesome and refreshing respite from the routine of work, particularly those who are not actively involved in the sports competitions conducted by various government athletic leagues, all ministry heads and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including those of government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby required to institute and implement a continuing physical fitness program for its officials and employees.

They shall, for the purpose:

1. Designate their respective officials and/or staffs entrusted with the responsibility of formulating, implementing, and monitoring this program;

2. Allow participants at least one hour a week each, except when their services are badly needed on official matters during their scheduled day and time;

5. Schedule the participants in such a way as to insure the least disruption of the normal work of an office or any of its unit;

4. Arrange, if the office concerned has no suitable facilities of its own, for the use of those of other government entities such as the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex, Amoranto Sports Center, sports complexes of state colleges and universities and those of the different branches of the military service;

5. Start activities for each session with at least 15 minutes of mass calisthenics followed by supervised participation in the different fieldsof sport as the facilities would allow, according to individual preferences of the participants;

6. Institute such safeguards as may be necessary to preclude the use by participants of the time intended for the program for other unauthorized purposes; and

7. Submit to the undersigned, through Presidential Finance Assistant Cesar A. Dumlao, their respective programs, indicating therein the mechanics, schedule, venue, nature and scope of activities, and the officials and/or staffs responsible for the implementation and monitoring of said program.

Strict compliance with this Circular is hereby enjoined.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, March 8, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff