TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 677

Pursuant to Letter of Instruction No. 142 dated October 30, 1973, creating the Administrative Committee for the Maharlika Village situated at Bicutan, Taguig, Rizal, in order to systematize the management of the village and control the disbursement of funds, the following definition of functions is necessary:

1. The Executive Secretary as Chairman of the Administrative Committee for the Maharlika Village shall exercise direct supervision over the village thru the Special Assistant on Muslim Affairs.

2. The Project Officer shall be responsible for the administration of the engineering and administrative staff and all other contractual and detailed personnel of the Maharlika Village project. The Project Officer shall be assisted by an Assistant Project Officer.

3. The budgetary and financial requirements of the Maharlika Village shall come from the funds appropriated by Letter of Instruction No. 142 and such other available sources from which funds may be forthcoming including loans from government financing institutions on the recommendation of the Special Assistant on Muslim Affairs.

4. The budget and accounts of the Maharlika Village shall be under the administration of the budget and accounting staff of the Presidential Assistant on Housing and Resettlement Agency to be assisted by the budget and accounting staff of the Monitoring and Operations Center created under Memorandum Order No. 370.

5. The Executive Assistant to the Executive Secretary shall exercise, in behalf of the Executive Secretary as Chairman of the Administrative Committee of the Maharlika Village and during the latter’s absence, shall approve and control the disbursement of all funds for the Maharlika Village.

6. The personnel, budget, accounts, records and physical assets assigned, entered, transferred, acquired by the Maharlika Village shall be managed by the Special Assistant on Muslim Affairs thru the Project Officer.

7. The auditing of all funds disbursed and expended by the herein-named officers shall be under the Auditor of the Presidential Assistant on Housing and Resettlement Agency.

8. All applications for loans for the financing of the projects to be undertaken within the Maharlika Village shall be subject to the approval of the Administrative Committee and endorsement of the Chairman to the proper financing institutions.

9. The budget and project as approved by the Administrative Committee of the Maharlika Village for the purpose of implementing Letter of Instruction No. 142 are exempted from the provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 593 series of 1972 restricting government expenditures.

10. The Executive Secretary, upon recommendation of the Special Assistant on Muslim Affairs shall appoint temporary, casual, and contractual employees of the Maharlika Village, administrative and engineering staff.

This order shall take effect immediately.

BY AUTHORITY OF THE PRESIDENT: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, November 7, 1973

Source: Presidential Management Staff