TANGGAPAN NG PAITGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 944

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEVENTH PHILIPPINE MANAGEMENT CONGRESS

The Philippine Council of Management (PHILCOMAN) will sponsor the Seventh Philippine Management Congress to be held on December 2 to 4, 1976, at the Manila Hilton. The theme of the Congress is “Effecting the Linkage of Public and Private Sectors in Managing Development.”

Management experts, practitioners, educators and government leaders from the Philippines and other countries will participate as speakers, reactors, discussants and delegates. The Management Congress will explore the role of management in total development in the light of the rapid political and social changes in the region as well as the new priority areas, growing opportunities and expanding responsibilities of the Manager in synchronizing the roles of the public and private sectors in total development.

Heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices and government owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to send one (1) participant each, preferably a senior management official, to the Congress on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and conference fees not exceeding ₱200.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 3, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Greater Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report on their attendance in the Congress within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof. The PHILCOMAN is requested to furnish this Office a copy of its report and evaluation of the Congress.

Interested parties may contact the PHILCOMAN Secretariat with offices at Room 312, Sunvesco Bldg., Taft Avenue, Manila Tel. Nos. 47-59-24 and 98-60-46.

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Manila, November 12, 1976

Source: Presidential Management Staff