TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 982

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL WORK-CONFERENCE OF THE PHILIPPINE ASSOCIATION OF PRACTICAL ARTS SUPERVISORS, INC.

The Philippine Association of Practical Arts Supervisors, Inc. and the Department of Education and Culture, Region VI-Western Visayas, will jointly hold a work-conference of practical arts and vocational supervisors at the Dingle Agro-Industrial School, Dingle, Iloilo, on May 18-20, 1977, in order to up-date their competencies and to give them precise direction in the implementation of the DEC programs, projects and activities along, socio-economic development.

For this purpose, all practical arts and vocational supervisors of public schools are hereby authorized to attend said conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of ₱100.00 per participant to pay for the kit and printing cost. Of conventions materials, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective schools, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

It is understood that the participants residing or stationed within the Municipality of Dingle, Iloilo, shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective school heads a report on their attendance in the conference within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof. Likewise, within the same period, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Budget Commission, including a list of participants and observers indicating their respective schools. The report thereon shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organizers.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, May 3, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff