OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 2

REMINDING ALL CONCERNED OF THE OBLIGATIONS TO FILE THEIR SWORN STATEMENTS OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 3019, AS AMENDED.

Under Section 7 of Republic Act No. 3019, as amended, otherwise known as the Anti-Graft Law, every public officer is required to file with the offices of the Department Head concerned his statement of assets and liabilities “within thirty days after the approval of this Act or after assuming office, and within the month of January of every other year thereafter, as well as upon the expiration of his term of office, or upon his resignation or separation from office.” In the case of a Department Head or chief of an independent office, the statement shall be filed with the Office of the President. The last filing of such statements was in January, 1964, as published in Memorandum Circular No. 49 of this Office dated December 5, 1963.

For the proper guidance of all concerned, it is hereby informed that public officers who filed their statements in January, 1964, are required to file their new Sworn Statements of Assets and Liabilities within the month of January, 1966. Those who entered the service and assumed office sometime during the period since January 1, 1964, who are presumed to have filed their sworn statements of assets and liabilities within thirty days after assuming office, are also required to file such statements in January, 1966. The statement shall cover the period from the day immediately following the date included in the previous statement, up to December 31, 1965.

For this purpose, the form prescribed under the aforementioned Memorandum Circular No. 49 shall be used. Sufficient number of copies of the said form shall be prepared by all offices concerned for the use of their respective officials and employees.

All concerned are hereby reminded that failure to file that required statements within the prescribed period is punishable by a fine of net less than P100 nor more than P1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the Court, or by dismissal from the service in a proper administrative proceeding even if no criminal prosecution is instituted against the official or employee concerned, as provided in Section 9(b) of the law.

By authority of the President

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, January 5, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff