Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1215

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEMINAR-WORKSHOP FOR ACTION OFFICERS OF VARIOUS GOVERNMENT OFFICES, AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES IN THE VISAYAS AREA.

The Complaints and Investigation Office (CIO), Office of the President, will conduct a seminar-workshop for Action Officers of various government offices, agencies and instrumentalities in the Visayas Area comprising Region VI, VII and VIII, to be held at Cebu City on June 3, 4 and 5, 1981.

The objectives of the seminar are to reappraise the role of Action Officers in the attainment of development goals; to identify, analyze, and seek solutions to access problems that militate against progressive government in line with the need for reforms; to professionalize the work of Action Officers thru the development of skills that would guide them in the study of representative problems and cases brought before them, and to formulate solutions and/or procedures in resolving such problems and cases; and to effect better coordination among the Action Officers in all offices of the government.

The attendance of one (1) Action Officer from each government agency in the Visayas Area in the said seminar-workshop is hereby authorized on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a seminar fee of ₱300.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344, dated November 26, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception of Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within Cebu City shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and seminar fees only. Meals included in the seminar fee shall be deducted from per diems.

Within 30 days after the seminar, participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the seminar-workshop as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987, dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the Complaints and Investigation Office shall submit, within 30 days after the seminar, to this Office a report of evaluation of the seminar-workshop, including a list of participants with their respective positions and a statement of fees collected and expenditures incurred, duly certified by a Certified Public Accountant. A copy of the report shall be furnished the OCPC, MOB and the CSC.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, May 14 1981

Source: Presidential Management Staff