TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 641

IMPLEMENTATION OF LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 77 FOR THE REHIRING OF GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL LAID OFF AS A RESULT OF REORGANIZATION AND THE ADOPTION OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION

The following policies and instructions as embodied in Letter of Instruction No. 77 dated May 25, 1973 to the Executive Secretary, the Commissioner of the Budget, and the Commissioner of Civil Service are hereby re-stated for the information and guidance of all concerned:

1. Application.

The general policy of absorbing laid off personnel in other agencies of the government shall be limited to separated personnel who:

a. Possess Civil Service eligibilities; and b. Were separated as a result of the implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan or pertinent provisions of the new Constitution.

This policy shall not apply to personnel who have been separated under Letter of Instructions Nos. 11, 14, 14-A and 14-B.

2. Preparation of Master List.

The Civil Service Commissioner, in collaboration with the Budget Commissioner, shall prepare a Master List of all personnel mentioned in Paragraph 1., above, who are willing to be employed either in the public service or in private business establishments, indicating therein their respective Civil Service eligibilities, experience and other qualifications and other relevant bio-data.

3. Rehiring of Separated Personnel.

Appropriate regulations and procedures shall hereafter be issued to ensure that such separated personnel belonging to the Master List shall be given priority in filling classified position vacancies over other Civil Service eligibles who are entering the government service for the first time.

Such preference, however, shall be subject to the condition that the Civil Service eligibilities, experience and other qualifications of the previously separated personnel are consistent with the job requirements of the position vacancies, attention being invited to the special or technical qualifications called for in such positions as teachers, doctors, engineers, economists, and the like.

4. Appointments not Covered by LOI No. 77.

The filling of position vacancies by casual appointments, appointments to positions in the non-competitive service, contractual appointments, promotional appointments and transfer appointments, are not covered by Letter of Instruction No. 77. Department Heads and the Civil Service Commissioner shall continue to act on such appointments in accordance with existing policies and rules on the matter.

5. Action on Original Appointments of New Civil Service Entrants.

Pending completion of the Master List mentioned above and the issuance of the amplifying instructions with regards to Paragraph 4., above, all original appointments of new Civil Service entrants shall be referred to the Office of the President on a case-to-case basis for decision on whether an exception to the policies and instructions prescribed herein shall be made.

In order to hasten the attainment of the objectives of the Letter of Instruction No. 77, all heads of departments and offices are hereby required to submit to the Commissioner of Civil Service, a list of the laid off employees referred to above including those to be affected by the full implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, June 21, 1973

Source: Presidential Management Staff