TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO.839

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE THIRD ANNUAL CONVENTION FOR TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZED BY THE PHILIPPINE SOCIETY FOR TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT.

The Philippine Society for Training and Development (PSTD), a professional organization dedicated to human resources, development, will hold the Third Annual Convention for Training and Development at the Manila Inter-Continental Hotel, Makati, Rizal on May 29-31, 1975, on the theme “Human Resources Development in a Crisis Environment”.

The Convention will focus the different government policies that affect the Philippine environment. Discussion will therefore be centered on the role and interdependence of the education, private and government sectors in bringing about an integrated approach to manpower training and development, Thus the convention will be conducted on a syndicate, group method.

In view of the relevance of the foregoing to the national development efforts, all heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus ‘and offices, including those of the government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593, s. of 1972, to sent not more than two (2) participants, who must be training officers and/or personnel involved in human resources development, to the said convention on official time with expenses for convention fees, transportation, subsistence and lodging pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 3847, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 344 and implemented by Commission on Audit (COA) General Circular No. 127, s. of 1973, chargeable against the funds of their respective offices, subject to the availability thereof and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

It is understood that participants residing or permanently stationed in the Greater Manila Area shall not be entitled to expenses for lodging and transportation.

The participants shall submit a report to their respective agency heads on their attendance in the convention within thirty (30) days upon termination thereof. Likewise, within the same period, a report and evaluation of the convention, together with a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant, shall be submitted to this Office.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, June 2, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff