TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 975

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF GOVERNMENT BROADCASTERS ON INFRASTRUCTURES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND FOOD PRODUCTION PROGRAM.

The Rural Broadcasters Council, in coordination with the Department of Public Information and the National Food and Agriculture Council, will conduct a national conference of government broadcasters on May 19-21, 1977 in the Malolos Convention Center, Malolos, Bulacan.

The main features of the conference will be discussions on the coordinated role of government broadcasters in the infrastructure, local government, and food production programs of the government in the current year in order to promote better understanding, coordination and communication among broadcasters and the implementing agencies of the government. The conference will also seek to promote national unity among the. citizenry.

In view of the importance of the above undertaking, all heads of departments, chiefs or bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send one (1) senior participant, who is a member of the council and actually working in the broadcast field, from each of the agency’s regional office to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging and a conference fee not to exceed ₱100 per participant, chargeable against, the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. It is understood that the participants residing within the site of the conference shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation only.

The participants shall submit to their agency heads a report on their attendance in the conference within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, April 14, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff