TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 708

AUTHORIZING THE PARTICIPATION OF GOVERNMENT EXECUTIVES IN THE PHILIPPINE EXECUTIVE ACADEMY’S EXECUTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 3534 has “declared as a national policy to improve the competence and performance of executives and administrators in the different departments, bureaus and branches of the Philippine Government, and make available a pool of capable executives needed to accelerate the economic and social development of the country;”

WHEREAS, there is a continuing need to develop in Government executives the combined skills of the leader, planner, entrepreneur and administrator, as a vital factor in meeting the country’s requirements for speedy national development;

WHEREAS, for this purpose, the Philippine Executive Academy has been established in the University of the Philippines to undertake a continuing development of prospective leaders in the career service of our Government;

WHEREAS, Government agencies are therefore encouraged and must avail of this opportunity offered by the Academy to strengthen executive manpower within their respective jurisdictions, and reorient them to their role under the new order; and

WHEREAS, the Philippine Executive Academy will open at the Pine’s Hotel, Baguio City, and eight-week residential executive course to be conducted from April 16 to June 13, 1974.

WHEREFORE, heads of departments, bureaus and offices of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to nominate a senior official each to attend and participate in the session of the Academy at Government expense. The nominee will be screened by the Academy in accordance with its standards, rules and procedures. For this purpose, and in the absence of specific appro­priations for executive training, the expenses of those admitted to the Academy are hereby authorized to be taken from the savings of the agencies concerned; provided, that in the next fiscal year, they may provide in their respective budgets an item of not more than 16000 to cover the agency’s continuing staff development program. Furthermore,” such departments, bureaus, agencies and corporations are enjoined to grant a daily allowance during the session as authorized by General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, of the Commission on Audit.

This Circular takes effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, March 4, 1974

Source: Presidential Museum and Library