OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1087

ORIENTATION AND APPRECIATION SEMINAR-WORKSHOP ON “LINGAP NG PANGULO SA BARANGAY” SCHOOL ON-THE-AIR PROGRAM (LOI 561) FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS

TO: PROD Offices

Regional Directors

Ministry of Education and Culture Ministry of Agriculture Ministry of Agrarian Reform Ministry of Health Ministry of Natural Resources Ministry of Social Services and Development Ministry of Local Government and Community Development

Provincial Governors City/Municipal Mayors Provincial/City Schools Superintendent Provincial/City ABC President

1. To ensure the effective implementation of “Lingap ng Pangulo sa Barangay” School-on-the-Air Program (LOI 561) in the Integrated National Development Communications Program, a series of Regional Orientation and Appreciation Seminar-Workshops for Local Government Officials will be conducted. The Seminar-Workshops will provide an understanding of the program and consistency in the implementation so that all activities in relation to it will be geared towards the attainment of its objectives.

2. In general, the Seminar-Workshop seeks to enable the participants to understand, appreciate and support the “Lingap ng Pangulo sa Kabataan” School-on-the-Air Program (LOI 561). Specifically, if seeks to enable the participants to:

a. Understand the Operational Machinery for the implementation of LOI 561;

b. Identify the problems that hamper the successful implementation of the program in their respective localities;

c. Work out team solutions to these problems;

d. Identify and accept their role in the Lingap Program.

3. The Schedule and venue for the seminar-workshops are as follows:

4. The following members of the Sub-Cabinet Committee and Lingap Coordinators shall compose the training teams:

Team A

SCC Members

Asst. Minister Angelina R. Muñoz Asst. Minister Jose A. Janolo Deputy Minister Sylvia P. Montes Asst. Minister Miguel Zosa

Team B

SCC Members

Deputy Minister Feliciano G. Bernardino Deputy Minister Orlando Sacay Deputy Minister Jesus Azurin Deputy Minister Rafael Dante Cruz

Lingap Coordinators

Remigia C. Camua Allison M. Escritor Antonio R. Cabantac

5. The Seminar-Workshop participants in every region shall be composed of the following:

Regional Level

− PROD

− The Regional Directors of the following agencies:

Ministry of Education and Culture Ministry of Agrarian Reform Ministry of Natural Resources Ministry of Agriculture Ministry of Health Ministry of Social Service and Development Ministry of Local Government and Community Development

− The Lingap Regional Coordinating Team

− The NMPC Regional Operations Division Representative

− The KBP/BMC Station Manager

− One DPI Representative

Provincial/Municipal Mayors

− The Provincial Governors

− The City/Municipal Mayors

− The Division NFE Supervisors

− The Provincial/City Association of Barangay Captains (ABC Presidents)

6. The seminar-workshop shall be held for three (3) days, the first day as an Appreciation and Orientation Seminar for all the participants.

The last two days which shall be devoted to the Workshop session shall be attended by the following:

− The Lingap Regional Coordinating Teams

− The Provincial/City Schools Superintendents

− The Division NFE Supervisors

− The Provincial/City ABC Presidents

7. Financial assistance shall be provided for each region to cover expenses for:

− Meals and snacks of seminar participants

− Rentals of training site and facilities, etc.

− Accommodation of the team of Lingap Sub-Cabinet Coordinating Committee and staff.

This financial assistance which shall be subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedure shall be released to the NFE Regional Supervisor of the MEC or the Lingap Regional Coordinating Team if existing and actively functioning the region.

8. Lodging and transportation expenses of participants in the regional, provincial and municipal levels shall be chargeable against their respective offices.

9. The MEC/MLGCD and/or the Lingap Coordinating Teams shall coordinate/provide:

− Participants attending

− Venue for the conferences including facilities

− Accommodating for the Team of Sub-Cabinet Committee and Staff (7-member team)

− Counterpart personnel to assist the Lingap Coordinator/Training Staff

10. Included is the tentative list of the number of participants per region and program of activities. It is requested that this Memorandum Circular be given immediate dissemination.

By authority of the President:

JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 4, 1978

Source: House of Representatives, Legislative Library