TANGGAPAN NG PAGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 782

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF GOVERNMENT BROADCASTERS ON FOOD PRODUCTION.

The Rural Broadcasting Council, in coordination with the Department of Public Information and the Department of Agriculture, will conduct a national conference of government broadcasters on food production on January 10-11, 1975, in Baguio City.

The main feature of the conference will be discussions on the coordinated role of government broadcasters in the food production program in the year 1975 through a revised communications strategy in view of the recent typhoons that have adversely affected our agricultural production.

In view of the importance of the above undertaking, all heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send their officials and employees, who are members of the Council, and other government broadcasters to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging and conference fees, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this office dated August 9, 1972. It is understood that the participants residing within the site of the conference shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation only.

The participants shall submit to their agency heads a report on their attendance in the conference within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, December 13, 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff