Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1262

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 8TH GENERAL CONFERENCE OF THE LAW ASSOCIATION FOR ASIA AND THE WESTERN PACIFIC ON SEPTEMBER 9-13, 1983.

The Law Association for Asia and the Western Pacific (LAWASIA) will hold its 8th General Conference at the Philippine International Convention Center on September 9-13, 1983.

Considering the significance of the Conference to the promotion of regional cooperation in the field of law among Asia and the Western Pacific nations, all heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) lawyers each to the Conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems, as well as registration fee of not exceeding ₱1,000.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds, the usual accounting and auditing requirements; as an exception to Letter of Instructions No. 1098 dated January 5,1981.Participants residing or stationed within Metro Manila shall be entitled to convention fee only. Meals covered by the convention fee and the cost for the shuttle bus service shall be deducted from per diems and transportation expenses, respectively.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the Conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, August 3, 1983

Source: Presidential Management Staff