TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1166

NATIONAL TRAINING PROGRAM FOR FARMERS AND AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION WORKERS

TO: Deputy Minister, Incharge of Non-Formal Education, MEC Director, Bureau of Agricultural Extension Director, Bureau of Animal Industry Director, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Director, Bureau of Plant Industry Director, Bureau of Forest Development Deputy Director, Lingap ng Pangulo sa Barangay Director, Bureau of Cooperatives Development

1. A National Training Program for Farmers and Agricultural Extension Workers will be held on November 18-20, 1979 at the Hiyas Convention Center, Malolos, Bulacan, utilizing all the human resources and training facilities of the aforementioned agencies/bureaus including agricultural and fishery schools and colleges.

2. The specific objectives of the training program are to:

a. Develop the participants’ proficiency in understanding and the application of the latest technologies in agriculture, forestry and fishery;

b. Acquaint the trainees with the various agricultural support programs, particularly agrarian reform, agriculture credit, marketing, cooperative, and infrastructure development;

c. Train participants in the use of the learning modules for the Crash Training Program on Farm Technology for the Farm Family; and

d. Help the participants gain a better appreciation of their role in training the farmers for their own economic, social and cultural development.

3. The participants in this training program shall be limited to the following:

a. One NFE Regional/Division Supervisor b. One Agricultural Extension Worker from each of the above-mentioned bureaus in each region c. One Agricultural Educator from the agricultural/fishery schools/colleges in each region d. Three selected farmers from each region e. Representatives from the Presidential Management Staff, Office of the President.

4. The National Training Committee shall be composed of the following:

5. It is desired that echo training programs be conducted in the different regions as a result of the national training. The participants from the regions shall compose the regional committee and shall plan the said regional echo training program. In this regard, a detailed plan of the action shall be prepared by agencies concerned.

6. All expenses incidental to the attendance at the training program will be borne by the Office of Non-Formal Education, Ministry of Education and Culture, subject to the usual auditing and accounting procedures.

7. The Committee shall submit to this Office a report on the results of the training program and a detailed plan of action that may be adopted during the training program.

8. Participation of the above agencies is enjoined.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 20, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff