TANGGAPAN NG PAGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 728

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE REGIONAL SEMINAR ON THE ROLE OF THE CIVIL SERVICE IN THE NEW SOCIETY SPONSORED BY THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.

The successful execution of our national development programs today depend to a considerable extent on our civil service – the men and women who compose our bureaucracy. As such, it is imperative that continuing efforts be given toward making the civil service adequate and able to perform its role fully and well.

The men and women in government must realize the magnitude and implications of current projects for betterment under the New Society and the significance of their individual contributions in the completion of such projects. They must be fully informed of new development and policy changes which affect them in their work. And they must share and get involved in all these undertakings with a sense of commitment and dedication to national welfare.

A dynamic and hardworking civil service is, therefore, indispensable to our national development progress. It is in this awareness that the Civil Service Commission is hereby authorized to conduct a series of regional seminars on the subject “The Role of the Civil Service in the New Society” as hereunder indicated:

All departments, bureaus and offices of the national government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, with branches or units in the regions affected are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants to the seminar. They shall be granted official time with expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging as well as seminar fees. Such expenses shall be chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 593 of this office, series of 1972.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance in the seminar within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, April 22, 1974

Source: Presidential Museum and Library