Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1165

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 8TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES.

The 8th International Conference on Training and Development of Human Resources will be held at the Philippine International Convention Center on November 7-12, 1979, on the theme: “HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT HORIZONS IN THE EIGHTIES AND BEYOND.” This prestigious world forum on human resources planning and development will bring into the country-training managers/directors, personnel managers, organization development specialists, and other individuals involved and/or interested in human resources planning and development from about seventy (70) countries worldwide.

The President has declared the month of November, 1979, as “International Human Resources Planning and Development Month” under Proclamation No. 1849. By virtue of this proclamation, the International Federation of Training and Development Organizations (IFTDO), the Asian Regional Training and Development Organizations (ARTDO) and the Philippine Society for Training Development (PSTD) are jointly initiating and coordinating all activities attendant to the observance of the forthcoming conference.

In view of the timeliness of the conference theme, heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations within the Metro Manila Area, are hereby authorized to send one (1) representative each who are involved in human resources planning and development, preferably members of the Government Training Officers Association of the Philippines (GTOAP) and the Personnel Officers Association of the Philippines (POAP), to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation and a conference fee of ₱1,000.00 each for members of the IFTDO, ARTDO and PSTD and ₱1,200.00 for non-members thereof, if paid on or before September 30, 1979, and ₱1,200.00 and ₱1,400.00, respectively, if paid after September 30, 1979, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 18, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff