Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1171

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND ASIAN REGIONAL CONGRESS ON RADIATION PROTECTION.

The Philippine Association for Radiation Protection (PARP), an organization of nuclear scientists, technologists, engineers, medical doctors and other radiation workers, will sponsor the Second Asian

The main feature of the Congress will be the scientific meetings and forums where papers on radiation dosimetry, radiation monitoring and recent advances in radiation protection will be presented by local and foreign nuclear scientists and researchers. The scientists will discuss the various studies they have made on how to further develop the techniques of protecting man and his environment from the detrimental effects of radiation.

Heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations directly involved in the use of radiation in the fields of medicine, agriculture, research, education, and industry, are hereby authorized to send not exceeding two (2) participants each, who are members of the Association, to the Congress on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a congress fee of ₱200.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, .series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to congress fees only. Meals included in the congress fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the congress as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the congress, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices, and a statement of fees collected and expenditure incurred, duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organization.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 31, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff