TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 568

AUTHORIZING THE GOVERNMENT TRAINING OFFICERS ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES (GTOAP) TO HOLD REGIONAL SEMINARS.

The Government Training Officers Association of the Philippines (GTOAP), with the technical assistance of the Civil Service Commission, the Budget Commission, and the College of Public Administration, University of the Philippines, will conduct a series of regional seminars on the subject: “The Supervisor as a Trainer.”

The objective of the seminar is to make the first-line supervisor appreciate his training responsibilities and develop knowledge and skills as a trainer.

The first tree of these regional seminars have been scheduled on the dates and in the places indicated hereunder:

In view of the importance of these series of seminars and in line with the President’s State of the Nation Address on January 24, 1972, wherein he underscored the need for a “massive retraining program for government employees … to make them more efficient, more perceptive, and more knowledgeable of the development goals of the government,” all heads of department and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, with branches or units in the regions affected, as well as Provincial City and Municipal governments, are hereby authorized to send not more than one (1) participant each to the seminar to be held in their respective regions on official time with expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging, and seminar fees, all chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. It is understood that the participants stationed within the city where the seminar will be held shall be entitled to reasonable transportation expenses and seminar fees only.

The participants shall submit to their agency heads a report on their attendance in the seminar within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, April 17, 1972

Source: Presidential Management Staff