TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1141

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE ECHO SEMINAR-WORKSHOP FOR ACTION OFFICERS OF VARIOUS GOVERNMENT OFFICES, AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES IN THE SOUTHERN LUZON AREA.

The Complaints and Investigation Office (CIO), Office of the President, will conduct a seminar-workshop for action officers of various government offices, agencies and instrumentalities in the Southern Luzon Aria (comprising Regions IV-A and V), to be held at Legazpi City on June 20, 21 and 22, 1979.

The objectives of the seminar are to reappraise the role of action officers in the attainment of development goals; to identify, analyze, and to seek solutions to access problems that militate against progressive government in line with the need for reforms; to professionalize the work of action officers thru the development of skills that would guide them in the study of representative problems and cases brought before them and to formulate solutions and/or procedures in resolving such problems and cases; and to effect better coordination among the action officers in all offices of the government.

The attendance of one (1) action officer from each government agency in the Southern Luzon Area in the said seminar-workshop is hereby authorized on official tine with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a seminar fee of ₱180.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by CGA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within Legazpi City shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and seminar fees only Meals included in the seminar fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the seminar-workshop as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the Complaints and Investigation Office shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the seminar-workshop, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants indicating their respective offices.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, May 15, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff