TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 563

ENJOINING STRICT OBSERVANCE OF THE RULES GOVERNING CONTROVERSION OF COMPENSATION CASES INVOLVING THE GOVERNMENT AS AN EMPLOYER.

Memorandum Circular No. 210 of this Office dated October 29, 1968, prescribes the rules to govern the controversion of compensation claims against the Government as an employer under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. The Office of the Solicitor General, as counsel for the government, however, brought to the attention of this Office the fact that many government officer and agencies do not follow strictly the provisions of said Circular, thereby creating a situation, among others, where claims of doubtful compensability have not been controverted within the period and in the manner prescribed by law.

In order therefore to enable the Office of the Solicitor General to effectively protect the interests of the government and its various agencies in connection with workmen’s compensation cases, all heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to strictly observe the rules promulgated in said Circular, particularly with respect to the following provisions:

1. Submission within the periods provided for in Section 45 of the WCA direct to the proper Regional Office of the Department of Labor of the notice of controversion or Employer’s Report by the head of Office or agency concerned or by the head of the regional offices or branches.

2. Specific statement of the reason or reasons for controversion in order that the controversion may be considered valid.

3. Creation of the compensation evaluation committee that will act immediately on all claims filed under the WCA.

Where the office or agency has regional office or branches, the Office of the Solicitor General shall be furnished with information as to the person authorized in said regional offices or branches to submit the Employer’s Report or Notice of Controversion for the guidance of the Office of the Solicitor General in the disposition of these cases.

As counsel for the government, the Office of the Solicitor General shall have the right to determine the propriety and advisability of proceeding with the controversion recommended by any office or Agency of the government,

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, March 29, 1972

Source: Presidential Management Staff