TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 738

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE WORKSHOP SEMINAR OF THE PRESIDENTIAL REGIONAL OFFICER FOR DEVELOPMENT, REGION I, UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

The Presidential Regional Officer for Development, Region I, is sponsoring a management seminar on June 17-21, 1974 at San Fernando, La Union, on the theme “Maximizing Government Efforts in National Development thru the Involvement of Regional, Provincial and City Executives in Planning and Priority Setting for Programs of Various Levels”.

The desired goals and guidelines of the workshop seminar are as follows:

1. To define the role of each participating agency in the formulation and implementation of an Integrated Development Program for the Region.

2. To acquaint planners and implementers with the interrelations among programs/projects and explain why a harmony and integration of these projects/ programs are necessary.

3. To provide an opportunity for the planners and implementers of the programs to meet and discuss in a convivial atmospheres.

4. To make planners and implementers aware of the potentials and limitations of the resources available to them in order that they may utilize these resources effectively.

5. To enable the Office of the President to select and organize a pool of development-oriented regional executives as agents of change to help attain the goals of a changing society.

In view of the foregoing, national, regional, provincial and city executives including those from government owned or controlled corporations or their assistants operating in Region I are hereby authorized to attend the workshop seminar on official time with expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging as well as seminar fees, all chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by GAO General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of the Office of the President, series of 1972.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance and proceedings in the convention within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof and the PROD shall submit to the Development Management Staff (DMS), Office of the President, the consolidated plan and strategies to launch a regional development concept for study and evaluation.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, May 20, 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff