Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1207

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEMINAR-WORKSHOP FOR ACTION OFFICERS OF VARIOUS GOVERNMENT OFFICES, AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES IN THE MINDANAO AREA

The Complaints and Investigation Office (CIO), Office of the President, will conduct a seminar-workshop for Action Officers of various government offices, agencies and instrumentalities in the Mindanao Area (Regions IX, X, XI and XII), to be held at Davao City on March 4, 5 and 6, 1981.

The objectives of the seminar are to reappraise the role of Action Officers in the attainment of development goals; to identify, analyze, and seek solutions to access problems that militate against progressive government in line with the need for reforms; to professionalize the work of Action Officers thru the development of skills that would guide them in the study of representative problems and cases brought before them, and to formulate solutions and/or procedures in resolving such problems and cases; and effect better coordination among the Action Officers in all offices of the government.

The attendance of one (1) Action Officer from each government agency in the Mindanao Area in the said seminar-workshop is hereby authorized on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a seminar fee of ₱300.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception of Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within Davao City shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and seminar fees only. Meals included in the seminar fee shall be deducted from per diems.

Within 30 days after the seminar, each participant shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the seminar-workshop as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987, dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the Complaints and Investigation Office shall submit, within 30 days after the seminar, to this Office a report of evaluation of the seminar-workshop, including a list of participants with their respective positions and a statement of fees collected and expenditures incurred, duly certified by a CPA. A copy of the report shall be furnished the CCPC, MOB and the CSC.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

12 January 1981

Source: Presidential Management Staff