TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1163

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE CONFERENCE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS AND CONTRACTORS OF ASIAN COUNTRIES.

The Society of Philippine Electrical Contractors (SPEC) in cooperation with the Institute of Integrated-Electrical Engineers of the Philippines, Inc. (IIEE), will hold the Conference of Electrical Engineers and Contractors of ASEAN Countries on September 7-10, 1979 at the Philippine International Convention Center.

The objectives of the conference are to promote intra-ASEAN trade in the electrical contracting industry; to have intra-ASEAN exchange of technology, and to provide a forum where the electrical industry’s problems and opportunities, can be defined and resolved.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and officers, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send one (1) electrical engineer and/or master electrician each, who are members of the .Society of Philippine Electrical Contractors and the Institute of Integrated Electrical Engineer of the Philippines, to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of ₱500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila area shall be entitled to conference fees only. Meals included in the conference fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as Prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices, and a statement of fees collected and expenditure incurred, duly audited by a Certified Public Accounts not connected with the two organizations.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 5, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff