OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 77

URGING THE ATTENDANCE OF CERTAIN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES IN THE 2ND SYMPOSIUM ON MINERAL RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT AND THE 13TH MINE SAFETY CONFERENCE.

The 2nd Symposium on Mineral Resources Development and the l3th Mine Safety Conference will be hold at the San Miguel Corporation Auditorium, Ayala Avenue, Makati, Rizal, on November 24-26, 1966, under the auspices of the mining industry and the Bureau of Mines. The theme selected for the occasion is “Nation Building through Mineral Resources Development.”

It need not be emphasized that the promotion of progressive policing and practices in the field of mineral resources development and the adoption of safety practices in the mines are continuing needs in a developing economy.

Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Public Works and Communications, Labor, and Health, and the Bureaus of Mines, Lauds, Forestry, Plant Industry, Coast and Geodetic Survey, and Public Works, as well as the National Power Corporation, Cepee Industries, Inc., Manila Gas Corporation, Board of Technical Surveys and Maps, Gold Mining Industry Assistance Board, National Science Development Board, and other agencies of the government which perform functions related to the subject of the symposium and the conference are hereby authorized to send not more than three (3) participants each, except the Bureau of Mines which may send such number of its technical personnel whose services could be dispensed with during the period. Their attendance shall be on official tine and their expenses for transportation, Subsistence, lodging and symposium fees shall be charged against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and editing requirements. It is understood that the expenses those from the private sector shall be borne by or by the establishments they represent.

The delegates from the government sector shall submit to their respective agency heads within one month after the symposium a report on their attendance and participation in the conference. The Bureau of Mines shall also render a report on the symposium to the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources said the Secretary of Labor.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, September 23, 1966

Source: Presidential Management Staff