TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 812

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SOUTHEAST ASIAN SUMMER INSTITUTE IN MATHEMATICS, 1975

The Mathematical Society of the Philippines (MSP) will host a regional Summer School in Combinatorial Mathematics and Graph Theory, a lecture series in pure and applied mathematics and a symposium on mathematical education in Southeast Asia from April 21 to May 16, 1975 in Quezon City.

The aims of this Summer Institute are to widen the understanding of the different fields of mathematics in Southeast Asia and in particular, the Philippines; to realize the national policies on science and mathematics, through the establishment of a base for mathematical research and training that would serve developmental and educational needs of the country; and to establish the necessary links between the Philippines and the larger world mathematical community.

In view of the significance of this Summer Institute in Mathematics in the developmental and educational efforts of the government which is encouraging the improvement of mathematical training and research in the Philippines, all heads of schools departments in mathematics of State Universities, colleges and non-collegiate public schools are hereby authorized to send three (3) of their faculty members in mathematics or related sciences to attend the Summer Institute in Mathematics on official time with expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging as well as seminar fees, all chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973 as implemented by General Circular No. 127 of the Commission on Audit dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements and as an exception to the provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

The administration of private schools, colleges and universities are encouraged and enjoined to avail of this Summer Institute, by allowing the members of their academic personnel in mathematics and related sciences to attend and participate in this Summer school on official time, as part of their academic training program.

It is understood that participant who are residing or who are stationed within the Greater Manila area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and training fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective school heads a written report on their attendance and participation in the Summer Institute, within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

This Circular takes effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, March 18, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff