OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 55

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE THIRD NATIONAL CONVENTION OF GOVERNMENT CARTOGRAPHIC, PHOTOGRAMMETRIC AND GEODETIC ENGINEERS.

The Board of Technical Surveys and Maps and the National Waterworks and Sewerage Authority, with the cooperation of 30 surveying and mapping agencies of the government will hold the Third National Convention of Government Cartographic, Photogrammetric and Geodetic Engineers, in the City of Manila or suburbs on July 25-30, 1966.

The Convention will discuss, among; other things, ways and means of improving management procedures and administration of surveying and mapping to maximize efficiency and attain economy.

Departments, Bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, which have members in the Philippine Surveying and Mapping Institute, Philippine Society of Photogrammetry, Philippine Society of Geodetic Engineers, Philippine Geodetic and Geophysical Institute, Philippine Association of Geodetic Engineers, Philippine Geographical Society, Geological Society of the Philippines and Philippine Association of Civil Engineers, may send not sore than 4 delegates to the convention. Regional, district or division offices in the province and government agencies may he allowed to send one delegate each. This limitation as to the number of delegates not apply to convention officials. Their attendance shall be on official time and their expenses for transportation, subsistence, lodging and conference in connection therewith shall be charged against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

The delegates shall submit s report of their attendance and participation in the convention to their respective agency heads. The Board of Technical Surveys and Maps shall render a report on this conference to the Civil Service Commission in line with the latter’s leadership function in field of career and employee developments.

By authority of the President

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, June 28, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff