TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 955

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE AT THE 8TH WORLD LAW CONFERENCE SPONSORED BY THE WORLD PEACE THROUGH LAW CENTER.

The World Peace Through Law Center and its affiliates will sponsor the 8th World Law Conference at Manila from 21 to 26 August 1977.

The Center is a non-governmental legal organization counting among its members judges, lawyers, law professors and law students from 140 nations. The Conference is expected to provide a forum for forging workable solutions based on the rule of law encompassing transnational corporations, legal services to the poor, human rights, international finance and securities regulation, administrative law, foreign trade and investments, legal education, congestion of cases in courts, law of the sea, environmental law, intellectual property law, and others. All of these issues are pertinent to lawyers in the government service, and their attendance at the Conference will broaden their outlook, expand, their exposure, and benefit them immeasurably.

All heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government owned and/or controlled corporations and local governments, are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) representatives to the conference. Participants shall be on official time and allowed reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems, as well as seminar fees, chargeable against the released appropriations of their respective offices in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

It is understood that participants residing or stationed within the Greater Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 7, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff