Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 814

PROVIDING THE GUIDELINES GOVERNING THE PARTICIPATION OF THE LOCAL BOARDS IN THE 1975 INTEGRATED CENSUS OF THE POPULATION AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES IN THE COUNTRY.

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 650 dated 31 January 1975 directs the taking of an integrated census of population and economic activities in May 1975 to provide more recent data for national planning purposes and to properly evaluate the progress in various fields and measure the impact of ongoing projects of the government, as well as provide the barangays with the latest data on their populations and effect-desired changes and reforms in the social, economic and. political structures within their jurisdiction;

WHEREAS, for the systematic coordination of government agencies and instrumentalities involved in the operation, a Presidential Census Coordinating Board (PCCB) was created;

WHEREAS, as a counterpart of the PCCB at the local government level, Provincial Census Boards, City Census Boards, and Municipal Census Boards shall be established to provide such facilities and assistance as may be required by the National Census and Statistics Office (NCSO);

WHEREAS, the Executive Director of the PCCB is the Executive Director of the NCSO while those of the local boards are the Provincial Census Officers for the provinces, and the Municipal Census Officers/Census Assistants or the City/Municipal Census Supervisors for cities and municipalities;

WHEREFORE, in consonance with .the above, the local census boards are hereby enjoined to:

a) Convene immediately and formally organize if this has: not yet been done.

b) Assess the needs of the local NCSO office in. terms of transportation, communication, security and publicity requirements.

c) Make an inventory of transportation and communication facilities of each department vis-a-vis the requirements of the NCBO and indicate specific .areas of involvement of participation for the different agencies as may be consistent with their resources. Transportation assistance will include provision for drivers.

d) Conduct an information campaign for the operation through seminars, meetings, open forums and other means.

e) Provide security to census personnel and materials whenever needed.

f) Assist in the census operation to insure its efficient undertaking and the complete coverage of areas enumerated.

g) Through its chairman affix its certification to the tabulation of hand-tallied results after the enumeration.

h) Provide, whenever needed, clerical help to the local census office at the expense of the participating agency for the duration of the enumeration.

i) Provide suitable training space, storage space and office space for the local supervisor.

j) Take up other matters and provide such other assistance as may be necessary for the successful prosecution of the operation.

The officials and employees of the local census boards are also authorized to receive reasonable allowance for transportation and representation expenses payable either by the local government or by the respective offices of the members of the Board, in the amount that shall be determined by the local boards subject to the prior approval of this Office and the availability of funds and the usual auditing rules and regulations.

For the information and guidance of all concerned, enclosed is a copy of Presidential Decree No. 650.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary and Chairman of the Presidential Census Coordinating Board

25 March 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff