Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1011

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL HOSPITAL PROGRAM.

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to raise the level of health of the general population by bringing about adequate medical care to the people at the least cost;

WHEREAS, in view of the increasing health requirements of the populace, there is a need to provide for a more responsive operational support to both government and private hospitals;

WHEREAS, in line with the policy of the government, there are currently being undertaken various on-going and related studies for a nationwide hospital development program; and

WHEREAS, there is ‘a further need to consolidate and coordinate such activities into a comprehensive and integrated national hospital development program;

WHEREFORE, in view of the aforesaid objectives, there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee to be composed of the following members:

The Committee shall have the following tasks:

1. Serve as a forum for the resolution of operational and developmental problems of both government and private hospitals. In line with this function the Committee shall establish a system of coordination among the various agencies and instrumentalities of government and the private entities involved in the establishment and operation of hospitals. The Committee shall also develop a hospital information system to serve the information needs of all agencies involved in hospital operations, planning, or regulation.

2. Formulate and recommend to the Office of the President a comprehensive and integrated hospital development program that will cover both government and private hospitals. Such development program shall define the policies, programs, projects and financial implications on the government and private sectors. The Committee shall recommend standards and guidelines for the establishment, upgrading and classification of hospitals, as well as such laws or measures as may be necessary for the effective development -and regulation of all hospitals. To facilitate, the accomplishment of this task, the Committee shall coordinate the conduct of all studies on the various aspects of hospital development.

The Committee may create a technical study group to be composed of resource persons in the different disciplines, and for this purpose, may call on the services of such technicians and professionals from all branches of government as it may need in the conduct of such activities. For this purpose, the Committee is hereby authorized to reimburse members of the Committee, the study groups, and detailed personnel of actual representation or transportation expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties at such rates as may be approved by the Committee, subject to applicable accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and, for the purpose of discharging its functions, may create such subcommittees as may be necessary.

The National Economic and Development Authority shall provide the necessary secretariat services to the Committee.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department bureau, or instrumentality of the government for any assistance that may be required to ensure the accomplishment of its tasks. The Committee shall take necessary steps to obtain the assistance and cooperation of the private sector.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 10, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff