OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 24

INSTITUTING THE “ONE-APPEAL PLAN” GOVERNING EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES.

Government employees, particularly those in the national government, have been owned or controlled by the government, have been a perennial target of fund campaigns being conducted annually by various civic and charitable organizations. The usual practice of direct, personal solicitation to the employees usually causes general irritation among government personnel to the extent that they feel they are being unduly burdened by so many appeals for contributions. Such a feeling negates the laudable character of the campaigns and therefore jeopardizes the desired ends. The said practice also entails loss of considerable time and effort on the part of the officials and employees assigned to conduct the drive in their respective offices, who could otherwise be performing their official duties. Duplication of contributions to one organization is also highly probable.

For a better system of collecting voluntary contribution, there is hereby instituted the “ONE APPEAL PLAN,” and all departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of the government, including corporations owned or controlled by the government, are hereby authorized to adopt the said plan. It calls for the following:

(a)A “One-Appeal Plan” for a United Welfare Fund to adopted, whereby Government employees, whether on salary or daily-wage basis, will be requested to contribute one day’s pay during the course of each fiscal year as contribution to all civic and charitable organizations.

(b) This contribution is purely voluntary , and refusal on the part of any official or employee to contribute should not be taken against him.

(c) Should an employee agree, the corresponding amount may be deducted from his salary in four (4) installments, unless, of course, he desires a quicker way of meeting his pledges.

(d) The amount collected from the official and employees under the foregoing arrangement shall be constituted under the foregoing arrangement shall be constituted into a Trust Fund called the UNITED WELFARE FUND OF THE DEPARTMENT, BUREAU OR OFFICE concerned solely for civic and charitable purposes, to be disposed of in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by a Committee created for this purpose.

The “ONE-APPEAL PLAN” or One-Drive a year for all fund campaigns shows distinct advantages. Among these advantages are:

(1) The plan will, once and for all, eliminate the frequent and often annoying fund solicitations that have heretofore subjected government personnel to constant harassment. This will now be replaced by just ONE DRIVE each year.

(2) Government officials and employees are afforded protection from unauthorized and irregular solicitations of contributions.

(3) It will save much time and enormous expenses of time on the part of the employees as well as the Government Administration.

(4) It will reduce valuable man-hours expended on multiple drives.

(5) Payment through payroll deductions will undoubtedly make the contribution much easier and more convenient and preclude duplicate contributions for one drive.

(6) Finally, the installment plan, through more or less negligible deductions, would be a “PAINLESS” way of helping out charitable cause.

The full and effective implementation of the above “ONE APPEAL PLAN”, as well as the communication to all employees of all its particulars, shall be the responsibility of all departments heads, bureau directors, chiefs of offices and their assistants.

By authority of the President

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, March 22, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff