TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (Office of the President of the Philippines)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1021

TO: ALL HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS AND AGENCIES OF THE GOVERNMENT, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.

SUBJECT: Attendance in the First National Convention of the Buklod ng mga Kabataang Kawani.

The Buklod ng mga Kabataang Kawani (BKK), an organization of young government employees, will hold its First National Convention at Camp September 21st Movement, Kalinan, Davao City, on December 4-11, 1977, on the theme: “The Young Government Employees in the Changing Society.”

The Convention aims to formulate policies and programs that shall serve as the guidelines of the BKK members in carrying out the objectives of the organization.

The attendance of all presidents, vice presidents of the regional Buklod, and the presidents of Provincial and City Buklod organizations and the participants of the First Future Leaders Program jointly sponsored by the National Defense College of the Philippines and the Civil Service Commission is hereby authorized as official business with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and other expenses incidental to the holding of the Convention, chargeable against the appropriation of the respective offices of the participants, in accordance with the provision of Letter of Instructions No. 344, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report on their participation in the Convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977-Likewise, within the same period, the Chairman of the Convention shall submit to the Civil Service Commission an evaluation report of the Convention, furnishing a copy thereof to the Budget Com-mission. The report shall include a list of participants indicating their respective positions and offices and a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organization.

The Civil Service Commission shall coordinate with the agencies concerned in connection with this Convention.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

November 16, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff