OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO.489

CREATING THE COMMITTEE ON LAW ENFORCEMENT AS AN ACTION ARM OF THE PEACE AND ORDER COORDINATING COUNCIL.

There is hereby created a committee on law enforcement as an action arm of the Peace and Order Coordinating Council, composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions and objectives:

1. To coordinate the formulation, implementation and supervision on a national scale of an integrated peace and order program designed to combat the many facets of crime, i.e., organized crime syndicates involved with smuggling, carnapping, narcotics, gambling, criminal untouchables, wanted persons, loose firearms holders/traffickers, subversive groups, dissident/insurgent groups, etc.

2. To coordinate the formulation and implementation on a national scale of a public information/orientation program designed to win the maximum cooperation of the populace in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of public order.

3. To undertake studies designed to improve the techniques and procedures of law enforcement, thereby making it a more potent weapon in our drive against all forms of lawlessness and criminality.

4. To undertake surveys of various law enforcement agencies to determine existing problems with regards to law enforcement and to be able to formulate corresponding corrective measures.

The Committee is hereby empowered to create sub-committees as may be needed to conduct researches and studies in-depth of the whole spectrum of law enforcement. Further, the Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for any assistance it may need in the discharge of its function.

Periodic reports on the status and progress of planning and implementation of progress/projects shall be submitted to the Secretariat, Peace and Order Coordinating Council.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 29, 1971

Source : Presidential Management Staff