Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1227

TO: All Heads of Departments, Bureaus, Offices, Agencies including Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN ANY OF THE FOUR CRASH SEMINAR-WORKSHOPS OF INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT EXECUTIVE CENTER (IMEC) PURSUANT TO LOI 506 IN BUDGET COST REDUCTION.

The International Management Executive Center (IMEC), managed by concerned Filipino professional managers of the New Society who are mostly faculty members of known graduate schools in Public and Business Management of our country, in collaboration with the Civil Service Commission and the Office of the President, will continue to conduct in-house practical crash seminar-workshops for House Keeping Expenses in the Budget which it started in September, 1978, intended for those employees who are engaged in procurement of government supplies, supervision in the Implementation of government projects, and Human Resource Training and Development.

I. Effective Logistics & Procurement Practicum through “Self Reliance Approaches.”

II. Effective Project Supervision & Evaluation through tested “Tools and Techniques of Management.”

III. Records and Communication Management

IV. Human Resource Trainors and Personnel officers Management Program

The above seminar-workshops aim to enhance the managerial capability of government officials to effect immediately in their respective budgets 20% to 25% cost savings as previously proven by the Ministry of the Budget. The course will be conducted for a period of one (1) week and will consist of 16 hours of lecture-workshops on Saturday and Sunday and AO hours Monday to Friday to teach on-the-job application of the know-how learned. There will be a fee of P400.00 for each participant. This fee includes free instructional materials, handouts, consultations and certificates of completion.

The agency concerned shall provide physical facilities like a training room, chairs, tables and blackboards, and may allot funds for meriendas of the participants, subject to the availability thereof.

Participants shall be required to submit a Plan of Action approved by their respective heads and designed to contribute to the government’s effort to reduce expenditures in the different agencies and regions.

At no instance during the course shall the participants be entitled to collect overtime pay for the time spent while attending the seminar-workshops. The graduates will be given due accreditation to the degree of Master in Public and Business Management of UP-La Salle-TMEC under Memorandum Circular No. 1074 dated August 11, 1978.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 23, 1981

Source: Presidential Management Staff