OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 382

AUTHORIZING THE COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC HIGHWAYS TO DISPOSE OF ALL UNSERVICEABLE EQUIPMENT OF THE BUREAU OF PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.

The Commissioner of Public Highways is authorized to dispose of all unserviceable equipment of the Bureau of Public Highways, (BPH) as an exception to Executive Order No. 37, s. 1954, according to the disposal plan described hereunder:

1. Accountable Officials (Depot Equipment Engineers, District, City or Project Engineers) in possession of unserviceable equipment shall submit to the BPH the corresponding inventory and investigation (I & I) Report supported by the individual Survey Reports and recent photographs (two views) of the unserviceable equipment.

2. The Commissioner of Public Highways, after processing, submits the I & I Report to the Infrastructure Operations Center (IOC), Office of the President, for the necessary clearance.

3. The IOC then forwards the I & I Report with its comment, recommendation and/or appropriate action to the Disposal Committee composed of the representatives of the following Offices:

a.) Bureau of Supply Coordination b.) Department of Public Works and Communications c) Bureau of Public Highways

A representative of the General Auditing Office shall sit with the Committee to witness and certify to the bidding, sale and hauling of the equipment.

4. The Disposal Committee shall appraise and inspect the unserviceable equipment and recommend for approval by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, the manner of disposal that it deems appropriate in accordance with Section 640 of the Revised Administrative Code.

5. The Secretary of Public Works and Communications shall approve, for the Office of the President, the disposal of unserviceable equipment valued at ₱1,000.00 or more as required under GAO Memorandum Circular No. 23, dated July 18, 1946.

6. The Director of Supply Coordination shall implement the recommended manner of disposal.

7. After the disposal is consummated, the I & I Report with all supporting papers shall be returned to the BPH as basis for dropping the property from the books of account.

Precautions shall be taken to prevent the resale to the Government of the same equipment after they are reconditioned, repaired, or repainted.

Unserviceable equipment or property which might still be used for instructional purposes should be sold at nominal cost to government vocational schools in need of the sane.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, August 7, 1970

Source: Presidential Management Staff