MALACAÑANG MANILA

GENERAL ORDER NO. 40

PRESCRIBING NEW WORK HOURS DURING THE CURRENT ENERGY CRISIS FOR ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICES, NATIONAL AND LOCAL WITH CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS.

WHEREAS, it has now become necessary to prescribe even stringent measures for the conservation and proper allocation of energy resources available to the Government of the Philippines, in view of the seriousness of the current energy crisis;

WHEREAS, it is important for the agencies of the Government to take the lead in this effort, particularly to set an example which private enterprise con follow;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed forces of the Philippines and pursuant to Proclamation To. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order the strict observance of new work hours by all departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including local governments, and government-owned and controlled corporations, which hours shall based on a 3-day weekend according to the following schedule:

This Order shall not be applied to the following:

1. Government Hospitals, medical and dental clinics.

2. Fire Departments and all law enforcement agencies.

3. Military agencies.

4. Government agencies for relief and rehabilitation.

5. Government agencies directly involved in-productive activities related to agriculture, industry, and other essential public services.

6. Government Banks which shall continue to observe banking hours pursuant to C.B. Circular No. 353 of December 29, 1972.

7. Such other units as each head of department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government, may certify as required by exigencies of the service to report for work on hours other than therein prescribed. In each case, the proper certification shall be furnished by the respective heads of department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality to the Office of the President within fifteen (15) days from the date of this Order.

All employees on daily wage basis shall be entitled to payment of their wages on Fridays for the duration of the new work hours. All agencies are once more directed to upgrade the measures that they have already taken for the conservation of energy resources, in addition to such as may be further prescribed by one or by any duly designated representative.

This General Order shall not have mandatory effect on the judiciary and other government offices exercising judicial functions, private businesses and industries, However, these offices are urged to take appropriate and complementary measures to implement the objectives of this General Order.

All laws, executive orders, rules and regulations, and general orders, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this General Order are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

This Order shall take effect Tuesday, November 13, 1973.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of November in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Supreme Court Library