MALACAÑANG Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 55

DEFINING THE JURISDICTION OF MILITARY TRIBUNALS AND CIVIL COURTS OVER CRIMES COMMITTED BY MEMBERS OF THE UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES THE CIVILIANS COMPONENTS THEREOF OR THEIR DEFENDENTS.

WHEREAS, the PR-US Military Bases Agreement of 1947, as amended on August 10, 1965, provides that subjects to certain exception, the authorities of the Republic of the Philippine shall have jurisdiction in over the members of the United States Armed Forces or the civilian component within the Republic of the Philippines and punishable by the laws of the Republic of the Philippines.

WHEREAS, General Order No. 12 dated September 30, 1972 defines the jurisdiction of military tribunals authorized to be constituted under General Older NO. 8 dated September 27, 1972.

WHEREAS, General Order NO. 12-A dated October 2, 1972, amending General Order No. 12 provides, among others, that in the cases involving members of the United States Armed Forces of the Civilian component thereof and their defendents over which the Republic of the Philippine has jurisdiction pursuant to the existing RP-US Military Bases Agreements the preliminary investigation shall be conducted by the City or provincial fiscal concerned and the corresponding informations filed with the proper civil courts, except cases involving suspension rebellion, sedition, or any other crime committed in furherance or on the occasion of, or filed with the military tribunals.

WHEREAS, General Order No. 49 dated October 4, 1972 redefining the jurisdiction of military tribunals and repealing “General Order No. 12 and emended thereto, and related General Orders inconsistent with the provisions of” said. Order does not contain a provision similar to the provisions of General Order No. 12-A allocating between the civil courts and the military tribunals jurisdiction over offenses committed by members of the United Stated Armed Forces or civilian component thereof or their dependents.

WHEREAS, it is imperative that a reeefinition of jurisdiction over such offense JS be made in order to obtiate confusion among all concerned and to eliminate possible conflicts of jurisdiction between the military tribunals and the civil courts in respect thereof;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippine by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, hereby order as part of the law of the land the following:

SECTION1. The military tribunals created under General Order No.8 dated September 27, 1972, in relation to Presidential Decree No. 39 dated November 7, 1972, shall exercise exclusive jurisdiction over cases filed against a member of the United States Armed Forces or Civilian component thereof or their dependents involving aubversion, rebellion sedition, or any other crime committed in futherance or on the occasional, or incicentto, or in connection with said crimes and over which the Philippines has jurisdiction pursuant, to the existing RP=US Military Bases Agreement.

SECTION2. Cases other than those enumerated in the preceding section against a member of the U.S. Armed Forces or civilian component thereof or their dependents over which the Philippines has jurisdiction pursuant to the existing RP-US Military Bases Agreement shall be triable by the proper civil courts, Such cases already filed and pending in military tribunals at the time of the effectively of this Order shall immediately be transferred to the corresponding civil counts to trial and disposition.

SECTION3. The military tribunal or the proper civil court shall exercise jurisdiction as hereinabove conferred subject to the provisions of the aforementioned RP-US Military Bases- Agreement.

SECTION4. All Orders, instructions rules, regulations and directive which are inconsistent herewith are hereby superseded, modified and/or repealed accordingly.

SECTION5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE the City of Manila, this 10th Day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

President of the Philippines

JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives