TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

GENERAL ORDER NO. 52

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, declaring a state of martial law throughout the land was issued for reasons therein stated;

WHEREAS, by virtue of the said Proclamation No. 1081 and in order to restore the peace and order conditions and the stability of the nation and protect the citizenry from violence, injuries and loss of lives in the most effective and expeditious manner, General Order No. 6, dated September 22, 1972 and General Order 7, dated September 23, 1972, were issued to prohibit the inhabitants of the country from keeping any firearm without a permit duly and legally issued for that purpose as well as to prohibit the carrying of such firearm outside the residence of the duly licensed holder thereof;

WHEREAS, said General Order No. 6 and General Order No. 7, prohibit company guards or watchmen of public or private corporations, firms or business establishments from possessing high powered firearms;

WHERAS, as members of the Integrated Civilian Home Defense Forces, all duly licensed security guards and watchmen of private firms, establishments and corporations, as well as employees of government agencies, offices or government-owned or controlled corporations who are utilized as security guards are to assist in suppressing lawlessness and in restoring peace and order within their respective areas of operation, provided they are allowed adequate capability, especially in terms of armaments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, do hereby order that in areas where there is an upsurge of lawlessness and criminality as determined by the Chief Constabulary of the Philippines, private firms, establishments and corporations, as well as government agencies or offices and government-owned or controlled corporations utilizing their employees as security guards or watchmen may be allowed to acquire, possess and use high-powered firearms under the following conditions:

1. The acquisition of the firearms shall be at the expense of the firm, establishment or corporation, agency or office concerned;

2. The firearms shall first be registered with the Philippine Constabulary under existing laws;

3. The duly licensed security guards or watchmen who will use the firearms shall be given adequate training in the care and use thereof and will be under the supervision of qualified officers and men of the Armed Forces if the Philippines.

The Chief of Constabulary of the Philippines shall promulgate rules and regulations, which shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of National Defense, for the effective implementation of this Order.

General Orders No. 6 and No. 7, both as amended, are hereby modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of March , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives