MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 67

AMENDING AND AMPLIFYING PARAGRAPH 7 OF GENERAL ORDER NO. 66 DATED SEPTEMBER 13, 1980.

WHEREAS, paragraph 7 of General Order No, 66 dated September 13, 1980 provides, among others, that persons who refuse to be inspected or to allow his luggages, bags or other personal belongings to be inspected shall be detained until otherwise ordered released by me;

WHEREAS, said paragraph does not provide for a specific or definite period of detention for those who refuse to be inspected, or to allow their bags, luggages or other personal belongings to be inspected, by authorized personnel of duly established checkpoints;

WHEREAS, a period of not exceeding seventy-two hours is ample time for the arresting elements to conduct the investigation of those who refuse to be inspected, or to allow their bags, luggages or other personal belongings, or vehicle, to be inspected;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order that any person who shall refuse to be searched, or to allow his vehicle, bags, luggages, or other personal belongings, to be inspected at duly established checkpoints, pursuant to General Order No. 66, dated September 13, 1980, shall be arrested and detained for investigation for his refusal and possible involvement in subversive activities for a period of not exceeding seventy-two hours from the time of arrest, after which such person shall be ordered released by the Commander of the detaining unit, except as provided hereunder.

I hereby further order that those who are found to be in possession of any firearm, explosives, or incendiary or any material used in the manufacture of firearms or explosives, without permit to carry outside residence and/or license from the proper authorities, or have committed any offense exclusively triable by the military tribunals, shall be forthwith arrested and detained until otherwise ordered released by me or my authorized representative and prosecuted before the military tribunals, With respect to those persons who are found to have committed any other offense or crime under the jurisdiction of the civil courts, they shall likewise be arrested, detained and investigated after which they shall be delivered, if practicable, within the period provided for in Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code, as amended, to the proper civil judicial authorities for disposition.

This Order shall take effect immediately,

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives