MALACAÑANG Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 13

WHEREAS, Martial Law has been declared under Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and is now in effect throughout the entire country;

WHEREAS, one of the objectives of the proclamation of Martial Law is to effect social, economic and political reforms, and thus bring about the transformation of a New Society in our country, a Society infused with a profound sense of discipline and order;

WHEREAS, every citizen and resident of the Philip pines should participate in bringing about these changes; and

WHEREAS, it is also the duty of every citizen and resident of the Philippines to keep his environment or surroundings clean and wholesome;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, .FERDINAND B. MARCOS, President of the Philippines,, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, do hereby call upon every resident and citizen of the Philippines, all universities, colleges and schools and other similar institutions, private as well as public; all commercial and industrial establishments, hotels, restaurants, hospitals, cinema houses, public markets, transportation companies, and all establishments of any kind, to undertake the cleaning of their own surroundings, their yards and gardens, as well as the canals, roads or streets in their immediate premises.

Towards this end, it is hereby prohibited for anyone to throw garbage in public places, such as roads, canals, esteros or parks.

I expect everyone to cooperate in this project to clean our surroundings,

I hold everyone responsible for his own surroundings, and should anybody fail to comply with his obligations under this General Order, the Government will undertake the cleaning of his premises at his own expense,

The owners of idle lots in the Greater Manila Area are expected to keep these idle lots clean. In the event of their failure or inability to comply with this obligation, the Government will undertake the cleaning of the lot at the owner’s expense, and the Government may further utilize the land for its food production program.

I order the Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communications to supervise the implementation of this campaign.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(SGD.) FERDINAND Ea MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : Supreme Court Library