MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES Manila GENERAL ORDER NO. 46

RESTORING THE USUAL OFFICE WORKING SCHEDULE IN ALL OFFICES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE GOVERNMENT.

WHEREAS, General Order No. 40, dated November 10, 1973, prescribed a four-day working schedule in all offices of the Government, both national and local, as an urgent measure for the conservation and proper allocation of energy resources available to the Government of the Philippines, in view of the seriousness of the energy crisis;

WHEREAS, conditions have tentatively changed relative to the country’s oil supply environment, and the energy uncertainties, which gripped not only the Philippines but also many countries of the world, have somehow stabilized in the meantime; and

WHEREAS, the return to the usual office working schedule of 40-hour, five-day work week is highly necessary, in order for all government offices and entities, both national and local, to accelerate the tempo of activities and thereby enable all sectors of Philippines society to pursue speedy national development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order that all departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, both national and local, shall resume the usual 40-hour, five-day week working schedule, as follows:

This Order shall not apply to particular operating units of all entities and instrumentalities which have been traditionally observing different schedules and which are necessary and peculiar to their operations, like military services, hospital and medical services, law enforcement units, fire departments, and agencies for relief and rehabilitation.

All laws, executive orders, rules and regulations, and general orders, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this General Order are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

This order shall take effect April 1, 1974.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives