MALACAÑANG Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 66

AUTHORIZING THE CHIEF OF CONSTABULARY TO ESTABLISH CHECKPOINTS, UPDATE LIST OF WANTED PERSONS AND CONDUCT DRAGNET OPERATIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, there has been a series of fires, bombings and explosions in several parts of the country particularly in Metropolitan Manila, which resulted in the deaths and injuries of innocent people and in the destruction of properties worth millions of pesos;

WHEREAS, these series of fires, bombings and explosions have been caused by international and domestic terrorists and anarchists;

WHEREAS, appropriate measures should immediately be adopted to prevent the further loss of lives and destruction of properties and to preserve the peace and security of the people.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the Chief of Constabulary;

1. To establish checkpoints in big establishments places of amusements and other public and private buildings or places where people congregate, meet or transact business for the purpose of inspecting bags, luggages and other personal belongings of persons entering the premises of said buildings or establishments and to apprehend, detain and file charges against any person who shall contrary to law, be found to be carrying firearms, explosives or incendiary and other material used in the manufacture of firearms or explosives;

2. To inspect all passengers and cargoes either coming in via land, sea and air transport, including mails coming in and out of the country, for the above stated purpose;

3. To update the list of wanted persons and conduct dragnet operations in places or areas where these wanted persons and terrorist elements are reportedly hiding for the purpose of apprehending them and prosecuting them before the bar of justice.

4. To restrict the travel of persons, suspected of subversive and terroristic activities;

5, To secure all public utilities especially sources of water, energy, power and communications including vital transport systems like airports, piers, harbors and land transportation terminals or stations, in coordination with proper authorities or agencies;

6. To place an intelligence team in all communication facilities with authority to trace all threats, coercion, intimidation and blackmail by telephone or other means; and

7. To detain the persons who are apprehended in accordance with this order and all other persons who refuse to be inspected or to allow his luggages, bags or other personal belongings to be inspected, until otherwise ordered released by me.

I hereby further order the Chief of Constabulary to deputize such qualified personnel in the government service or private sector to assist in the inspection of bags, luggages, and other personal belongings as herein directed.

Finally, I hereby order the nullification of the temporary release orders of detainees who have violated or who may violate the conditions of their release, and to detain them until otherwise ordered released by me.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives