MALACAÑANG Manila

GENERAL ORDER NO. 51

PROVIDING FOR PUBLIC AND FREE DISCUSSIONS AND DEBATE ON THE REFERENDUM QUESTIONS AND SETTING A PERIOD THEREFORE.

WHEREAS, in my desire to ascertain the people’s views, I have, through Proclamations No. 1366, dated December 31, 1974 called a nationwide referendum on January 30, 1975;

WHEREAS, I have declared that our people should be fully informed and enlightened on the referendum question in order that they can cast their votes intelligently and with full understanding of the issue involved;

WHEREAS; therefore, our people should be afforted the fullest opportunity to discuss and debate freely and publicity the question to be submitted in the referendum.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the constitution, do hereby order as follows:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy – Free and public discussion and debates on the questions to be submitted in the referendum of February 27, 1975, shall be aalowed and encouraged in order that the barangay voters can vote intelligently and with full understanding of the issue involved.

SECTION 2. Implementation of Policy – To implement the policy declared in the preceeding section, the following provisions shall be enforced:

1. Any person who is duly registered as a barangay member shall not be questioned, interrogated or investigated before or after the referendum for any speech, remark or statement in any discussion or debated intended to explain the referendum questions or to enlighten the people about the issues involved, or for any view for or against any or all of the question made in public rallies or debated or in other forms of communications, radio or televisions, and such remarks, statements or views shall not be administrative as evidence in any investigation or suit against the person making them.

2. The printing of pamphlets, leaflets, posters, handbills and other printed materials designed to explain the referendum question or enlighten the people about them, and the dissemination circulation of these material shall be allowed and in no way restricted, subject to pertinent and applicable provisions of the Election Code of 1971 and regulations that may be promulgated by the Commissions on Election in accordance with Sec. 5 of this General Order, and no person of Persons who are duly registered as barangay member shall be held to account for views expressed in these printed materials, which shall likewise be inadmissible as evidence in any investigation or suit against the person or persons printing, publishing, or circulating them; Provided , however, That any printed material shall not be disseminated or circulated if it (allowed to be) does not indicate the name and address of the author thereof as well as the name and address of the printed.

Nothing in this Order, however, shall be constructed as in any manner allowing any speech, remark or statements in the discussions or debated herein referred to which are patiently libelous or which are not clearly and patently related to, or connected with the questions or the issues involved.

Likewise, the distribution of printed material shall not be allowed if the contents thereof are patently libelous or are not clearly and patently related to, or connected with the questions or issues involved.

SECTION 3. Period of Free and Public Discussion of Debate. Free and public discussion debate for the purpose herein provided shall be allowed during the period from February 7th up to February 21st, 1975.

SECTION 4. Power of Supervision and Control. – The Commission on Election shall have direct and immediate supervision and control over national, provincial, city, municipal, and municipal district of officials required by it to perform duties relative to the enforcement of the provisions of this General Order and the rules and regulations promulgated in accordance with section 5 of this Order, including members of any national or local enforcement agency and instrumentality of the Government.

SECTION5. Rules and Regulation. – The Commissions on Elections is hereby empowered to promulgated rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of this General Order, taking into account the condition of peace and order in each locality in the light of pertinent provisions of existing laws.

SECTION 6. Penal Provisions. – The penalty of imprisonment of one year but not more than five years of a fine of not less than one thousand pesos, or both, at the discretions of the court, shall be imposed upon any person who:

1. Shall obstruct, impede or frustrate in any manner the exercise by any barangay member of the right to free and public debated or discussion provided herein.

2. Shall prevent or obstruct any barangay member in disseminating or circulating printed materials allowed under this General Order;

3. Shall print or disseminate or circulate propaganda materials in violation of the provisions the General Order;

4. Shall violate any provision of the rules and regulations promulgated by the Commission on Elections in pursuance of Section 5 hereof;

SECTION 7. – Repealing Clause. – All laws, executive orders, decrees, rules and regulations or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions modified of this Order are hereby repealed amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. – This General Order shall take effect in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 hereof.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of January in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy five.

President of the Philippines

By the President ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives