MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDERNO. 81
REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 1 or the “National Defense Act” created
the Council of National Defense now the National Security Council under Executive
Order (EO) Nos. 115 (s. 1986) and 292 (s. 1987) or the “Administrative Code of 1987,”
as the principal advisory body in the proper coordination and integration of plans and
policies relating to or with implications on national security;

WHEREAS, pursuant to EO No. 292, which authorizes the President to appoint
such other government officials and private individuals as members of the Council, EO
Nos. 33 (s. 1992) and 34 (s. 2001) reconstituted the NSC to further enhance
coordination between the Executive and Legislative branches, in the formulation and
integration of policies affecting national security;

WHEREAS, at present, the NSC is composed of the President as Chairperson,
and 26 officials from various offices of the Executive and Legislative branches as
members;

WHEREAS, there is a need to further guarantee that the NSC remains a resilient
national security institution, capable of adapting to evolving challenges and
opportunities both domestically and internationally, and to ensure that its council
members uphold and protect national security and sovereignty, thereby fostering an
environment conducive to effective governance and stability;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book Ill of EO No. 292 provides
that the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative
structure of the Office of the President; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,

do hereby order:

4

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES /

Section 1. Reorganization of the NSC. The NSC is hereby reorganized and

shall now be composed of the following:

aT Tao a0 TD

NXxXE<o7H>Q00905 35>

President as Chairperson;

Senate President;

Speaker of the House of Representatives;

Senate President Pro-Tempore;

Three (3) Deputy Speakers to be designated by the Speaker;

Majority Floor Leader of the Senate;

Majority Floor Leader of the House;

Minority Floor Leader of the Senate;

Minority Floor Leader of the House;

Chairperson, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations;

Chairperson, Senate Committee on National Defense and Security, Peace,
Unification and Reconciliation;

Chairperson, Senate Committee on Public Order and Dangerous Drugs;

. Chairperson, House Committee on Foreign Affairs;

Chairperson, House Committee on National Defense and Security;

Chairperson, House Committee on Public Order and Safety;

Executive Secretary;

National Security Adviser;

Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs;

Secretary, Department of Justice; ?
Secretary, Department of National Defense;

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government;

Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment;

. Chief Presidential Legal Counsel;

Secretary, Presidential Communications Office;

Head, Presidential Legislative Liaison Office; and

Such other government officials and private citizens as the President may appoint
or designate from time to time.

The Director-General of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency, the

Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Chief of the Philippine
National Police, and the Director of the National Bureau of Investigation shall attend
the meetings of the Council as may be necessary to advise and assist in its
deliberations. The Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas may also be invited to
participate in the NSC.

Section 2. Reorganization of the Executive Committee of NSC. The

Executive Committee of the NSC is hereby reorganized and shall now be composed
of the following:

a>oaooD

President as Chairperson;

Executive Secretary;

Senate President or his representative;

Speaker of the House of Representatives or his representative;
National Security Adviser;

Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs;

Secretary, Department of Justice;

h. Secretary, Department of National Defense;
i. Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government; and
j. Such other members or advisers as the President may designate from time to time.

Section 3. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 30th day of December , inthe
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Tweniy-Four.

 

By the President:

 

Office ef the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERT

   

LIC OF THE PHILIPPI

VNR

PBBM007133

 

wt