MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 705

DECLARING DECEMBER 6, 1995, AND OF EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS NATIONAL HEALTH EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS DAY

WHEREAS, injuries, trauma and other health emergencies now constitute one of the ten leading causes of death in the Philippines, accounting for one death every 22 minutes;

WHEREAS, injuries and health emergencies need not result in death;

WHEREAS, mishandling of victims, misinformation and delayed consultation can be more damaging than the injury itself;

WHEREAS, health emergency preparedness and basic skills in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and first aid is internationally recognized as an appropriate public health intervention for injury prevention and control;

WHEREAS, health emergency preparedness through public health education, training and information dissemination can only be achieved at the national level through multi-sectoral efforts;

WHEREAS, injury should be recognized as a major public health problem that needs a comprehensive, multi-sectoral, interdisciplinary institutionalized public health response program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare December 6, 1995, and of every year thereafter, as National Health Emergency Preparedness Day.

For this purpose, I call on all sectors and organizations, especially the Department of National Defense, the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Department of Health, the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Department of Labor and Employment, the Department of Transportation and Communications, the Philippine Youth Commission, the Department of Social Welfare and Development and the Philippine Information Agency and other national agencies of government, as well as local government units to join hands with the private sector, non-government organizations, peoples organizations, media, women, youth and business corporations to:

a) promote health emergency preparedness awareness;

b) provide health emergency preparedness skills trainings available to all citizens;

c) participate in the nationwide campaign to prevent accidents and injuries; and

d) instill in the general citizenry respect for laws and ordinances that promote public safety and prevent injuries, trauma and accidents.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of December in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and ninety-five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) LEONARDO A. QUISUMBING Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia