MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 528

DECLARING TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1995, AS THE GREAT FILIPINO WORKOUT DAY

WHEREAS, the Philippine Constitution mandates that the State shall promote “physical education and sports programs for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry” and that the national policy of “SPORTS-FOR-ALL” was adopted under Executive Order No. 64 within the “Decade of Physical Fitness and Sports: 1990-2000”;

WHEREAS, the leading cause of deaths among Filipinos today is due to heart diseases with one out of four deaths in the country due to varying forms of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) or an estimated 600,000 Filipino children and 4.5 million adults are afflicted with said disease;

WHEREAS, to greatly reduce the level of risk factors of heart diseases, emphasis on a healthy lifestyle should be inculcated among Filipinos including regular physical fitness activities and exercises;

WHEREAS, “The Great Filipino Workout”, the physical fitness exercise that can be adopted by all Filipinos, herein referred to as “the project”, is one of the strategies of the DOH’s National Cardiovascular Disease Prevention and Control Program (NCVDPCP) and is also a major component of the National Physical Fitness and Sports Development Program (NPFSDP) of the Government;

WHEREAS, DOH, as the government agency in-charge of the health of the Filipino citizenry, is tasked to spearhead this project in preparation for its launching on February 14, 1995;

WHEREAS, necessary linkages and coordination among all the member-agencies of the National Physical Fitness and Sports Development Council (NPFSDC) as created under Executive Order No. 63 and all other concerned government agencies and private groups of associations should be well-established particularly to ensure the successful implementation of the national program and of the project;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare Tuesday, February 14, 1995, as the Great Filipino Workout Day.

All government agencies shall give full support and participate in said activity, particularly:

A. DOH shall:

1) Take the lead role in the planning, nationwide implementation, information dissemination, and monitoring of the project, which shall be implemented throughout the country onwards to February 14, 1995;

2) Coordinate with all member agencies of the NPFSDC, as well as with other concerned public and private groups and associations, to ensure its success;

3) Undertake a nationwide information dissemination campaign through print, broadcast, radio, and television in order to meet its objectives in cooperation with concerned groups and agencies.

B. DILG shall:

1) Coordinate with all its NPFSDC member-agencies, and with all the PFSDC’s at the regional, provincial, city, municipal, and barangay levels through all the local government units (LGUs), local chief executives (LCEs), and sanggunians, to ensure its nationwide implementation in close coordination with both the public and private sectors;

2) Issue appropriate memorandum circulars and guidelines to LGUs and LCEs for an integrated and well-synchronized approach, as well as to ensure their support and active participation, in the project through their respective local health boards and enjoin them to allocate and provide adequate funds to support the project.

C. DECS shall:

1) Adopt, implement, and monitor the project as an integral part of the physical fitness and sports development program of their Department, through its Bureau of Physical Education and School Sports (BPESS) for all its accredited public and private schools, colleges, and universities throughout the country;

2) Conduct training programs for all its school officials and teachers involved in physical education and sports on the project through BPESS, in coordination with concerned groups.

D. DND shall:

1) Adopt, implement, and monitor the project as an integral part of their physical fitness and sports development program not only for their military officers, personnel, and enlisted men of the AFP, but also for the benefit of all the Filipino people at the community level.

E. DOLE and CSC shall:

1 Adopt, implement, and monitor the project as an integral part of their physical fitness and sports development, as well as human resource development program, for all private employers and employees, i.e., for DOLE, and for all government officials and employees, i.e., for CSC.

F. PSC shall:

1 Perform all its functions and responsibilities mandated under R.A. No. 6847 as the sole government regulatory agency in-charge of the promotion and development of amateur sports in the country, and also as mandated under E.O. Nos. 63 and 64;

2) Allocate and provide adequate funds for the continued planning, implementation, monitoring, as well as information dissemination, of the NPFSDP that includes this project;

3 Enjoin the non-government organizations and the private sector to support the said activity.

4 Order the Philippine Sports Commission to implement and monitor regular exercise activities in all agencies.

All concerned agencies shall issue appropriate circulars and guidelines, if necessary, in order to facilitate and coordinate the proper implementation of their tasks within the respective areas of concern in line with the National Physical Fitness and Sports objectives.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia