MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 448

DECLARING THE PERIOD 25 SEPTEMBER 1994 TO 24 SEPTEMBER 1995 AS THE DIAMOND ANNIVERSARY OF PHILIPPINE CINEMA

WHEREAS, motion picture is a vital tool for the cultural and economic development of our country and people;

WHEREAS, Philippine cinema is the most popular entertainment medium that touches the lives and psyche of every Filipino, being singularly responsible for the effective propagation and dissemination of the Pilipino language, as a graphic chronicler of history and a pervasive influence in the molding of our people’s mores, tradition and culture, among others;

WHEREAS, Philippine cinema’s advent dates back to 1919 when the first full-length, 100% Filipino-capitalized and produced, 35mm film “Dalagang Bukid” was exhibited in the country;

WHEREAS, it is therefore fitting and opportune to observe and celebrate this historic occasion as a source of pride and honor of the citizenry, as well as to promote the government’s vision for the industry’s global competitiveness and development as an area for investments and exports; and,

WHEREAS, the celebration of this event is designed to inspire a renewed and concerted effort focused in harnessing the value and great potential of the motion picture medium in the rapid economic, social and cultural development of the country in line with the objectives of Philippines 2000.

NOW THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from 25 September 1994 to 24 September 1995 as the “Diamond Anniversary of Philippine Cinema”.

The National Commission for Culture and the Arts and the Film Development Foundation of the Philippines are hereby designated to take the lead to ensure the success of the year-long celebration.

All national government agencies and local government units are hereby encouraged to support and mobilize resources in connection with the celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16 th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia