PROCLAMATION NO. 1109

DECLARING THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER OF EVERY YEAR AS CLEAN AIR MONTH THROUGH NATIONAL VEHICLE INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE CONSCIOUSNESS

WHEREAS , the pollution of the air in rapidly urbanizing areas, particularly in Metro Manila, the home of about 9.5 million people as of 1995 estimates, has reached levels that adversely affect human health and public welfare and calls for more aggressive efforts to reduce emissions in the air;

WHEREAS , air pollution is caused by increased emissions of carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds, oxides of nitrogen and sulfur and particulate matter from sources that burn fuels for energy;

WHEREAS , motor vehicles which were estimated to have produced almost 65 million metric tons of pollutants in 1993, account for the majority of total airborne pollutants in Metro Manila;

WHEREAS , the almost 2.6 million motor vehicles nationwide, 43% of which are in Metro Manila, continue to grow in number at about 8% per year, threatening to consume more fuel and to emit more toxic gases into the atmosphere;

WHEREAS , although technological advances in engine design, pollution devices and fuels have continued to develop, the motorist’s neglect of his vehicle’s maintenance remains a major contributor to the rise in vehicle emission;

WHEREAS , engine malfunctions that contribute to excessive pollution can be corrected often with simple maintenance, resulting in substantial emission reduction and fuel savings;

WHEREAS , there is a need to create awareness among the motoring public regarding the importance and benefits of vehicle maintenance;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of November of every year as “Clean Air Month Through National Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance Consciousness”. In connection therewith, I hereby allocate the amount of TWO MILLION PESOS (P2,000,000.00) annually from the Social Fund of the Office of the President for the planning and implementation of a nationwide awareness program that will promote the need to curb exhaust pollutants from on-road motor vehicles by maintaining them in good working condition. I further enjoin all motorists, concerned civic and non-governmental organizations and government offices to actively participate in this annual effort.

All government vehicles, including vehicles of government owned and controlled corporations and of local government units shall, on this month of November, be subjected to rigorous emission inspection and proper maintenance operation conducted. Henceforth, any government vehicle apprehended for smoke-belching shall be the responsibility and liability of the concerned Department Secretary or head of government owned or controlled corporation or government agency or local government unit.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the SEAL of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS