MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1048

DECLARING A NATIONWIDE OBSERVANCE IN THE PHILIPPINES OF THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF OLDER PERSONS IN 1999

WHEREAS , the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines states that “the family has the duty to care for its elderly members but the state may also do so through just programs of social security”;

WHEREAS , the government recognizes that older persons share the same rights and opportunities as other people and can contribute to nation building;

WHEREAS , necessary measures are being undertaken by the government to ensure the full implementation in the grant of their benefits and special privileges and to maximize their contribution to the society;

WHEREAS , the United Nations, in its Resolution 45/106 dated 14 December 1990, recognizes the complexity of the ageing of the world’s population and the need to have a common basis and frame of reference for the protection and promotion of the rights of older persons including the contribution that older persons could and should make to society;

WHEREAS , every United Nations member state observes the International Day of Older Persons to commemorate the rights and contributions of older persons to society;

WHEREAS , in recognition of the invaluable contribution of older persons to society, the United Nations in its Resolution 47/5 of 16 October 1992, declared 1999 as the International Year of Older Persons;

WHEREAS , the United Nations Resolution 1993/22 of 27 July 1993 urges the member states to strengthen their national mechanism on ageing, enabling them to serve as national focal points for the preparations for and observance of the Year;

WHEREAS , by virtue of its membership in the United Nations, the Philippines is committed to participate in and observe the International Year of Older Persons in 1999.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the nationwide observance of the International Year of Older Persons in 1999.

All Heads of Departments, Chief of Bureaus, Offices, Agencies and Instrumentalities of the National Government, including officials of local governments, are hereby instructed and directed to develop a conceptual framework, implement plans, programs and activities, and conduct researches particularly on the situation of older women relative to the observance of the International Year of Older Persons in 1999.

The Department of Social Welfare and Development, as the lead agency in the development and implementation of programs for the welfare of older persons, is hereby directed to give the International Year of Older Persons the widest possible dissemination to the private and public sectors. It shall coordinate and monitor all programs, projects and activities pertaining to the same.

The Federation of Senior Citizens Association of the Philippines (FSCAP), Coalition of Services for the Elderly (COSE) and other non-government organizations and associations among the older persons are hereby enjoined to take full cognizance of the International Year of Older Persons and to fully cooperate in the attainment of its goals, objectives and activities by supporting programs, projects and activities for the Year, particularly at the local level, in cooperation with local authorities, community leaders, enterprises, media and schools.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES

Source: CDAsia