MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 248

AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 137 (1987)

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 137 (1987) declared certain portions of land within the National Government Center site in Quezon City, Metro Manila consisting of One Hundred Fifty (150) hectares, more or less, as open for disposition in accordance with Act No. 3038 in relation to the provisions of the Public Land Act, as amended, to the bona fide residents thereat as of 25 February 1986;

WHEREAS, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) and the National Government Center Housing Committee (NGCHC) have determined that the number of families residing in the aforesaid site had increased from approximately 18,000 to 60,000, and that horizontal development through subdivision and distribution of individual lots would not adequately provide for the housing needs of said families;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7279, otherwise known as the “Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992,” mandates the rational land use and development of urban lands to optimize the use and productivity thereof for both residential and commercial purposes; and

WHEREAS, the vertical development of the site through the implementation of a “medium-rise building” housing project would increase the number of families who can effectively become beneficiaries of the government’s socialized housing program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare that portion of the National Government Center site, which had already been identified under Proclamation No. 137 (1987), and more particularly described as follows:

“A PARCEL OF LAND covering a portion of SWO-04-000494 situated west of Commonwealth Avenue, bounded on the E., by Commonwealth Avenue, on the SW., by Don Enrique Heights Subdivision and BF Homes Subdivision; on the W., by Doña Petrona and Fairview Subdivision; and on the NW., by Ideal Homes and Don Jose Desiderio, containing an approximate area of 1,500,00 square meters.”

likewise open for vertical development whereby the National Government Center Housing Committee (NGCHC) may undertake a “medium-rise building” housing project wherein condominium-type dwelling units shall be built as integral parts thereof, Provided that, the lots, dwelling units and other improvements, or interests therein, either singly or in combination, shall be disposed of to the bona fide residents thereat as of 28 March 1992 in the manner and conditions most expedient in carrying out the purposes of this Proclamation, subject to requirements under applicable laws, the executive orders and other administrative issuances.

Furthermore, pursuant to Section 2, paragraph b (3) of Republic Act No. 7279 (1992), portions of the site which are deemed conducive to livelihood and commercial activities shall be accordingly developed by the National Government Center Housing Committee, to harness and maximize economic and development opportunities for the beneficiaries and communities therein.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7th day of September , in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia