MALACA Ñ ANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1071

ADOPTION OF THE BALANCED FERTILIZATION STRATEGY UNDER THE GINTONG ANI PROGRAM OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

WHEREAS , food security remains an important national issue;

WHEREAS , continued efficient fertilizer use is necessary to sustain food supply to feed the population which is expected to double in 25 years;

WHEREAS , there is a need to correct the dismal situation wherein fertilizer sales for the last 15 years have more than doubled yet the yield for rice and corn have barely increased;

WHEREAS , the decline in the rate of increase in productivity has been attributed to excessive depletion of soil nutrients in disproportionate quantities leading to nutrient imbalances;

WHEREAS , the appropriate mix of inorganic and organic fertilizers is recognized as a potent strategy in order to make available most if not all of the essential nutrients needed by plants;

WHEREAS , there is a need to restructure the existing practices into location specific balanced fertilizer recommendations which incorporate the use of inorganic and organic fertilizers;

WHEREAS , the balanced fertilization strategy could jumpstart and increase the yield from 3 MT to 5 MT per hectare under the Gintong Ani Program of the Department of Agriculture.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Department of Agriculture and its instrumentalities to adopt the Balanced Fertilization Strategy and perform the following:

1 To disseminate guidelines for strategic distribution of appropriate fertilizers which are affordable, with the end in view of increasing rice and corn yields from 3 MT to 5 MT per hectare and 2 MT to 4 MT, respectively, which increase could be sustained through the season and will not cause depletion of our natural resources.

2 To provide the necessary forum for cooperative efforts with local government units, non-government organizations, the private sector and other entities involved in the efficient production and distribution of organic and inorganic fertilizers for the furtherance of the program.

3. To provide for the redirection of Research and Development on Balanced Fertilization Strategy as well as on the economics of fertilizer usage and to make other necessary studies on the appropriate quality and quantity of fertilizer with the end view of ensuring maintenance of soil productivity over long period of use.

4 To promote the Balanced Fertilization Strategy jointly with the Integrated Pest Management and synchronous planting as the country’s Integrated Crop Management approach that will ensure improvement in crop yields and reduce traditional losses from pests and diseases as well as inefficient use of irrigation facilities.

5 To establish a Fertilizer Watch System at national, regional, provincial and municipal levels to monitor and evaluate the quantity and quality of all commercial fertilizers and to do any act which will ensure the success of the Program.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the SEAL of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27 th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia