MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 188

DECLARING THE ADOPTION OF THE PHILIPPINE TOURISM MASTER PLAN AND MOBILIZING THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR TO SUPPORT SAID PLAN

WHEREAS , the tourism industry not only contributes to the economic growth of our country by generating income and employment but also promotes the rich and colorful socio-cultural life of the Filipino people;

WHEREAS , in order to realize the full potential of tourism as an important economic tool necessary for national development, an integrated approach to tourism development must be adopted and implemented;

WHEREAS , cognizant of the imperative need to adopt policies required to optimize the tourism industry’s contributions to national goals and objectives, the Department of Tourism, with the assistance of the United Nations Development Program and the World Tourism Organization, formulated the Philippine Tourism Master plan for 1992 to 2010; and

WHEREAS , the Philippine Tourism Master Plan is a product of extensive research and consultations both within the country and in key market areas abroad, competitive analysis through visits in the ASEAN region, and a series of workshops and meetings with leaders from the tourism industry and the government sector.

NOW, THEREFORE , I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the adoption of the Philippine Tourism Master plan for 1992 to 2010.

Pursuant to this Proclamation:

The Department of Tourism (DOT), as lead agency, shall coordinate and monitor the implementation, periodic assessment and updating of the Philippine Tourism Master Plan with the support and participation of government agencies, local government units and non-governmental organizations involved in the tourism industry.

2 The Secretary of Tourism is hereby authorized to create the appropriate committees/task forces and promulgate such guidelines as may be necessary for the implementation, monitoring and updating of the Philippine Tourism Master Plan.

3. All government agencies, including the Department of Budget and Management, Department of Transportation and Communication, Department of Public Works and Highways, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department of the Interior and Local Government, Department of Trade and Industry, National Economic and Development Authority and the Board of Investments, shall extend their full support and assistance for the successful implementation of the Philippine Tourism Master Plan.

All tourism establishments and businesses in the private sector are encouraged to give their full cooperation in the implementation of the Philippine Tourism Master Plan by aligning their objectives and coordinating their activities with said Plan.

This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of June, n the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source: CDAsia