MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 542

AUTHORIZING THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE OLD BILIBID PRISON COMPOUND FOR MIXED HOUSING AND COMMERCIAL PURPOSES

WHEREAS , the National Government owns strategically located parcels of land and improvements thereon which are underutilized and have deteriorated into blighted areas;

WHEREAS , the Old Bilibid Prison Compound in the City of Manila is one of such properties;

WHEREAS , the Old Bilibid Prison Compound actually is a portion of the San Lazaro Estate, originally part of the so-called “friar lands” and, therefore, patrimonial property of the State;

WHEREAS , Act No. 3984 approved on 3 December 1932 authorizes the President of the Philippines (formerly the Governor-General) to sell the lands, buildings and improvements comprising the Old Bilibid Prison Compound;

WHEREAS , the Old Bilibid Prison Compound represents an opportunity for the National Government and the private sector to jointly undertake an urban renewal, mixed housing and commercial, inter-modal transportation, and infrastructure project designed to achieve a higher level of socio-economic development for Metro-Manila and breathe new life to one of the City of Manila’s core districts and historical sites; and

WHEREAS , the Public Estates Authority (PEA) pursuant to its charter, Presidential Decree No. 1084, as amended, is authorized to manage, administer and develop real estates properties and assets of the National Government.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the development of the Old Bilibid Prison Compound, a property owned by the National Government in the City of Manila, for mixed housing and commercial purposes, subject to existing laws and private rights, if any; Provided, that the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) through the Lands Management Bureau shall immediately cause an actual survey and final verification thereof.

The PEA, pursuant to its Memorandum of Agreement 20 September 1990 with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, is hereby designated as the principal government agency responsible for the administration, management, and development of the Old Bilibid Prison Compound, in accordance with its charter, Presidential Decree No. 1084, as amended.

Other government agencies and instrumentalities including concerned local governments are enjoined and directed to extend such assistance to and cooperation with PEA as may be required and necessary for the speedy and successful development of the Old Bilibid Prison Compound for mixed housing and commercial purposes.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of February in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia