MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 835

DECLARING THE YEAR 1997 AS RED CROSS YEAR

WHEREAS, the Republic of the Philippines became an independent nation on July 4, 1946, and proclaimed in February 14, 1947 its adherence to the Geneva Conventions of 1929, and by the action, indicated its desire to participate with the nations of the world in mitigating the suffering caused by war and to establish in the Philippines a voluntary organization for that purpose as contemplated by the Geneva Conventions;

WHEREAS, there existed in the Philippines since 1917 a chapter of the American Red Cross which was terminated in view of the independence of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the volunteer organizations established in other countries which have ratified or adhered to the Geneva Conventions assist in promoting the health and welfare of their people in peace and in war, and through their mutual assistance and cooperation directly and through their international organizations promote better understanding and sympathy among the people of the world;

WHEREAS, in 1947 the Congress of the Philippines enacted Republic Act No. 95, entitled an Act Incorporating the Philippine National Red Cross which was signed into law by then President Manuel A. Roxas on April 15, 1947;

WHEREAS, though Republic Act No. 95 was subsequently amended by various promulgations namely, R.A. 6373 and PD 1264 and 1643, the Philippine Government continued to unqualifiedly adhere to the provisions of the four (4) Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols;

WHEREAS, the Philippine National Red Cross has consistently been an indispensable partner of the government in providing relief assistance and other critical social services during times of disasters and calamities resulting from either man-made or natural causes;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Red Cross will be celebrating its 50th Year or Golden Jubilee of Humanitarian Service in April 15, 1997;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the year 1997 as Red Cross Year, and do hereby task the Philippine National Red Cross, its Boards of Governors, the Chapters’ Board of Directors and its staff and volunteers nationwide to undertake pertinent programs and activities benefiting this milestone in the PNRC history.

Furthermore, every Filipino and/or foreign national taking sojourn in the Philippines is enjoined to participate in, and contribute to, the humanitarian programs of the Philippine National Red Cross and make the seven (7) Fundamental Principles of the Red Cross namely: Humanity, Impartiality, Neutrality, Independence, Volunteerism, Unity and Universality, a real way of life for all.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25 th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia