MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 972

DECLARING FEBRUARY 22 – 28, 1997 AS “ECOZONE WEEK”

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7916 the Special Economic Zone Act of 1995, which was signed into law on February 24, 1995 provides that it is the declared policy of the Government to actively encourage, promote, induce and accelerate a sound and balanced industrial economic and social development of the country;

WHEREAS, in pursuance of these policies, the Act provides for the establishment of special economic zones (ecozones) throughout the country “in order to provide jobs for the people especially those in the rural areas, increase their productivity and their individual and family income”;

WHEREAS, these new ecozones are vital to Government’s efforts to increase exports, disperse industries to the countryside; create job opportunities and thus uplift the quality of life of the people, especially in the rural areas;

WHEREAS, there is a need for all sectors involved, including concerned government entities and local government units, to be aware of, recognize, support and accelerate the development of ecozones;

WHEREAS, the development of ecozones throughout the country and the tremendous opportunities resulting therefrom should be brought to the awareness of the Filipino public in order to draw their support and cooperation;

WHEREAS, there is a need to sustain the interest of investors in the development of ecozones and in the establishment of enterprises in the ecozones;

WHEREAS, February 24, 1997 will mark the second anniversary of R.A. 7916;

NOW, THEREFORE. I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare February 22-28, 1997, and every year thereafter, as “ECOZONE Week”, enjoining all government sectors, the business community and the general public to support the programs and activities of the Philippine Economic Zone Authority.

This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19 th day of February in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia