MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 279

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM OCTOBER 18 TO 24, 1993, AS THE TRANSPORT COOPERATIVE WEEK

WHEREAS, the Transport Cooperative Program created under Memorandum Order No. 395, series of 1973, will mark its 20th Foundation Anniversary on October 19, 1993;

WHEREAS, the Office of Transportation Cooperatives, the government agency attached to the Department of Transportation and Communications which was tasked to oversee the program, continuously pursues projects designed to ameliorate the socio-economic condition of the small workers in the public transport industry;

WHEREAS, for the past two decades, the Transport Cooperative Movement under the leadership of the Katipunan ng mga Kooperatibang Pansasakyan ng Pilipinas, the national federation of transport cooperatives, has vigorously promoted the efforts of government to rationalize the public land transportation services, particularly those rendered by the small operators and their drivers;

WHEREAS, the success of the Transport Cooperative Program demonstrates the effectiveness of a strong partnership between government and the cooperative sector in undertaking activities that foster people’s economic and political empowerment;

WHEREAS, there is a need to focus the attention of the nation to this outstanding program and to accord due recognition to the agencies, institutions, and individuals who, by their dedication and exemplary services, continue to make the program strong, vibrant, purposeful, and responsive to the needs of the Filipino people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from October 18 to 24, 1993, as the “Transport Cooperative Week.”

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18 Th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia