MALACAÑANG Manila BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 847

DECLARING EVERY FOURTH SUNDAY OF SEPTEMBER AS FAMILY THANKSGIVING DAY

WHEREAS, Presidential Proclamation No. 60 declares every last week of September as Family Week to focus on the importance of strengthening and promoting unity, solidarity and stability of the Filipino family as the basic unit of Filipino society and for whose well-being all national development efforts are directed;

WHEREAS, a National Steering Committee was created through Executive Order No. 241 naming the Secretary of Social Welfare and Development as Chairman, to plan and implement programs and activities to ensure wider and active participation of the private and public sectors in the nationwide observance of Family Week;

WHEREAS, there is a need to set aside a special day for the family to get together as an occasion for thanksgiving and forging family unity and cohesiveness;

WHEREAS, traditionally, a Sunday is always considered a special family get-together day in Filipino households;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare every fourth Sunday of September of every year as Family Thanksgiving Day.

The National Steering Committee for the Family Week celebration shall lead in the nationwide observance of Family Thanksgiving Day. The heads of all Departments, agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are hereby directed to support the Committee in ensuring active participation of everyone in this event.

I enjoin all churches, religious communities, civic organizations, the business community, non-government organizations and all Filipino families nationwide to observe this Family Thanksgiving Day.

All national and local publications, televisions and radio stations are enjoined to help generate awareness and public support for activities in promoting the observance of Family Thanksgiving Day.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia