MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 990

DECLARING THE FOURTH WEEK OF SEPTEMBER OF EVERY YEAR AS “URBAN PEST CONTROL WEEK”

WHEREAS, the National Committee on Urban Pest Control Week was organized by the Office of the President of the Philippines with the task of implementing a five-principle program for the Urban Pest Control through a sustainable franchise system to control disease-transmitting pests at no expense to the National Government, which system was formalized in Department of Health Circular No. 155 and the 1991 Memorandum of Agreement between the Earth Savers Movement, Inc., Metropolitan Manila Development Authority, Department of Science and Technology, Department of Social Welfare and Development, Department of Agriculture, the National Committee on Urban Pest Control, Office of the President of the Philippines, etc., to undertake, among others, cellulosic wastes recycling and urban pest control;

WHEREAS, the observance of an Urban Pest Control Week under the aegis of the National Committee on Urban Pest Control in cooperation with the Earth Savers Movement, Inc. will promote community participation and public awareness, and will enable the Government and non-government organizations to realize five major benefits, namely:

Prevent epidemics transmitted by mosquitoes, flies and other urban pests, thus enhancing healthy population and saving many lives;

2. Achieve self-sufficiency and economy by sustaining the use of indigenous, locally-produced pest control inputs;

3. Strengthen the Philippine “Zero-Wastes, Zero-Pests” campaign for a better, cleaner and healthier environment;

4. Provide a mechanism for mutual cooperation to harmonize laws and regulations relating to urban pest control; and

5. Make the Philippines an international showcase for effective urban pest control and biodegradable waste recycling;

WHEREAS, the National Committee on Urban Pest Control has been undertaking “Zero-Waste, Zero-Pests” seminars, trainings, and setting up a nationwide franchise system of urban pest control which needs further strengthening;

WHEREAS, the present Administration supports and encourages the empowerment of non-government organizations to undertake productive and pro-active activities for sanitary urban garbage recycling and for prevention of an outbreak of epidemics;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the fourth week of September of every year as the national “Urban Pest Control Week” as a component of Clean-Up the World Month (September) celebration.

All Government agencies and offices, as well as business, commercial, and industry sectors and non-government organizations are hereby enjoined to extend every possible support, assistance and cooperation in making the celebration of the “Urban Pest Control Week” under the aegis of the National Committee on Urban Pest Control, a success.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15 th day of April in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia