MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1058

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 20 TO 26 OF EVERY YEAR AS NATIONAL GRAINS INDUSTRY WEEK

WHEREAS , the Philippine grains industry comprised of rice and corn farmers/producers, processors/millers, traders/retailers, and consumers, is a vital segment of the country’s economy that accounts mainly for the annual gross output of the agriculture sector and provides livelihood to about 70% of the population;

WHEREAS , the total development of the Philippine grains industry is essential to the country’s bid toward achieving Newly Industrialized Country (NIC) status by the turn of the century;

WHEREAS , the National Food Authority, created by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 4, series of 1972, as amended, is mandated, among others, to coordinate the activities of all government agencies engaged in the study, research and promotion of measures designed to enhance the integrated growth and development of the grains industry;

WHEREAS , there is a need to institutionalize a multi-sectoral annual celebration which will focus on the Philippine grains industry as a strategic sector of the economy, as well as highlight the significant role of the various grains industry, stakeholders and the National Food Authority, in collectively preparing the entire industry and the nation to meet the challenges and opportunities of globalization.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the period from September 20 to 26 of every year as National Grains Industry Week to coincide with the founding anniversary of the National Food Authority.

For this purpose, I call upon the National Food Authority to spearhead the annual nationwide celebration, in collaboration with the Philippine Grains Industry Council and its members organizations.

The celebration shall give emphasis on the enhancement of national food security, the promotion of food safety and quality consciousness among our people and fair trade practices in the grains market and the institutional development of farmers cooperatives into self-reliant and competitive economic entities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20 th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia