MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 568

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM APRIL 24 TO 30 OF EVERY YEAR AS CREDIT CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK

WHEREAS, PHILIPPINES 2000, the Filipino vision of sound development by the year 2000, recognizes the need for accelerated industrial and agricultural development by generating financial resources through effective financial intermediation and sound lending operations in aid of capital formation;

WHEREAS, the drive towards the attainment of the status of a Newly Industrialized Country by the turn of the century will be effectively boosted if all sectors of society are made fully aware of the vital role that capital formation and responsible credit play in the country’s economic development;

WHEREAS, to effectively impart this awareness, it is imperative to institute a continuing campaign that will involve all sectors of society, as well as all levels and instrumentalities of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from April 24 to 30 of every year, as “CREDIT CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK”.

For this purpose, the Secretary of Finance, Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports, Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, Director-General of the National Economic and Development Authority, the Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, as well as all heads of Departments, Bureaus, Offices, Agencies, and Instrumentalities of the Government, Local Government Units of all levels, and Government-owned or Controlled Corporations are hereby directed to undertake activities in accordance with the spirit of this Proclamation.

The Bankers Association of the Philippines, the Chamber of Thrift Banks, the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines, the Financial Executives Institute of the Philippines, and all members of the mass media, civic and commercial associations and non-governmental organizations are hereby requested to extend their full support and cooperation in this campaign.

This supersedes Proclamation No. 1837, dated March 30, 1979

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia