MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 873

DECLARING 1996 AS SPEAKER EUGENIO PEREZ CENTENNIAL YEAR

WHEREAS, the year 1996 marks the centenary of the birth of the late Speaker Eugenio Perez, the first Speaker of the Philippine Republic, speaker of the first and second Congress, eminent parliamentarian for nine terms, and president of a major political party;

WHEREAS, Eugenio Perez, a man of modest means, through his determination and perseverance rose through the ranks from teacher, guerrilla leader, councilor, representative, and later Speaker of the House of Representatives, a man whose life should be an example to be emulated by our youth;

WHEREAS, Eugenio Perez’s political career, which spanned more than three decades, exemplifies selfless, dedicated, and loyal public service;

WHEREAS, during his speakership, Eugenio Perez steered through important legislation which resulted in the effective rehabilitation and reconstruction of the war devastated Philippine economy;

WHEREAS, in recognition of his enlightened economic ideas, Eugenio Perez as a minority leader, became a member of the Council of State, the highest policy advisory body of government.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the year 1996 as Eugenio Perez Centennial Year in consonance with the Decade of the Centennial of Filipino Nationalism.

The National Commission for Culture and the Arts, hereinafter referred to as the Commission and the National Historical Institute, hereinafter referred to as the Institute, in coordination with the following organizations and government agencies:

1 The Eugenio Perez Foundation

(2) The Binalatongan Historical Institute

(3) The House of Representatives

(4) The Department of Education, Culture and Sports

are hereby designated to collectively take charge of the celebration and to undertake the following activities:

(1 Prepare the general program of the Centennial and submit a copy of the same to the President for information;

(2) Promote and direct commemorative celebrations throughout the province of Pangasinan;

(3) Collect, edit and publish the important works, articles, speeches, and state papers of Speaker Perez that have not been published;

(4) Install fitting and inspiring monuments or markers in honor of the late Speaker Perez in the appropriate and proper places;

(5) Coordinate with concerned government agencies relative to the issuance of commemorative stamps and medals for the Eugenio Perez Centennial; and,

(6) Prepare a photo exhibit which will chronicle the life and achievements of Eugenio Perez for the purpose of inspiring the youth to emulate a life of public service. This exhibit will be implemented in coordination with the Department of Education, Culture and Sports.

The Commission and the Institute are authorized to receive gifts or donations, including funding, materials, and services, for the use of the above mentioned activities, subject to Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 373 dated 09 January 1974 and Section 21 of R.A. No. 7356 dated 03 April 1992.

The Commission and the Institute are likewise empowered to call on any department, bureau, office or agency of the government, including government owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of the functions relative to the centenary celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11 th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia