PROCLAMATION NO. 1098

DECLARING THE MONTH OF OCTOBER OF EVERY YEAR AS CONSUMER WELFARE MONTH

WHEREAS , Republic Act No. 7394 , otherwise known as the Consumer Act of Philippines, which took effect on 15 July 1992, declared it a policy of the State to protect the interest of the consumer and promote his general welfare;

WHEREAS , the National Consumers Affairs Council was created by RA 7394 to improve the management, coordination and effectiveness of consumer programs and policies of the different government agencies and private organizations;

WHEREAS , the protection of the consuming public against unreasonable price increases or fraudulent practices is a continuing concern of the government;

WHEREAS , there is a need to focus national attention on the role consumers play in the vitality of the economy;

WHEREAS , there is necessity to set aside a period during which concerted efforts for the assertion of consumers rights may be thoroughly discussed, planned and carried out;

WHEREAS , a Consumer Welfare Month will promote dissemination of sound consumer information by both public and private sector, including the media, on subjects such as complaints and policies affecting consumer and encourage dialogue and cooperation among consumers, business and government and broader the scope of consumer education by heightening consumer awareness;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of October of every year as Consumer Welfare Month. The National Consumer Affairs Council is tasked to undertake programs and activities to ensure the successful observance thereof and to pursue thereunder such measures as may be necessary to effectively the interest and general welfare of the Filipino consumer.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary