MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 510

DECLARING 1996 AS THE YEAR OF FILIPINO HEROES AND DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL CENTENNIAL COMMISSION TO LEAD IN THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, 1996 marks the 100th year of the start of the concerted struggle for Philippine Independence mounted by Filipinos against oppression of the colonizers;

WHEREAS, the Philippine revolution was critical in determining the fate of the nation which culminated with the declaration of Philippine Independence in 1898;

WHEREAS, that revolution unleashed the inherent heroism of the Filipino, as exemplified by Andres Bonifacio and especially ordinary through the countless nameless men, women, and youth who participated in the reform movement;

WHEREAS, there is a desire to deepen our sense of history and to inculcate in the Filipino youth the values lived out by our heroes;

WHEREAS, there is a need to project all Filipino heroes as national, rather than regional, local or folk heroes, given their significant contributions for advancing the struggle for freedom, justice and nationhood;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the year 1996 as the Year of Filipino Heroes as a tribute to all Filipinos who, directly or indirectly, gave meaning and impetus to the cause of freedom, justice, Philippine independence and nationhood.

The National Centennial Commission, which was reconstituted under Executive Order No. 128, dated October 4, 1993, tasked to spearhead the preparations for the country’s centennial celebrations, is hereby directed to lead and oversee all the necessary and fitting activities in the celebration of the Year of Filipino Heroes to ensure its success.

The Commission is authorized to call on any department, bureau, office, agency or any instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, for assistance as it may need in discharging its functions.

Non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other sectors of society, particularly the youth, are hereby enjoined to participate in the observance of the Year of Filipino Heroes.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of November in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia