MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO 1179

AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 254 (S. 1929) RESERVING FOR THE USE OF THEN BUREAU OF CONSTABULARY, CERTAIN PARCELS OF LAND OF THE PUBLIC DOMAIN IN BAGUIO CITY, AND PROCLAMATION NO. 2313 (S. 1983), AS CONFIRMED BY PROCLAMATION NO. 920 (S. 1992), DECLARING CERTAIN PARCELS OF LAND IN BAGUIO TOWNSITE AS MILITARY RESERVATION

WHEREAS , Proclamation No. 254 dated 5 August 1929, reserved for the use of the then Bureau of Constabulary, certain parcels of land of the public domain in Residential Section B, Baguio City, identified as Lot No. A-2, Plan Rs-404, covering a total area of 34,008 square meters more or less;

WHEREAS , Proclamation No. 2313 dated 21 September 1983, as confirmed by Proclamation No. 920 (Series of 1992), declared Lot Nos. 140 and 141, Residential Section D, Baguio City, covering a total area of, more or less, 290,283 square meters and 8,074.4 square meters, respectively, as military reservations;

WHEREAS , certain portions of these strategically located military reservations have remained underutilized and continue to deteriorate into urban blights, thus highlighting the need to maximize their land use;

WHEREAS , the overall plan of the Armed Forces of the Philippines requires the transfer and integration of the military installations in Baguio City into one unified military base with modern facilities, and funded by internally generated resources, among others;

WHEREAS , the development and disposition of the underutilized portions of these military reservations shall maximize their land use in terms of urban functions, social benefits, economic returns and environmental enhancement, and at the same time, generate funds for the establishment of a unified military base in Baguio City, and other purposes that the AFP may deem necessary for the furtherance of the AFP Modernization Program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , president of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, and upon recommendation of the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. The first paragraph of Proclamation No. 254 (dated 5 August 1929) is hereby amended to read as follows:

“The parcels of land of the public domain situated in Residential Section B, City of Baguio, and described in the Land Management Bureau’s Plan Rs-404, are hereby reserved for military purposes including the furtherance of the AFP Modernization Program and for this purpose, the AFP may undertake development and disposition of portion or portions of these lands, to wit:”

Section 2. The fourth paragraph of Proclamation No. 2313 dated 21 September 1983, as confirmed by Proclamation No. 920 dated 15 June 1992, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“The disposition, developments and utilization of the above described parcels of land, the ownership of which are vested in the Armed Forces of the Philippines, shall not be limited to military purposes.”

Section 3. The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), subject to the cadastral survey requirements under the Public Land Act and related laws, shall identify the portion or portions of the above parcels of land for development and disposition, to support the establishment of the unified military base in Baguio City, and other purposes that the AFP may deem necessary for the furtherance of the AFP Modernization Program.

Section 4. Towards this development objective, the AFP may enter into agreement and/or joint undertakings with government agencies and/or private sector entities, as may be allowed under existing laws, for the formulation and implementation of the appropriate development and disposition plans covering the above parcels of land.

Section 5. All orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Proclamation are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia