Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

PROCLAMATION NO. 274

CALLING THE CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES TO A SPECIAL SESSION

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by the Constitution, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby call the Congress of the Philippines to a Special Session on November 3 to 6, 1993 to urgently consider and enact the following bills:

1. “An Act requiring Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations to declare at least twenty-five percent (25%) of their annual net profit as cash dividends to the National Government”;

2. “An Act increasing the documentary stamp tax, amending for the purpose certain provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended”;

3. “An Act imposing a tax on the sale of shares of stock listed and traded through the local Stocks Exchange, amending for the purpose the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, by inserting a new section and repealing certain sub-sections thereof”;

4. “An Act amending Title VI and Sections 237 and 238 of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended”, [re: VAT refinements];

5. “An Act providing for the legalization of the stay of certain aliens unlawfully residing in the Philippines, and for other purposes”;

6. “An Act liberalizing the entry and scope of operations of foreign banks in the Philippines, amending for the purpose Republic Act No. 337, otherwise known as the General Banking Act”;

7. “An Act extending the life of the Committee on Privatization and the Asset Privatization Trust”;

8. “An Act to amend Section 5 of the Republic Act numbered seventy six hundred and thirty seven, entitled ‘An Act appropriating the sum of ten billion Pesos for the aid, relief, resettlement, rehabilitation and livelihood services as well as infrastructure support for the victims of the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo, creating the Mt. Pinatubo Assistance, Resettlement and Development Commission, and for other purposes”.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th Day of October in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia