Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

BY ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 1160

FURTHER AMENDING PROCLAMATION NOS. 347 AND 724

WHEREAS, on March 25, 1994, Proclamation No. 347 was issued “Granting Amnesty to Rebels, Insurgents, and All Other Persons Who Have or May Have Committed Crimes Against Public Order, Other Crimes Committed in Furtherance of Political Ends, and Violations of the Articles of War, and Creating the National Amnesty Commission” which was given the mandate of “receiving and processing applications for amnesty and determining whether the applicants are entitled to amnesty”;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 347 was amended by Proclamation No. 724 reopening the period for filing applications for amnesty as well as extending the cut-off date of commission of crimes eligible for amnesty, to June 1, 1995;

WHEREAS, since its inception, the National Amnesty Commission has received more than 15,000 individual and group applications for amnesty;

WHEREAS, during the brief information campaign period for Proclamation No. 724, a total of 4,408 individual amnesty applications were filed with the National Amnesty Commission’s Local Amnesty Boards nationwide;

WHEREAS, some 1,543 rebels and insurgents have belatedly manifested their desire to apply for amnesty under Proclamation No. 724, but their applications could not be acted upon because the deadline for filing applications has expired;

WHEREAS, the status of hundreds of amnesty applicants under Proclamation Nos. 10 and 10-A were not resolved due to the abolition of the National Reconciliation and Development Program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 19, Article VII of the Constitution do hereby declare and proclaim:

SECTION 1. Grant of Amnesty. -Section 1 of Proclamation No. 347 is further amended as follows:

“Section 2. Re-opening of Application Period. – Applications for the grant of amnesty under Proclamation No. 724 as amended by this proclamation shall be filed with the National Amnesty Commission within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Proclamation.”

SECTION 2. The National Amnesty Commission. – Section 4 of Proclamation No. 347 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 4. National Amnesty Commission. There shall be created a National Amnesty Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission that shall be tasked to perform the following functions:

a) Receive, and process applications for amnesty and determine whether the applicants are entitled to amnesty under this Proclamation;

b) Process unfinished Manifestations Favouring Amnesty filed under Proclamation Nos. 10 and 10-A;

c) Perform such other functions as well as exercise such powers as may be delegated or assigned by the President.”

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of February, in the year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia