MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 81

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM NOVEMBER 1 TO 7 OF EVERY YEAR AS LABOR RELATIONS WEEK

WHEREAS, the attainment of industrial place and harmony is an imperative of national economic development, one of the goals of the social welfare clause of the Constitution, and an iridescent dream of the Filipino people;

WHEREAS, it is the goal of this Administration to strengthen the administration of justice by way of full support and recognition to the vital public services dispensed by the judiciary and all quasi-judicial tribunals;

WHEREAS, this Administration seeks full implementation of the constitutional formula of cooperation between the government, labor and management sectors under the doctrine of tripartism in resolving labor disputes and achieving industrial peace;

WHEREAS, in the field of labor relations, the National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC) from its genesis on November 1, 1974 has been quietly but effectively rendering labor justice nationwide without fear or favor;

WHEREAS, for purposes of people empowerment, there is a pressing need to acquaint the Filipino people of the performance and achievements of the NLRC so that it may merit public support of its functions and policies.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from November 1 to 7 of every year as Labor Relations Week, to recognize the goals and achievements of the NLRC, and to insure its meaningful interaction with the Filipino people, in general, and with labor and management sector, in particular, toward their common quest for industrial peace and economic prosperity.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia