MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES PROCLAMATION NO. 10

GRANTING AMNESTY IN FAVOR OF PERSONS WHO HAVE FILED OR WILL FILE APPLICATIONS FOR AMNESTY UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 350, SERIES OF 1989

WHEREAS, it is the goal of new administration to achieve stability through unity and people empowerment, hand in hand with the institution of basic reforms as one of the main thrusts of government;

WHEREAS, national unification is necessary to the attainment of this goal as it would hasten the restoration of peace and order in the land, widen the opportunities for people empowerment and create the climate conducive to the institution of basic reforms thereby insuring the conditions for stability;

WHEREAS, under the National Reconciliation and Development Program of the previous administration, Executive Order No. 350, series of 1989 was issued which prescribed the guidelines governing the filing and processing of manifestations for amnesty, pending the issuances of an amnesty proclamation by the President concurred in by Congress;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 350 applies to all individuals who of their own free will have returned or will return to the folds of the law after having committed an act or acts in violation of existing laws in furtherance of their political beliefs;

WHEREAS, desirous of resuming their lawful pursuits or occupations as loyal and law abiding citizens, four thousand four hundred fifty three individuals had returned to the fold of the law and had filed their applications for amnesty under Executive Order No. 350, and whose applications have already been processed and are ready for final dispositive action;

WHEREAS, there may still be others who may want to apply for amnesty under Executive Order No. 350;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 19, Article VII of the Constitution, do hereby order as follows:

SEC. 1. GRANT OF AMNESTY – Amnesty is hereby granted in favor of the four thousand four hundred fifty three persons hereinabove mentioned and whosoever may want to apply for amnesty under Executive Order No. 350 from the date of this Proclamation up to December 31, 1992, who have committed any acts covered under Section 2 of Executive Order No. 350, namely: treason; conspiracy and proposal to commit treason; misprision of treason; espionage; rebellion or insurrection; inciting to rebellion or insurrection; inciting to sedition; illegal assemblies; illegal associations; direct assaults; indirect assaults; resistance and disobedience to a person in authority or agents of such persons; subversion; and illegal possession of firearms and/or explosives.

SEC. 2. Effect of Grant of Amnesty – The grant of amnesty under this Proclamation shall completely obliterate the criminal offense and extinguish the criminal liability therefor and restore the grantee to all civil and political rights lost or suspended on account of the commission of offenses enumerated in Section 1 of this Proclamation.

SEC. 3. Date and Period of Effectivity – This Proclamation shall take effect from the date of concurrence by a majority of all the members of Congress up to December 31, 1992.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) PETER D. GARRUCGO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia