MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 17
CREATING THE ORDER OF LAPU-LAPU

WHEREAS, in order to achieve his desired developmental outcomes for the
nation, the President has pursued a wide array of campaigns and advocacies on
various issues, such as suppression of illegal drugs and illegal gambling, the protection
of the environment, and eradication of graft and corruption;

WHEREAS, the efforts and sacrifices of the officials and personnel of the
government and private citizens in furtherance of the campaign or advocacy of the
President deserve recognition;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of
the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Order of Lapu-Lapu. The Order of Lapu-Lapu is hereby created and
shall be awarded to officials and personnel of the government, as well as to private
individuals, in recognition of invaluable or extraordinary service in relation to a campaign
or advocacy of the President.

Section 2. Medals. The Order of Lapu-Lapu shall comprise three (3) medals:

Lapu-Lapu Medal — Awarded to officials and personnel of the government and
private individuals who have contributed significantly to the success of an activity
pursuant to a campaign or advocacy of the President;

Kalasag Medal - Awarded to officials and personnel of the government and
private individuals who lost their lives and/or property as a direct result of their
participation in an activity pursuant to a campaign or advocacy of the President: and

Kampilan Medal — Awarded to officials and personnel of the government and
private individuals who are seriously wounded or injured as a direct result of their
participation in an activity pursuant to a campaign or advocacy of the President,

In all cases, the nominees shall be recommended by the Heads of Agencies
involved in the abovementioned activities,

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

Secti
posthumously to Posthumous Award. The Order of Lapu-Lapu may be awarded
awardee's legal any person entitled thereto, in which case it shall be received by the
eat i tae gal heirs. If there is no legal heir, the nearest of kin shall receive the award,

is no legal heir or nearest of kin, any i i
4 ; person designated by the President
May receive such award on behalf of the awardee. ° ”

Section 4. Nomination and Awarding. The President shall confer the Order of
Lapu-Lapu upon recommendation by a Committee to be composed of a representative
from the Office of the Executive Secretary, who shall act as Chairman, and two (2)
representatives from the Presidential Management Staff, who shall act as Members.

Section 5. Design and Form. The Committee may prescribe the form, make
and design of the decorations comprising the Order of Lapu-Lapu, as well as the
manner of wearing it and other details, through the appropriate rules and regulations.

Section 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be sourced from the available funds of the Office of the President.

Section 7. Separability. If any provision of this Executive Order is declared

invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid
and subsisting.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7" day of

April
Lord, Two Thousand and Seventeen.

in the year of Our

preg F
By the President: ee ;
sardoonc ma ‘DE.

DOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary A,

    

os a
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 002303

See rrctacaaeesece
CERTIFIED COPY: _

fAPHANITO M DIMAAND
‘ CAR UIKECTOR IV a
~h-aNr M“EACARANG RECORDS OFFI!