MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 102

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ROXAS IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Davao, a municipality to be known as Roxas to consist of the barrios and sitios of Coronon, Astorga, Darong, Inawayan, Sibulan, Pitogo, Idong, Cobingon, Sappot, Tubison, Bayongon, Landing, Tagulaya, Lomlom, Lower Quinocol, Upper Quinocol, Isom, Baracatan, Cabarisan and Lubo, all of the municipality of Sta. Cruz, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Darong.

The boundary that shall separate the municipality of Roxas from the municipality of Sta. Cruz shall be as follows:

“Beginning from a point at the mouth of the Pilan Delok Creek at Davao Gulf; thence along the center of Pilan Delok Creek to its source; thence by a straight line to the summit of Mt. Lepantod; thence by a straight line to the summit of Mt. Apo.” (From the technical description submitted by the District Engineer of Davao based on the map of the municipality of Sta. Cruz, scale 1:125,000, on file in this Office).

The municipality of Sta. Cruz shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Roxas.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill 1965 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Roxas shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Sta. Cruz, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Roxas, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.