MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 128

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MACO IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Pusuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Davao a municipality to be known as Maco to consist of the barrios and sitios of Maco, Bukana, Lupon, Hijo, San Juan, Langgam, San Roque, Anisingan, Mapaang, Manipongol, Binuangan, Patari, Ulogan, Tugunan, Magaarad, Lumatab, Concepcion, Dao, Maduaw, Panangan, Panibasan, Lower Tagaawa, Upper Tagaawa, Masara-Sawmill, Limbo, Kalabkan, New Leyte, Dumlan, Libaylibay, Siranganan, Alibungog, Lumbo, Taira, Anagasi, Anibongan, Lapu-Lapu, Tiglawig, Pangi, Pandiupon, Rabaywa, Laniti, Anislag, Balatinao, Baayon, Simura, Sarog, Kantunga, Birigian, Burog, Kaburakanan, Macupa, Pangian, Kantaraud, Kawayan, Pangpang, Basag, Kambakuro, Kapakyasan, Tigpan, Tibulan, Marabiga, Kamansi, Kuyapi, Lahog, and Makutpu of the municipality of Mabini, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Maco.

The municipality of Maco as herein created shall have the following boundaries:

“Starting from corner 1, a point at the mouth of Hijo river; thence following Hijo river upstream in a general northerly and northeasterly direction to corner 2, a point at the southern municipal boundary of Mawab; thence following the southern municipal boundary of Mawab in a straight line S 76°-30′ E, 14.25 kilometers to corner 3, a point at the southermost boundary corner of same municipality of Mawab; thence due north, 1.75 kilometers to corner 4, at point at intersection of the municipal boundaries of Mawab and Nabunturan; thence S 77°-30′ E, 6.75 kilometers to corner 5, a point at the southern boundary of the Municipality of Nabunturan, thence S 55°-00′ W, 20 kilometers to corner 6, a point; thence due west, 6.25 kilometers to corner 7, a point at the mouth of Tabuipua creek at Gulf of Davao; thence following the shoreline in a general northerly and westerly direction to corner 1, or point of beginning.” (From House Bill No. 1828)

The municipality of Mabini shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Maco, as delimited above.

The creation of this municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 1828 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Maco shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Mabini after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Maco, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 128 : Creating the municipality of Maco in the Province of Davao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (47), 7728-7729.