PROVIDING INSTRUCTIONS TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS DURING THE TIME THAT THE PRESIDENT IS OUTSIDE THE PHILIPPINES.

The following instructions are hereby issued for the conduct of public affairs during the absence of the President of the Philippines, on the occasion of his official visit to Pakistan and Spain from June 29, 1962, until he returns from abroad:

1.The President of the Philippines shall continue to exercise all functions of his office as enjoined by the Constitution and the laws, in the same manner as when he is within the national territory. The Executive Secretary shall, as heretofore, sign all papers that are ordinarily signed by him by or under the authority of the President.

2.Each Secretary of Department shall attend to and decide matters which pertain to his department and which under the law he may decide. On those matters which require approval of the President, in case urgent action is needed, such approval shall be obtained by radio. On the other departmental business which, although within the jurisdiction of a Secretary of Department, are of such importance as to affect the general policies of the Government and, therefore, should be the subject of consultation with the President, the Secretary concerned may communicate for such purpose with the President by radio or other convenient means of communication.

3.All official communications to the President, whether by letter or by radio, shall be transmitted through or by the Executive Secretary.

4.The Vice-President shall exercise general supervision over the conduct of affairs in the executive departments, except as to administrative functions. He shall preside over the Cabinet meetings and shall represent the president in social functions requiring the presence of the latter. He shall also preside over official ceremonies, receive and return the official calls of foreign dignitaries in behalf and in representation of the President, and on such occasions the Vice-President shall be entitled to the honors and courtesies due the President of the Philippines. The Vice-President, if he desires, can meet his visitors in the President’s Study Room.

3.The Executive Secretary shall exercise general supervision over the conduct of affairs in the executive departments. He shall, heretofore, sign all papers that are ordinarily signed by him or under the authority of the President and shall decide routine matters.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28 th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Executive Secretary