MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 93

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF NILO IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Nilo to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Dumalinao and Pagadian, both of said province.

From the Municipality of Dumalinao

From the Municipality ofPagadian

The seat of government: of the municipality of Nilo shall be at the barrio of Nilo.

The municipality of Nilo as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Point “1” following straight line latitude 7°47’53” at north direction until it intersects the Municipal boundary lines of Pagadian, Dumalinao and Lapuyan until it intersects the intersection of the Municipal Boundaries of Pagadian, Lapuyan, and Ramon Magsaysay called Point “2”; thence due east following the straight/boundary lines of Pagadian and Ramon Magsaysay until it intersects the intersection of the Municipal Boundaries of Pagadian, Labangan and Tukuran called Point “3”; thence due southeast following straight line until it intersects longitude 123°20′ called point “4”; thence due south following longitude 123°20′ until it intersects latitude 7°47’53” called Point “5”; thence due west following straight line latitude 7°47’53 ” until it intersects point “1” the’ point of beginning.” (From the Technical Description submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur, based on the map of the proposed municipality of Nilo, Scale; 1:100,000. now on file in this Office.)

The Municipalities of Dumalinao and Pagadian shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Nilo as delimited above.

The municipality of Nilo shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Dumalinao and Pagadian, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Nilo, can still maintain creditably their municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.