MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 138

CREATING THE COMMITTEE ON WOOD INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

Pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by law, realizing the need for the nationwide development of the wood industry as an important factor in the economic program of the country, and in view of the rapid and expansion growth that the wood industry is capable of attaining, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, do hereby create the Committee on Wood Industries Development under the Office of the President.

1. The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

( a ) As a deliberative body concerned with the problems of the entire wood industries, to study, discuss, and objectify current situations confronting the industry;

( b ) As recommendatory council representing the interests of the industry, to draft and submit concrete recommendations to the President concerning policies and action programs which affect the industry;

( c ) As a planning committee concerned mainly with the future requirements for the sustained growth of the industry, to conduct researches and market development programs designed to accomplish the objectives of growth in the wood industries; and

( d ) As an implementing body geared toward the proper execution and management of policies and action programs approved and proclaimed by the President, to harness available potential resources from both government and private sectors for the development of the industry.

2. The Committee shall be composed of eleven members:

3. The committee shall be headed by its chairman who shall be the executive officer of the committee, and will be empowered to appoint such persons or entities and to issue such rules and regulations for the purposes of assisting him in the discharge of his duties and responsibilities and of implementing the objectives and programs of the committee.

4. The chairman is also authorized to call directly upon any department, bureau, or office of the executive branch of the government or upon any government-owned or controlled entity or agency for such assistance as the committee may need and, subject to the approval of the President, to requisition or utilize and make use of the service of their personnel.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 8th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Secretary of Justice concurrently Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 138 : Creating the Committee on Wood Industries Development under the Office of the President. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 61 (5), 486-487.