MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 109

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAGUING IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Lanao del Sur a municipality to be known as Maguing to consist of barrios of Borua, Pindulonan, Alog, Butod, Dimaroa, Lumbac, Balagunun, Dimagalin, Bulao, Borokot, Dasaon, Romapunut, Dilausan, Madaya, Madanding, Malungun, Mimbisa, Pindulonan, Linindingan, Buadiangcay, Pagalongan, Pilimoknan, Maguing-Proper, Batobato, Bualan, Tandiongkairan, Rinabor, Minipagalanga, Balintao, Bubong, Dilimbayan, Panayangan, Macadiar, Polo, Elian, Kianodan, Runggayan, Ilalag, Camalag, Kilala, Cambong, Balawag, Minaring, Dalidigan, Bosicong, Pantao, and Agagan, all of the municipality of Lumba-Bayabao, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Dilausan.

The municipality of Lumba-Bayabao shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Maguing.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 10291 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Maguing shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Lumba-Bayabao after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Maguing, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 109 :  Creating the Municipality of Maguing in the Province of Lanao del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 60 (42), 6739.