MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 115

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ROXAS IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Norte a municipality to be known as Roxas to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Katipunan, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Roxas shall be at the barrio of Langatian.

The municipality of Roxas as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from the mouth of Piao river following said river upstream until it intersects the mouth of Bob river and thence following said Bob river upstream until the Zamboanga del Sur Boundary at latitude eight degrees thirteen minutes (8°–13′) thence following latitude eight degrees thirteen minutes (8°–13′) due west, until it intersects longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees ten minutes (123°–10′) and following longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees ten minutes (123°–10′) in a straight line northward until it intersects Dohinob Dacu river which is the Manucan–Katipunan boundary and following said river downstream until the mouth of the river.” (From the technical description submitted by the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Norte based on the map of said municipality of Roxas, scale 1:100,000, now on file in this Office).

The municipality of Katipunan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Roxas as delimited above.

House Bill No. 7429 creating this new municipality was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Roxas shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Katipunan after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Roxas, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 115 :  Creating the municipality of Roxas in the province of Zamboanga del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 60 (46), 7527.