MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 105

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BADIANGAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ILOILO

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Iloilo a municipality to be known as Badiangan, to consist of the following barrios of the municipality of Janiuay, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Badiangan shall be at the barrio of Badiangan

The Municipality of Badiangan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“The boundary lines between the Municipality of Janiuay and the proposed Municipality of Badiangan starts from the northern portion of the Municipality from MBM No. 33 (Municipal Boundary Monument) of Lambunao and Janiuay to Barrio Boundary Monument (BBM No. 104) of the barrio of Sarawag and Mapile Grande; then to BBM No. 102 of the barrio of Sarawag-Patongpatong and Mapile Grande-Botong; then to BBM No. 96 of the barrio of Patongpatong-Madong and Botong; then to BBM No. 75 of the barrio of Madong and Botong-Calanzanan; then to BBM No. 76 of the barrio of Madong and Calanzanan; then to BBM No. 78 along the Magapa River to BBM No. 79 of the barrio of Matag-ob-Gibolo and Calanzanan; then to BBM No. 60 of the barrio of Gibolo and Calanzanan- Sianon; then to BBM No. 59 of the barrio of Gibolo-Damires and Sianon; then to BBM No. 48 of the barrio of Damires and Sianon-Iniñigan; then to BBM No. 50 of the barrio of Damires and Iniligan-Teneclan; then to BBM No. 51 of the barrio of Damires and Teneclan-Catubig; then to BBM No. 52 of the barrio of Damires-Tamuan and Catubig; then to BBM No. 16 of the barrio Tamuan and Catubig; then to BBM No. 15 of the barrio Tamuan-Cabantog and Catubig; then to BBM No. 14 of the barrio Cabantog-Carañas and Catubig-Bitaoyan; then to BBM No. 17 of the barrio Bitaoyan and Caranas and along the Municipal boundary of Janiuay and Pototan from MBM No. 3 to MBM No. 2 of the Janiuay Cadastre No. 266 described and indicated on the attached map.” (As certified by the Office of the District Land Officer, Land District No. 29, Bureau of Lands, City of Iloilo, based on the map prepared and authenticated by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Iloilo, on file in this Office, Scale: 1:40,000)

The municipality of Janiuay shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Badiangan, as delimited above.

House Bill No. 7711 for the creation of the new municipality was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Badiangan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Janiuay, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Badiangan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.