MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 28

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 14, DATED JUNE 29, 1962, BY CONVERTING THE COMMITTEE CREATED THEREUNDER INTO A NATIONAL HEROES COMMISSION WITH ADDITIONAL MEMBERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, the grandeur of a nation is determined by the greatness of the lives and works of its heroes, and the Philippines is a country of great men whose heroic deeds have shaped our destiny as a nation;

WHEREAS, on the solid rock of their historic past is based the present structure of our nationhood for the well-being of future generations;

WHEREAS , our government and people have jointly initiated a determined .move to propagate their teachings not only among our people, who are the immediate beneficiary of their enduring legacy, but also among all peoples in countries where democracy and freedom are held supreme;

WHEREAS, in view of the favorable impact on our people made by the centennial celebration of the birth of Jose Rizal, there is need for establishing a continuing agency of the government to’ prepare for the centenary of other national heroes whose lives and teachings should likewise be perpetuated;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, in recognition of the necessity of observing the centenary and anniversary of national heroes of the Philippines and the perpetuation of their lives and teachings, do hereby amend Executive Order No. 14, series of 1962, abolishing the Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission and creating a committee to carry out the remaining activities of the commission, by converting said committee into a National Heroes Commission with increased membership, duties, and functions.

The Commission shall be composed of the following:

The Commission shall have the following additional duties and functions:

1. Prepare for the celebration of the centenary of selected national heroes, to include but not limited to the publication of their works and to adopt measures that will afford every Filipino a chance to participate in the celebration of each centenary;

2. Translate into English, Filipino, and major languages of the Philippines and publish for distribution their original writings and significant works about them to be sold at cost;

3. Print and distribute biographies of national heroes;

4. Administer and appropriate, with the approval of the President, funds donated to it by the public and by the Government and proceeds from income in pursuance of its duties and functions;

5. Study who of our heroes should be honored by way of proclamation of special public holidays in their honor; the scope of the celebration, whether national or local; the appropriate manner of observing the various occasions; and whether it is the natal day or the death anniversary that should be observed;

6. Take charge of the celebrations in their honor so as to assure harmony, solemnity, and propriety in the observance of the various occasions.

The Commission may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance or information as it may need in the performance of its functions.

The Commission shall make report to the President from time to time but not less than once every six months.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1963). Executive Order No. 28 : Amending Executive Order No. 14, dated June 29, 1962, by converting the committee created thereunder into a National Heroes Commission with additional members, duties, and functions. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 59 (1), 1.