MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 4

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL ANTI-GRAFT COMMITTEE

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Presidential Anti-Graft Committee to be composed of such personnel as the President may designate from time to time.

The main functions of the Committee shall be:

1. To inquire into and take measures to prevent, the occurrence of graft and of violations of Republic Act No. 3019 in such, departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as the President may determine, under the supervision of the Department Head, concerned;

2. In such departments,, bureau, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as the President may determine, to implement and enforce Republic Act No. 1379 by inquiring into, investigating, determining, and verifying’ any and all unlawfully acquired properties of the officials and employees thereof, and obtaining the needed evidence to establish such unlawful acquisition of property or other forms of wealth acquired by .them while in public office.

The committee herein created is granted all the powers of an investigating committee under sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code.

The committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance or information as it may need in the performance of its functions, and for this purpose, it shall have access to, and the right to examine, any books, documents, papers, or records thereof subject to the limitations provided by law.

The committee is hereby directed to forward all its reports of investigations, findings, and recommendations, with all the supporting evidence and other papers relevant thereto, to the President of the Philippines.

The properties and equipment of the Presidential Anti-Graft Committee created by Executive Order No. 378, dated February. 18, 1960, and abolished by Executive Order No. 457, .dated December 29, 1961, shall be turned over to the committee herein created; and the Committee shall, at its request, be given access to any of the records of the defunct Presidential Anti-Graft Committee that are now in the custody of the National Bureau of Investigation.

This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) AMELITO R. MUTUC Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1962). Executive Order No. 4 : Creating a Presidential Anti-Graft Committee. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (6), 1045.