MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 22

PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REPUBLIC ACT NO. 2717, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE ELECTRIFICATION ADMINISTRATION ACT

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, the following implementing details of Republic Act No. 2717, otherwise known as the Electrification Administration Act, are hereby promulgated to govern the organization, powers, duties, and functions of the Electrification Administration.

SECTION 1. The organization, functions, and operation of the Electrification Administration, hereinafter referred to as the “Administration,” shall be in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 2717 and these Implementing Details.

SEC. 2. The Administration shall function under the Office of the President and shall consist of the Office of the Administrator, a Programming and Planning Department, a Fiscal Department, a Loans and Investments Department, and a Design, Construction, and Maintenance Department.

SEC. 3. The Office of the Administrator shall have an Administrative Department, an Accounting Department, and a Legal Department.

SEC. 4. The Administrator of the Electrification Administration, hereinafter referred to as the “Administrator,” is authorized to make such changes in organization, definition of functions, and distribution of work among the departments in the Administration as may be necessary to reflect changes in legislation, conditions, needs, or workloads: Provided, That no changes may be made during the fiscal year 1963 without specific approval of the President: And provided further, That any such changes must be in conformity with the provisions of Republic Act No. 2717 and these Implementing Details.

SEC. 5. Quarters for the Offices of the Administration shall be selected by the Administrator.

SEC. 6. The functions, owers, duties, and responsibilities of the Administrator shall consist of those provided in pertinent provisions of the Revised Administrative Code, other pertinent laws, orders, rules and regulations, besides those provided in pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 2717 and these Implementing Details.

The Administrator shall have the following functions, among others:

1. Advise the President on the formulation and execution of policies concerning the furnishing of cheap and dependable electric power and facilities in rural areas;

2. Promulgate rules and regulations necessary to carry out policy objectives and functions vested in him by law;

3. Appoint, fix the compensation, and detemine the duties of the officials and employees of the Administration as the exigencies of the service may require;

4. Delegate authority for the performance of any functions or set of functions to officers and employees under his direction; and

5. Direct and provide for the overall operation of the Administration.

SEC. 7. The Administrator shall receive an annual compensation of fifteen thousand pesos per annum.

SEC. 8. The Deputy Administrator shall be delegated such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable him to discharge his functions, duties, and responsibilities.

The Deputy Administrator shall have the following functions, among others:

1. Serve as deputy to the Administrator in all matters;

2. Administer the Administration’s day-to-day activities, coordinate its program and projects, and be responsible for the efficient and economical operation of the Administration;

3. Evaluate recommendations made by the various staffs and departments of the Administration and submit his findings to the Administrator for action;

4. Advise and assist the Administrator in the formulation, determination, and implemention of the Administration policies;

5. Act as Administrator in the latter’s absence’ or if the office is vacant.

SEC. 9. The Deputy Administrator shall receive an annual compensation of twelve thousand pesos per annum.

SEC. 10. The Administrative Department shall be responsible for providing services related to property, records, materials requisition, and general office management.

SEC. 11. The Legal Department shall provide legal services and advise required by the Administrator, or the office, including those pertaining to proposed and existing legislations pertinent to the functions of the Administration.

SEC. 12. The Accounting Department shall be responsible for the functions relating to the maintenance of proper accounting procedures and records.

SEC. 13. The Programming and Planning Department shall operate primarily as a planning, scheduling, coordinating, and advisory unit in the implementation of the Administration’s electrification program. It shall coordinate its work and consult with the National Economic Council, the Program Implementation Agency, the National Power Corporation, and the Bureau of Public Works.

SEC. 14. The Fiscal Department shall be responsible for the functions of the Administration relating to financial budgeting, control of expenditures of budgeted funds, and the handling of cash.

SEC. 15. The Loans and Investments Department shall be responsible for the evaluation and processing of loan applications.

SEC. 16. The Design, Construction, and Maintenance Department shall execute program, of the Administration relating to the location, design, construction and maintenance of electric power facilities.

SEC. 17. Out of the fund provided for in Republic Act No. 2717, the sum of P5,000,000 is hereby set aside as operating expenses of the Administration for the fiscal year 1962-63.

SEC. 18. The balance of the amount appropriated for the Administration as provided in R. A. 2717 and as programmed by the Budget Commission for the Fiscal Year 1962-63, after the amount provided in section 17 hereof has been deducted, is hereby made available for loans in accordance with the provisions of said Act.

SEC. 19. The sum of P5,000,000 for the fiscal year 1962-63 and the same amount each year, for the next four (4) fiscal years, is hereby authorized as a revolving fund of the Administration. Any sum as assets which the NEC-AID may assign to the Administration shall form part of this revolving fund, except when it is expressly set aside for research or operating expenses. For the succeeding fiscal years, the operating expenses of the Administration shall be incorporated in the General Appropriation Act. The increments due and collected by the Administration shall be subject to a special budget for the improvement of the Administration.

SEC. 20. The Government Service Insurance System, the Social Security System, and the Development Bank of the Philippines are hereby authorized and directed to make loans not exceeding the aggregate amount of P50,000,000, subject to the pertinent provisions of section 5, Republic Act No. 2717.

SEC. 21. The Chairman of the Reparations Commission shall allocate and transfer to the Administration any sums or assets received from or out of Japanese reparations and loans obtained under the Japanese Reparations Treaty.

SEC. 22. If any provisions of these Implementing Details should be held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby.

SEC. 23. The Administrator shall direct the orderly scheduling of transfers, changes, and other transitional actions required by these Implementing Details. In the Interim, each entity affected shall continue to perform its existing functions until such time as the Administrator orders changes or cessation, and each officer and employee shall continue to perform his duties and to exercise his authority until such time as the Administrator orders otherwise.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1962). Executive Order No. 22 : Providing for the implementing details for Republic Act No. 2717, otherwise known as the Electrification Administration Act. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (44), 6831.