MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDEER NO. 185

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LOURDES IN THE PROVINCE OF ORIENTAL MINDORO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Oriental Mindoro and pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Oriental Mindoro a municipality to be known as Lourdes to consist of the following barrios of the municipality of Naujan:

The seat of government of the municipality of Lourdes shall be at the barrio of Barcenaga.

The municipality of Lourdes as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From point 1 on plan, at the edge of Magasawangtubig River at the shore line following upstream of Magasawangtubig River to the confluence of Magasawangtubig River, Aglubang River and Ibulo River; Thence following upstream of Aglubang River to Point 2; Thence S. 2-05 W., 1,725 m. to point 3 of the common old boundary point of the municipality of Naujan and the province of Occ. Mindoro; Thence N. 61-18 W., 19,725 m. to point 4 of the common boundary line of Occ. Mindoro and Or. Mindoro; Thence N. 24-00 E., 22,875 m. to point 5, common old boundary line of the municipality of Baco and the municipality of Naujan”; Thence S. 82-15 E., 14,400 m. to point 6, common old boundary line the municipalities of Naujan and Calapan; Thence N. 60 00 E., 9,150 m. to point 7, common old boundary line of the municipalities of Naujan and Calapan; Thence Southward following the shore line down to point 1, point of beginning at the edge of Magasawangtubig River, containing an area of 334.88 sq. kms. more or less.” (From the Technical Description prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Oriental Mindoro based on the map of the Municipality of Naujan, scale 1:75,000, now on file in this Office.

The municipality of Naujan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Lourdes as delimited above.

The municipality of Lourdes shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 185 : Creating the Municipality of Lourdes in the Province of Oriental Mindoro. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (1), 1.