MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 194

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN RICARDO IN THE PROVINCE OF SOUTHERN LEYTE

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Southern Leyte a municipality to be known as San Ricardo to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Pintuyan, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of San Ricardo.

The municipality of San Ricardo as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Starting from the mouth of a creek on the seashore West of sitio Capingkit going upland along the course of said creek, passing the Mesyong Dotarot Bridge of the National Highway, to Corner 9 of Project 39-Block B of LC-791—Bureau of Forestry—direct to Northeast trail to corner 27 following Lines 26, 25, 24, 23 and 22 of same Block B, thence direct to Corner 27 of Block A and Block I, thence direct to Corner boundary of Liloan and Pintuyan, thence to Corner 1 of Project 28-Block E (Timberland) Liloan, LC-791 of the Bureau of Forestry, thence straight direct to the seashore point along the Beach of Surigao Strait, closed to the point of beginning of the creek in sitio Capingkit.” (From the technical description submitted by the Provincial Land Officer of Southern Leyte, based on the map of the Municipality of Pintuyan prepared by the District Engineer now on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Pintuyan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of San Ricardo.

The municipality of San Ricardo shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Pintuyan after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of San Ricardo, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 194 : Creating the Municipality of San Ricardo in the Province of Southern Leyte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (2), 201.