MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 226

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 130 DATED NOVEMBER 24, 1964, BY DEFINING THE FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE NATIONAL TRAFFIC SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE CREATED THEREIN

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, do hereby amend Executive Order No. 130 dated November 24, 1964, creating the National Traffic Safety Advisory Committee, by defining its functions and duties as follows:

1. To formulate and recommend to the President policies on the effective implementation of all laws, rules and regulations governing land travel and/or transportation;

2. To recommend to the President proposed legislation designed to promote safe, adequate, expeditious and economical means of land travel in consonance with progressive trends;

3. To conduct studies on ways and means of enforcing effectively, and of coordinating the activities of different offices and government agencies charged with the enforcement of, all laws, rules and regulations governing land travel and/or transportation;

4. To gather, compile and analyze data, and disseminate information to proper government offices and agencies, as well as to the public when the same is deemed in the public interest; and

5. To submit quarterly reports on traffic accidents and semi-annual reports on accomplishments, activities and recommendations to the President of the Philippines.

The National Traffic Safety Advisory Committee is hereby authorized to call on any government office, agency, political subdivision, and government-owned or controlled corporation for such assistance as it may require in connection with the performance of its work.

Executive Order No. 536 dated October 21, 1952, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 225 : Amending Executive Order No. 130 dated November 24, 1964, by defining the functions and duties of the National Traffic Safety Advisory Committee created therein. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (12), 1907.