MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 134

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL VOLUNTEER SERVICE COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a member of the International Secretariat for Volunteer Service (ISVS), is aware that economic progress could be stimulated through economic cooperation;

WHEREAS, in order to gain the maximum benefits afforded by the ISVS, the Philippines has to coordinate with the international body; and

WHEREAS, to make coordination with the ISVS more effective, there is a need for creating a national body to act as liaison between the international body and Philippine Government Agencies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine National Volunteer Service Committee which shall act as the national liaison with the ISVS, recommend appropriate measures for promoting economic cooperation through participation in ISVS programs and coordinate with community development organizations in planning and carrying out activities supporting ISVS economic development programs.

The Philippine National Volunteer Service Committee shall be composed of a Chairman and an Executive Secretary from the Department of Foreign Affairs and a representative each from the Department of Labor, the Department of Health, the Department of Education, the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Department of Public Works and Communications, the National Economic Council, and the Office of the Presidential Assistant on Community Development, to be designated by the respective office heads.

The Chairman is hereby authorized to call upon any officer or employee of any department, bureau, or agency of the Government for such assistance as may be needed by the committee for the proper discharge of its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 134 : Creating the Philippine National Volunteer Service Committee. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 61 (3), 244.