MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 182

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN ISIDRO IN PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Davao a municipality to be known as San Isidro to consist of the barrios and sitios of La Union, Talisay, Cambalion, Bitaogan, Baon, Wason, Manikling, San Roque, Dogmanon, Bato-Bato, Iba, Bitoon, Montabac, Bacong, Capasanan, Tipdas, Mag, Maputi and Haguimitan, all of the municipality of Governor Generoso, with the seat of government at the present site of the sitio of Bato-Bato.

The municipality of San Isidro as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Pinagsakan Creek running due east to the boundary line of the Municipality of Mati; thence from the south, beginning at the center of the mouth of the Cuabo River and running in a meandering direction following the said river to the crest of mountain forming the watershed; thence to the top of Mount Mayo, following the northern Boundary line of the Municipality of Mati.” (From House Bill No. 661)

The municipality of Governor Generoso shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of San Isidro as delimited above.

The Creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 661 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of San Isidro shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Governor Generoso after the segregation there from of the territory comprised in the municipality of San Isidro can still maintain creditably its municipal government: meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Davao, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 182 : Creating the Municipality of San Isidro in Province of Davao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (52), 8335.