MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 95

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF PITOGO IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Pitogo to consist of the following barrios and their respective sitios of the municipalities of Dimataling and Tabina, both of said province:

From the Municipality of Dimataling:

From the Municipality of Tabina:

1. Limbayan

The seat of government of the municipality of Pitogo shall be at the barrio of Pitogo.

The municipality of Pitogo as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Point 1 the intersection of the shoreline near barrio Limbayan and latitude 123°26′; thence following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of Section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code along Maligay Bay to point “2” at the middle of the mouth of Guling Creek; thence following the boundary line separating Libertad and Dimataling with a distance of 1,100 meters at point 3; thence following a straight line in a southeasterly direction to point 1 the point of beginning. This includes the island of Panikian.” (From the map of the proposed municipality of Pitogo prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur, scale 1:100,000, now on file in this Office).

The municipalities of Dimataling and Tabina shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Pitogo as delimited above.

The municipality of Pitogo shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Dimataling and Tabina after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Pitogo can still maintain creditably their municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.