MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 120

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LIBERTAD IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Libertad, to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Dimataling, Margosatubig, and Dinas, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Libertad shall be at barrio of Libertad.

The municipality of Libertad as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Point 1 the mouth of Cansalnion Creek, following a straight line with a northerly direction until it intersect Point 2, the intersection of the municipal boundaries of Lapuyan, Margosatubig, and San Miguel; thence to Point 3 the highest peak of Buga Mountain; thence following a straight line with a southeasterly direction to Point 4 on the mouth of Maridu Creek; thence following the shoreline of marine waters to Point 5 the mouth of Racak Creek; thence following a straight line with a southwesterly direction to Point 6 the mouth of Goling Creek; which intersect the bank of Sugbay River; thence following Sugbay River downstream until it reach the marine water of Malibay Bay up to Point 1 the point of beginning.” (From the technical description prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur).

The municipalities of Dimataling, Margosatubig and Dinas shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Libertad, as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 7982 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Libertad shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Dimataling, Margosatubig, and Dinas, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Libertad can still maintain creditably their municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 120 : Creating the municipality of Libertad in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (46), 7528-7530.