MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 49

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 58 DATED AUGUST 16, 1954, AS TO MEMBERSHIP IN THE NATIONAL SHRINES COMMISSION AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. Paragraph 3 of Executive Order No. 58 dated August 16, 1954, as amended by Executive Order No. 87 dated January 5, 1955 and Executive Order No. 204 dated October 9, 1956, as to composition of the Commission, is hereby amended by substituting the Commissioner of Tourism in place of the President of the Philippine Tourist and Travel Association and the President of the Veterans Federation of the Philippines in place of the National Commander of the War Veterans of the Philippines, Inc.

2. Paragraph 7 thereof is hereby amended to read as follows:

“The Secretary of Public Works and Communications, the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Civil Aeronautics Administration are hereby directed to give priority to these improvements and to make available for their immediate realization such funds as they may be in a position to dispose of out of their respective current appropriations for similar projects. In addition, the National Shipyards & Steel Corporation is authorized, the provisions of Executive Orders to the contrary notwithstanding, to donate portion of the proceeds of the sale of surplus and/or metal scrap items which may be found in areas declared as National Shrines for the development of such areas.”

3. Paragraph 9 thereof is hereby amended to read as follows:

“The Commission is hereby authorized to create, subject to availability of funds, such administrative staffs as it may need to carry out its mission effectively. In addition, the Commission may call on any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the preparation and execution of its plans or in the maintenance of the service to be established.”

4. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-three.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUFINO G. HECHANOVA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1963). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.