MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 119

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LANTAPAN IN THE PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrativs Code, there is hereby created in the province of Bukidnon a municipality to be known as Lantapan to consist of the barrios of Bugcaon, Culasihan, Bantuanon, Lantapan, Balila, Baclayon, Alanib, Kaatuan, Songko, Victory, Kibangay, Basak, and Kibogtong and the territory west of Cabangahan Creek, westward along the highway towards and up to the present boundary of the municipalities of Malaybalay and Talakag, all of the municipality of Malaybalay, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Lantapan.

The municipality of Malaybalay shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Lantapan.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 9011 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Lantapan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Malaybalay after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Lantapan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 119 : Creating the municipality of Lantapan in the Province of Bukidnon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (44), 7170.