MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 211-E

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF KULAMAN IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as Kulaman to consist of the following barrios and sitos of the municipalities of Kalamansig, Isulan and Palimbang, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Kulaman:

From the Municipality of Kalamansig:

From the Municipality of Isulan:

From the Municipality of Palimbang:

The municipality of Kulaman shall have the following boundaries:

“From point at South Kulaman towards northwest direction, intersecting the boundary line of palimbang and Kalamansig Municipalities, passing north Kulaman Bo., distance 27.0 kilometers (more or less); thence going to northeast direction intersecting the boundary line of Kalamansig and Isulan Municipalities, distance 23.0 kilometers (more or less); thence going southeast direction, until it reaches the corner of Pls.-604-D, distance 4.0 kilometers (more or less); thence following the boundary line of Pls-604-D south direction until it reaches Kulaman River, distance 16.2 kilometers (more or less); thence following the stream course of Kulaman River, until it reaches the boundary line of Banga and Isulan Municipalities, distance 4.5 kilometers (more or less); thenqe following the old boundary line of Banga and Isulan Municipalities, until it reaches the boundary line of Palimbang Municipality, distance 6.5 kilometers (more or less); thence following the old boundary line of Banga and Palimbang Municipalities, distance 2.8 kilometers (more or less); thence going southwest direction towards South Kulaman, distance 1.8 kilometers (more or less), the point of the beginning.” (From the Technical Description prepared and submitted by the Office of the District Engineer of Cotabato based on the map of the proposed municipality of Kulaman, scale 1:125,000 now on file in his Office)

The municipalities of Kalamansig, Isulan and Palimbang shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Kulaman as delimited above.

The municipality of Kulaman shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 211-E : Creating the municipality of Kulaman in the province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (7), 988.