MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 72

PRESCRIBING ECONOMY MEASURES IN THE OPERATION OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, the most judicious use of such resources is the government be utilized in the most economical, efficient, and effective manner;

WHEREAS, the most judicious use of such resources is necessary not only for the sound performance of governmental functions but also for an effective implementation of the country’s development program; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary that specific guides be followed by all concerned in achieving an effective austerity program in the Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that the following economy measures be observed by all personnel of the National Government:

1. Travel of officials and employees outside their duty stations requiring the payment of per diems or reimbursement of actual traveling expenses, or travel to foreign countries for which the Philippine Government shall bear all expenses or the major portion of expenses connected with such travel, shall not be allowed, except in meritorious cases to be determined by the Department Secretary concerned in case of local travel and the Office of the President in case of travel abroad.

2. Strict economy shall be observed in the use of office utilities and facilities such as electricity, water, telephone, telegraph, postage, motor vehicles, and other conveyances, etc. Electric power should be switched off after office hours or at any time it is not needed. Leaks and other defects in the water system should be immediately repaired. No new telephones should be installed, save in absolutely necessary cases. Airmail and telegraph services should not be availed of except in truly important and urgent matters. Office cars, jeeps, and other conveyances should be used only when absolutely necessary for the purpose authorized by law, and in no case for personal purposes.

3. Consumption of office supplies and materials should be limited to the barest essential minimum compatible with working efficiency. Office supplies and materials shall in no case, under pain of disciplinary action, be appropriated for personal use, no matter how seemingly small the cost thereof may be.

4. Purchases of motor vehicles, and office equipment, although authorized in current appropriation acts, shall be deferred except in meritorious cases.

5. No vacant position shall be filled without the prior approval of the Office of the President and prior certification by the Commissioner of the Budget that funds are available for the filling of such positions. Lump-sum appropriations for employment of casual or emergency workers shall not be released except upon certification, approved by the Office of the President, that the specified amount is needed to meet unusual volume of work arising from contingencies that cannot be coped with by the regular personnel.

6. Payment of additional compensation by the hour for overtime services under Section 7-I(32), Commonwealth Act No. 246, as amended, shall not be allowed, except in absolutely meritorious cases.

7. The Secretary of General Services shall formulate a building program for government offices to effect economy in the payment of rentals.

8. Economy committees created under Memorandum Circular No. 28 of the Office of the President dated June 21, 1983, in each department, bureau, and office of the National Government shall continue to function and help the respective organizational heads carry out the economy measures herein prescribed.

9. Each Department Head shall be responsible for the enforcement of these economy measures in the offices, bureaus, and agencies under his department and shall submit to the Office of the President periodic reports of savings effected.

This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 72 : Prescribing economy measures in the operation of the National Government. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (10), 1393-1394.