MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 187

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAGUMBAYAN IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as Bagumbayan to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Isulan with the seat of government at the barrio of Bagumbayan:

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

The municipality of Bagumbayan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at the junction where the course of Panas Creek and Ala River meets, following upstream on the course of Panas Creek to Pangolan Creek due West following upstream course of Pangolan Creek, thence to Salatan Creek, following the downstream course of Salatan Creek to the junction of Kabulunan River, thence straight westward to a point where the boundaries of the municipalities of Lebak, Kalamansig and Isulan meets, thence going southward following the former boundary of Isulan and that of Kalamansig and Palembang to a point where the boundary of the municipalities of Isulan, Palembang and Surala meet, thence straight eastward following the boundary of the municipalities of Isulan and Surala to a point at Malay Creek, thence following the course Malay Creek downstream towards Ala River, thence following the course of the Ala River on a northward direction to the point of beginning at the junction of Ala River and Panas Creek.” (From House Bill No. 13731.)

The municipality of Isulan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Bagumbayan as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 13731 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Bagumbayan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in Bato, Cebu, this 24th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 187 : Creating the Municipality of Bagumbayan in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (1), 3.