MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 170

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SANTIAGO IN THE PROVINCE OF SOUTHERN LEYTE

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Southern Leyte and pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Banday, Maslog, Cawayan, Cabascan, Anahawan, Cambito, Maanyag, Carnaga, San Isidro, Punong, Hinapo, Rizal and other adjacent barrios and sitios, all of the municipality of Malitbog, province of Southern Leyte, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Santiago with the seat of government at the barrio of Banday.

The municipality of Santiago as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at the mouth of the Canumay Stream on the shoreline in Sogod Bay, marked Point 1; thence, following upstream the Canumay stream until it intersects the municipal boundaries of Malitbog and Matalom, marked Point 2; thence, following the boundaries between the municipalities of Malitbog and Matalom in a northerly direction to the intersection of the municipal boundaries of Malitbog, Matalom and Bontoc, marked Point 3; thence, following the Higosoan Paver downstream to its mouth at the shoreline in Sogod Bay, marked Point 4; thence, following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to Section 2321 of the Eevised Administrative Code to Point marked 1, the point of beginning.” (Based on the technical description furnished by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Southern Leyte of the sketch plan or map of the proposed municipality of Santiago prepared by the said Office and on file in this Office, Scale: 1:50,000)

The municipality of Malitbog shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof included in the municipality of Santiago, as delimited above.

The municipality of Santiago shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Malitbog, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Santiago, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 170 : Creating the Municipality of Santiago in the Province of Southern Leyte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (44), 7097.