MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 197

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CARMEN IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Sur a municipality to be known as Carmen to consist of the barrios of Carmen, Esperanza, Cancaban, Bonga, Santa Cruz, Antao and Puyat, all of the municipality of Lanuza, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Carmen.

The municipality of Carmen as herein organized shall have the following boundaries;

“Beginning at the point marked “A” on the map following the Municipal Boundary of Lanuza (Mother Municipality) and Madrid on southwesterly direction until it intersect the Provincial Boundary line between the Provinces of Surigao del Sur and Agusan marked point “B”; thence, from point “B” following the provincial boundary of Surigao del Sur and Agusan provinces on southeasterly direction up to the point marked “C”; thence, from point “C” following an imaginary straight line on northeasterly direction up to point marked “D” which is 3.5 Km. more or less south of Surigao-Davao National Road; thence, from point “D” following an imaginary straight line N-26 deg. 30′-E to point marked “E” which is at the center of the bridge and at the intersection between the Surigao-Davao National Road and Malonong River; thence, from point “E” following the course of Malonong River downstream up to the mouth on the seashore marked point “F”; thence, following the seashore on the northwesterly direction up to the point of beginning point “A”. The barrios of Esperanza, Antao, Cancaban, Bonga, Sta. Cruz, Puyat and Barrio Carmen, the proposed seat of government, together with its corresponding sitios that compose the Municipality of Carmen shall also be the water territory limits of said proposed subdivision.” (From the technical description submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Surigao del Sur based on the map of the municipality of Lanuza, scale 1:100,000, now on file in this office.)

The municipality of Lanuza shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Carmen as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 16404 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Carmen shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.