MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 88

CREATING THE FINANCE ACADEMY OF THE PHILIPPINES

Whereas, a truly career development-and-training program in the service which will provide professional and civic education as well as cultural broadening is vital to the task of insuring a more effective and efficient performance in the finance services of the government;

Whereas, in the light of experience, the present set-up of having each bureau, office, or agency in the Department of Finance conduct its own educational and training program should be improved to achieve maximum effectiveness and efficiency;

Whereas, it is popularly felt that the various educational and training programs in the Department of Finance can be enriched and made more effective if resources and facilities are consolidated and are centralized, coordinated, and integrated in one combined-services institution, with the stature of an enduring and model academy of learning in the finance services of government.

Now, therefore, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the establishment of the Finance Academy of the Philippines.

The mission of the Academy is to insure effective and efficient operations in the finance services of the government through training and development of all personnel (national or local) directly or indirectly under the jurisdiction of the Department of Finance, and to train and develop a continuing crops of officials and leaders, in the field of public finance and related areas, capable of assuming and discharging the duties and responsibilities of top-echelon functions in the Department of Finance and all the bureaus and offices under it. The mission extends to the turning out of graduates of both “general” and “specific” orientation for professional and civic leadership in the society.

The Finance Academy shall have the following objectives:

( a ) Broad objectives—

(1) To provide opportunities for personnel efficiency training geared to the development of a desirable high standard of employee performance, morale and attitudes, including, career service in the Department of Finance and its agencies and offices, so that the Department can perform its role more effectively as the principal revenue-raising and collecting arm of the National Government;

(2) To promote inter-service understanding, communication, coordination and integrated planning in the Department of Finance, as well as harmonious relations with other Departments or Agencies in the government through instructions and study of the above aspects of government services;

(3) To conduct studies and research which will contribute to an increase in the knowledge and understanding of finance services and problems in the government; and

(4) To develop not only professional but also civil leaders.

( b ) Specific objectives—

(1) To develop the technical skills of the students and their productive capacities so as to enhance their efficiency and usefulness as public servants through modern techniques and methods of approaches in public administration and management;

(2) To foster the mental habits and attitudes necessary for the development of high morale and pride in public service, including good public relations, through emphasis on professional ethics and moral instructions;

(3) To acquaint the students with modern research;

(4) To sharpen intellectual skills and increase professional knowledge, particularly with respect to modern public finance, treasury, assessment, tax, tariff, insurance and other allied areas through modern pedagogical principles and techniques, as well as the encouragement of research studies;

(5) To provide for the development of career service in the finance services, such as career appraisers in Bureau of Customs, career examiners in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, career treasurers and assessors in the treasury service and other important positions in the Department of Finance, including finance attaches (treasury, customs, internal revenue, etc.) in other foreign services; and

(6) To provide for the humanities and cultural courses necessary to complement professional knowledge and training.

( c ) Scope of operations—

As an educational center, the Finance Academy shall have direct control, administration and supervision over all programs in the finance services of the government, from orientation, pre-service, in-service, job-instruction, or the like to training of special types of employees, senior executive of career development programs. Its scope of operations shall embrace all technical and other major services in the Department of Finance and all its agencies or offices.

In the interest of promoting better understanding and of enlisting public cooperation with the revenue-raising agencies of the national government, candidates from the private sector and of governments friendly to the Republic of the Philippines may be admitted from time to time as students of the Finance Academy.

The Finance Academy as hereby established shall be organized under the direction, administration and supervision of the Secretary of Finance.

Such amount as shall be necessary for the implementation of this order shall come from the funds for the training programs of the Department of Finance and all agencies thereunder upon organization and annually thereafter P1 million pesos or more to be provided in the budget.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 88 : Creating the Finance Academy of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (30), 4411-4413.