MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 124

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF RIZAL IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Norte a municipality to be known as Rizal to consist of the barrios of Catadman, Rizal, Roxas, Columbus, Puerto Princesa, Melgar, Cortes, Montag, and Tagabaca, all of the municipality of Dinagat, with the seat of government at the barrio of Rizal.

The municipality of Rizal as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From point A at the established Municipal boundary line of Dinagat and Cagdianao on a straight line due West passing Poladio Point to point B; thence following the old boundary line between the province of Surigaio and Leyte due south at point C; thence on an imaginary straight line passing Cogon Point of Sibanao Island to point D; at the southern mouth of Panlibo-ohan River of Capaquian Island; thence following the course of Panlibo-ohan River northward to point Kan-ayut at point E; thence following the established boundary line of Barrios Wilson and Tagabaca to point F at the boundary line of Dinagat and Cagdianao; thence following the old boundary line of Dinagat and Cagdianao northward to the point of beginning at point A. (Based on the map of Dinagat Island showing the proposed municipality of Rizal and the remaining portion of the mother municipality of Dinagat, submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Surigao del Norte, on file in this Office, Scale: 1:100,000)

The municipality of Dinagat shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Rizal as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 9422 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Rizal shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Dinagat, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Rizal, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 124 : Creating the municipality of Rizal in the Province of Surigao del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (46), 7533-7534.