MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 94

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MIDSALIP IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Midsalip to consist of the following barrios and their respective sitios of the municipalities of Ramon Magsaysay and Dumingag, both of said province:

From the Municipality of Ramon Magsaysay

From the Municipality of Dumingag

The seat of government of the municipality of Midsalip shall be at the barrio of Midsalip.

The municipality of Midsalip as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from point 1, intersection of latitude 7°58′ and longitude 123°23′; thence due West until it intersects longitude 123°10′ called point 2; thence due North following partly the provincial boundary between Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur until it intersects latitude 8°06′ called point 3; thence due East until it intersects longitude 123°23′ called point 4; thence due South back to point 1, point of beginning.” (From the Technical Description prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur based on the map of the proposed municipality of Midsalip, Scale: 1:50,000 now on file, in this Office.)

The Municipalities of Dumingag and Ramon Magsaysay shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Midsalip as delimited above.

The municipality of Midsalip shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Ramon Magsaysay and Dumingag, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Midsalip, can still maintain creditably their municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.