MALACAÑANG MANILA

E XECUTIVE ORDER NO. 111

CREATING THE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF ELPIDIO QUIRINO IN MOUNTAIN PROVINCE

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in Mountain Province a municipal district to be known as Elpidio Quirino to consist of the following barrios of the municipalities of Balbalan and Pinukpuk, both of said province.

From the Municipality of Balbalan

From the Municipality of Pinukpuk

The seat of government of the Municipal District of Elpidio Quirino shall be at the barrio of Mabaca.

The municipalities of Balbalan and Pinukpuk shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipal district of Elpidio Quirino.

The creation of this new municipal district as proposed in House Bill No. 5833 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipal district of Elpidio Quirino shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor; and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipal district is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipal district and that the mother municipalities of Balbalan and Pinukpuk, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipal district of Elpidio Quirino, can still maintain creditably their municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and . provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 111 :  Creating the Municipal District of Elpidio Quirino in Mountain Province. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 60 (43), 6965.