MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATION PERFORMANCE EFFICIENCY UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

In order to achieve greater efficiency, compentence, and dedication in the administration of government and ensure the prompt and faithful performance of assigned duties, functions, and directives by the implementing government offices, agencies, and instrumentalities, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency as the executive agency in the Office of the President which shall render the requisite services and assistance to attain the above objectives.

1. The Committee shall be directly under and responsible to the President of the Philippines.

2. It shall be headed by a technical assistant, to be designated by the President, and who shall be known as the Presidential Executive Assistant. He shall be a member of the Cabinet.

3. The Committee shall have such personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it from departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government upon the recommendation of the Presidential Executive Assistant.

4. The Committee shall have such duties and functions as the President may assign to it in order to carry out the objectives of this Executive Order.

5. The records, properties, and equipment of the Presidential Committee on Administration Efficiency created by Executive Order No. 306, dated July 15, 1958, and abolished by Executive Order No. 456, dated December 29, 1961, shall be turned over to the Committee herein created.

6. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) AMELITO MUTUC Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1961). Executive Order No. 1 : Creating the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency under the Office of the President. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (2), 171.