MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 188

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF NEW BATAAN IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Davao, a municipality to be known as New Bataan to consist of the barrios of Katipunan, including Upper Aguibawa and Upper Agusan of Barrio San Miguel, Magsaysay, Panag, Batinao, Fatima, Magangit, Camanlangan, Cabinuangan, San Roque and Bantacan, all of the municipality of Compostela, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Bantacan.

The municipality of New Bataan shall have the following boundaries:

“From point “10” corner 10 to Lot 10116 PLS 2 Municipality of Nabunturan; thence to point “7” corner 3 of Lot 2021 PLS a Municipality of Compostela, to point “1” MBM No. 12 Municipality of Banganga; there to point “3” MBM No. 13 municipality of Caraga; thence to point “4” MBM No. 14 Municipality of Pantukan; then to point “5” MBM No. 1 Municipality of Pantukan; and thence to point of beginning at point “10”. (From House Bill No. 14652)

The Municipality of Compostela shall have the present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Carmen.

The Municipality of Compostela shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of New Bataan as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 14652 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of New Bataan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 188 : Creating the Municipality of New Bataan in the Province of Davao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (1), 4.