MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 84

CREATING A SCHISTOSOMIASIS CONTROL COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the Department of Health has launched a national schistosomiasis (snail fever) control program the success of which needs the concerted and integrated efforts of various agencies of the government and not only the Department of Health; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to establish an administrative machinery to carry out a comprehensive program for the control of this pernicious disease in endemic and potentially endemic areas of the country for increased farm productivity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Schistosomiasis Control Committee composed of the following:

The Chairman may designate the technical head of the schistosomiasis control program as Executive Secretary of the Committee. He may also secure the services on detail basis of officials and employees of other branches and agencies of the government to assist the Committee in the discharge of its duties and functions.

The functions of the Committee are as follows to:

(1) Formulate and carry out a comprehensive national schistosomiasis control program;

(2) Foster effective exchange of information and coordination of projects, programs, and activities of various agencies connected with schistosomiasis control;

(3) Establish effective liaison with participating agencies; and

(4) Submit recommendations to the President on administrative or legislative measures that will effectively carry out a national control program for the disease.

The Commission shall meet regularly once a month and may hold such special meetings as the exigencies of the undertaking may demand.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 84 : Creating a Schistosomiasis Control Committee. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (25), 3569-3570.