MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 203

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF P. DUPAYA IN THE PROVINCE OF CAGAYAN

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cagayan and pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cagayan, a municipality to be known as P. Dupaya to consist of the barrios of Tagumay, Newagac, Taligan, Palagao Sur, Palagao Norte, Santa Ana, Calaoagan Dackol, Capidigan, Nabacayan, Barbarit, Naddungan, Langgan, Baraoidan, Ngagan, Bangatan, Cumao, Agutan, Baraccaoit, San Vicente, Capisayan, Piña Este, Piña Weste, Mabirbira, Mabono, Tanglagan and Agaman, all of the municipality of Gattaran, with the seat of government at the barrio of Nabacayan.

The boundary that shall separate the municipality of P. Dupaya from the municipality of Gattaran shall be as follows:

“From MBM No. 8, Cad. 272, following the Gattaran-Alcala municipal boundary with a bearing of S 81.00 W and a distance of 4,500 m. to point “A”; thence due north until it intersects the Tagumay Creek at point “B”; thence following Tagumay Creek in a northwesternly direction to point marked “C” (B. L. Mon. Cor. of the lots of Feliciana Lorenzo, Domingo Vargas and Pascual Sinco); thence N 17.00 E until it reaches the Gattaran-Lallo municipal boundary (Point “C”. (From the technical description on the map prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Cagayan, Scale 1:50,000 on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Gattaran shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of P. Dupaya. The municipality of P. Dupaya shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 203 : Creating the Municipal Districts of Cabanglasan and Tikalaan in the Province of Bukidnon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (5), 686.