MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 101

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MALIXI IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Sur a municipality to be known as Malixi to consist of the barrios of Malixi, Soriano, Sta. Juana, Manambia, Batunan, Quezon, Tagbina, Lago, Maglambing, Carpenito, Mabtay and Tagongon, all of the municipality of Hinatuan, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Malixi.

The municipality of Malixi as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point marked “A” on plan being on the intersection of a straight line from the barrio of Gamut, Lianga, to the mouth of Mansamoyao gushing spring and boundary of Lianga-Hinatuan municipalities. Thence, a straight line to Mansamoyao spring point “B”; thence, S2 deg. 30 min. W. to point “C” meeting point with the Surigao Agusan prov’l boundary; thence, following Surigao-Agusan boundary on northerly direction at point “D” meeting point with the Hinatuan-Lianga municipal boundary; thence, following the municipal boundary of Hinatuan-Lianga on easterly direction to point of beginning. (From the map submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Surigao del Sur, Scale 1:125,000 now on file, in this Office).

The municipality of Hinatuan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Malixi, as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 7417 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Malixi shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors hereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Hinatuan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Malixi, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.