MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 24

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 571, CREATING A DECORATION TO BE KNOWN AS THE ORDER OF SIKATUNA

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, do hereby amend section 8 of Executive Order No. 571, promulgated on February 27, 1953, to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. The Order of Sikatuna, which commemorates the first treaty (Pacto de Sangre) between the Philippines and foregin country, shall be divided into five ranks;

“1. Raja —To be awarded to actual or former heads of state and/or heads of government, Filipino or foreign, for extraordinary services in the field of international relations.

“2. Datu —To be awarded to foreign ministers, other Cabinet secretaries and ambassadors, Filipino or foreign, for exceptionally meritorious services in the field international relations.

“3. Lakan —To be awarded to ministers plenipotentiary and officials of equivalent rank and other disinguished persons, Filipino or foreign for outstanding services in the field of international relations.

“4. Maginoo —To be awarded to senior officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs, whether in the Home Office or in the Foreign Service, below ministerial rank, for excellent services in the field of international relations. This may likewise be awarded to other government officials of the Philippines and of foreign countries of equivalent or similar rank and to deserving private citizens. Before any Filipino government official or employee may be entitled to the award, he must have served at least six years in the government.

“5. Maharlika —To be awarded to junior officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs, whether in the Home Office or in the Foreign Service, to other government officials of the Philippines and of foreign countries, and to private citizens deserving of such honor. Before any Filipino government official or employee may be entitled to the award, he must have served at least four years in the government.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1962). Executive Order No. 24 : Amending Executive Order No. 571, creating a decoration to be known as the Order of Sikatuna. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (45), 7339.