MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 139

CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON THE SAFE TRANSPORT OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS

WHEREAS, it is necessary, in connection with the program for the peaceful uses of atomic energy in the Philippines, to regulate the shipment of radioactive materials in the interests of personal health and safety; and

WHEREAS, it is deemed propitious at this time to adopt national rules and regulations governing the safe carriage of radioactive materials on land, sea and air in view of the increasing number of users of radioactive materials in the Philippines and the expected widespread application of atomic energy with the commencement of operations of the nuclear reactor at the Philippine Atomic Research Center.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Committee on the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials to be composed of the following:

The Committee shall assist the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission in preparing rules and regulations for the safe transport of radioactive materials and shall study the manner by which these rules and regulations may be most effectively enforced within the framework of existing law. In addition, the Committee shall serve as advisor to the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission in matters affecting the shipment, transport and carriage by land, sea, or air of radioactive materials.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance and information as it may need in the performance of its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 139 : Creating a National Committee on the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 61 (12), 1635-1636.