MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 212

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF QUIRINO IN THE PROVINCE OF ISABELA

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Isabela a municipality to be known as Quirino to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Hagan, Roxas and Gamu, said province:

From the Municipality of Ilanan

From the Municipality of Roxas

1. Camaal

From the Municipality of Gamu

The seat of government of the municipality of Quirino shall be at a site between the barrios of Sta. Lucia, Ilagan find Luna, Gamu.

The municipality of Quirino as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From the junction of the Mallig river and Cagayan river, running southwest along the center of Siffu river, towards Roxas until it reaches a point which is about 5.50 kilometers from the national Highway (Calao-Enrile Road); running due north until it reaches the Mallig river; running eastward along the center of Mallig river until it reaches the existing boundary line of Ilagan, Mallig, and Magsaysay; following the existing boundary line of Mallig and Ilagan and the boundary line of Magsaysay, and Tumauini up to the point of beginning.” (From the technical description of the proposed municipality of Quirino prepared and submitted by the District Engineer of Isabela).

The municipalities of Ilagan, Roxas and Gamu shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Quirino as delimited above.

The municipality of Quirino shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.