MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 8

FIXING OFFICE HOURS DURING THE HOT SEASON

WHEREAS, section 564 of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended by Republic Act No. 1880, reduces the period of labor in the government service during the hot season to five continuous hours but at the same time leaves the observance thereof to the discretion of heads of departments, bureaus, and offices subject to the requirements of the services; and’

WHEREAS, this Administration is determined to protect the health and welfare of government employees without, however, impairing the interest Of the public at large, especially at this time when we are strengthening the foundations of a sound and efficient public service;

NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the provisions of section 564 of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, the office hours from Monday to Friday of all departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Government, including the provincial, city, and municipal governments and all corporations owned or controlled by the Government, during the period from April 2 to June 15, 1962, both dates inclusive, shall be from seven-thirty o’clock in the morning to twelve-thirty o’clock in the afternoon. The provisions of this Order shall not apply to the offices in the City of Baguio, whether national, provincial, or municipal.

However, in the interest of the service, the heads of departments, bureaus, offices agencies, and instrumentalition of the Government, including the provincial and municipal governments and all corporations owned or controlled by the Government, are enjoined to require at least one-half of their personnel to be on duty in the afternoon.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) AMELITO MUTUC Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1962). Executive Order No. 8 : Fixing office hours during the hot season. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (12), 2325.