MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 80

AUTHORIZING THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL MUSEUM TO ISSUE RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING THE EXPORTATION OF ANTIQUES

WHEREAS, recent archaeological and anthropological findings of the National Museum have focused attention on, and generated interest in, Philippine cultural artifacts and historical relics in and outside the Philippines;

WHEREAS, increasing valuable discoveries have created an equally increasing demand for such objects from foreign collectors;

WHEREAS, it has become apparent that many rare collections of cultural artifacts and historical relics have since found their way out of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, Act No. 3874 expressly prohibits the exportation of the Philippine antiques to conserve the cultural treasures of the Philippines within the country; and

WHEREAS, the National Museum, which is charged with the acquisition and preservation of all objects of archaeological, artistic, or commemorative value which should be preserved in testimony of the national history or culture, has since been placed under the Department of Education;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, by virtue of the powers vested in me, do hereby order:

1. The National Museum shall promulgate rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the Secretary of Education, for the purpose of effecting the objectives of Act No. 3874.

2. The Secretary of Finance, through the Commissioner of Customs, and the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, through the Postmaster General shall require all shippers, exporters, or consignors of commodities, products, or parcels being shipped abroad by means of any common carrier, commercial or government, to declare under oath in the proper shipping documents that the same are not antiques as defined in Act No. 3874 and in the rules and regulations of the National Museum, unless otherwise permitted to be exported by the Director of the National Museum under the said rules and regulations.

3. All the law enforcement agencies of the Government, as well as the various services of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, are enjoined to help prevent any illegal shipment of Philippine antiques and such other culture and historical objects herein contemplated, and to assist the Director of the National Museum in the enforcement of Act No. 3874 and this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 80 : Authorizing the Director of National Museum to issue rules and regulations regarding the exportation of antiques. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (20), 2745-2746.