MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 91

IMPLEMENTING REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED THIRTY-SIX HUNDRED AND ONE, ENTITLED “AN ACT CREATING THE NATIONAL IRRIGATION ADMINISTRATION”

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. The Board of Directors of the National Irrigation Administration (NIA) as composed in Article III, section 4, of Republic Act No. 3601 shall immediately call an executive meeting for the purpose of organizing the National Irrigation Administration and exercise thereafter its powers and duties as defined in said Act.

2. In order to effect a coordinated effort in the development, improvement, maintenance, and operation of all national gravity irrigation systems throughout the country, the Friar Lands irrigation systems now under the administrative control of the Bureau of Lands, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, are hereby transferred to the National Irrigation Administration. This transfer will include all personnel of the Irrigation Unit of the Bureau of Lands, and all unexpended appropriations, and the equipment, records, assets, and liabilities pertaining to the Friar Lands irrigation systems.

3. The Board of Directors of the National Irrigation Administration is hereby authorized to make available such adequate office space as is necessary for all personnel of the National Irrigation Administration for the efficient discharge of its functions.

4. To effectuate an equitable assessment of irrigation fees for all national gravity irrigation systems, whether financed under bond funds floated in accordance with Article II, section 3, of Republic Act 3601, general obligation bond (GOB) funds or general funds appropriated in all Public Works Acts or from any other funds previously made available for the construction of national gravity irrigation projects, the Board of Directors is hereby directed to study and recommend the proper rates of irrigation fees which will include maintenance and operation cost, cost of construction without interest, and insurance, which fees shall be applicable to all national gravity irrigation systems including the Friar Lands irrigation systems irrespective of the sources of government funds used in the construction thereof. Studies and appropriate recommendations shall also be made as to the manner and procedure of collecting these irrigation fees.

5. The Board of Directors is hereby directed to promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the proper administration and management of the National Irrigation Administration, and implementation of Republic Act 3601, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines pursuant to Article III, section 5 ( a ) , of Republic Act 3601.

6. The Auditor General and all other officers concerned are hereby directed to effect the transfer of the personnel, unexpended appropriations, functions, duties, equipment, records, assets, and liabilities of the Irrigation Division of the Bureau of Public Works to the NIA, pursuant to Article VII, section 12, of Republic Act No. 3601, and the personnel and equipment of the Friar Lands irrigation systems as ordained in section 2 of this Executive Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 91 : Implementing Republic Act Numbered Thirty-six hundred and one, entitled “An Act creating the National Irrigation Administration”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (35), 5291-5292.