MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 85

RE-CREATING THE PEACE AND AMELIORATION FUND COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the necessity for intensifying the campaign against dissident activities, the continued existence of rampant smuggling, and other forms of lawlessness prejudicial to the economy require a vigorous and concerted action on the part of the Government and the nation at large;

WHEREAS, the tasks of maintaining peace and order, suppressing smuggling and other economically significant law violations and making the Government responsive to the needs and the best interest and welfare of the people demand the cooperation of every citizen;

WHEREAS, the successful accomplishment of these tasks urgently requires additional funds other than those derived from public revenues for carrying out the purposes hereinafter stated; and

WHEREAS, responsible civic-spirited and patriotic elements of the nation have manifested their readiness to cooperate in these undertakings and to contribute in the campaign to raise funds;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby recreate the Peace and Amelioration Fund Commission which shall be charged with the responsibility of raising funds from voluntary contributions to carry out the purposes of this Order.

Said funds shall be for:

(1) The purchase of loose firearms and such other arms and equipment as can be used to resist the violent elements in accordance with the provisions of Republic Acts Nos. 482 and 486;

(2) Compensation of additional members of the Armed Forces to be employed in the peace campaign against the remaining dissidents and in the anti-smuggling campaign, as well as in the campaign against dynamite fishing, despoliation of natural resources like illegal fishing and land-grabbing and cattle rustling;

(3) Indemnity to the heirs of those who may die or receive injuries in line of duty;

(4) Other relief and assistance to civilians who may be engaged in the aforesaid campaigns;

(5) Aid in the protection of the civilian population in case of emergency;

(6) Payment of cash rewards to civilians or to members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and, in case of their death in action, to their immediate relatives, subject in the latter case to the prior approval of the President of the Philippines, for the surrender, capture, or killing or for the information leading to the capture or killing of leaders of the dissidents and subversive organizations, or for information leading to the apprehension of smugglers and smuggling syndicates and others engaged in the aforesaid offenses, or for other assistance rendered directly in connection with the current peace drive and the campaign against smuggling and the other aforesaid offenses, and for intelligence, counter-intelligence, and psychological warfare expenses of the Department of National Defense and other law-enforcement bodies; and

(7) Payment of expenses in connection with investigation of complaints filed with the Office of the President against the manner the various executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, instrumentalities, and government-owned or controlled corporations are performing the duties entrusted to them by law, or complaints against the acts, conduct, or behavior of any officer or employee thereof.

The amounts collected shall be allotted by authority of the President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the chairman and the treasurer of the Commission and the Commissioner of the Budget. All the contributions and disbursements of the Commission shall be audited by the Auditor General or his representative in accordance with law.

The Commission shall be composed of a chairman, a vice-chairman and treasurer, a member and secretary, and not more than twelve members, all to be chosen by the President of the Philippines.

The Commission is hereby authorized to create local committees to assist in the performance of its functions and to adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Order. It may secure the services of officers and employees of any department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office, or instrumentality of the Government for the accomplishment of its task.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 85 : Re-creating the Peace and Amelioration Fund Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (26), 3723-3724.