MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1186

DECLARING A STATE OF NATIONAL CALAMITY

WHEREAS, Typhoon Nona (international codename: Melor) caused widespread destruction, substantial damage, and deaths in several areas, including the provinces of Albay, Northern Samar, Oriental Mindoro, Romblon and Sorsogon.

WHEREAS, pursuant to Republic Act No. 10121, or the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) has recommended the declaration of a State of National Calamity;

WHEREAS, the declaration of a State of National Calamity will hasten the rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation efforts of the government and the private sector, including any international humanitarian assistance; and

WHEREAS, this declaration will, among others, effectively control the prices of basic goods and commodities for the affected areas and afford the government ample latitude to utilize appropriate funds for rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation efforts of, and to continue to provide basic services to, affected populations, in accordance with law.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, do hereby declare a State of National Calamity.

All departments and other concerned government agencies are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation work in accordance with pertinent operational plans and directives.

All departments and other concerned government agencies are also hereby directed to coordinate with, and provide or augment the basic services and facilities of, affected local government units.

Law enforcement agencies, with support from the Armed Forces of the Philippines, are hereby directed to undertake all necessary measures to ensure peace and order in affected areas, as may be necessary.

The State of National Calamity shall remain in force and effect until lifted by the President.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 18th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Fifteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA JR. Executive Secretary