MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 991

DECLARING 2015 AS VISIT THE PHILIPPINES YEAR

WHEREAS, the Philippine hosting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum in 2015, and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Tourism Forum in 2016, will both serve as a venue to promote the country as a host for Meetings, Conventions, and Exhibitions in the Asia-Pacific;

WHEREAS, there is a need to consolidate the activities and products of the public and private sectors into one Calendar of Events to showcase the outstanding work of Filipinos in Music and Arts, Lifestyle and Entertainment, Sports and Adventure, Business, and History and Culture as well as unveil the many historic treasures, natural wonders, and unforgettable adventures of the country;

WHEREAS, tourism can be used to mobilize resources for enhancing infrastructure and product development, generate employment, and stimulate investments; and

WHEREAS, tourism serves as a platform for closer collaboration between the public and private sectors, and the international community in hosting events that attract international visitors and showcase local talent and skills.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 2015 as Visit the Philippines Year (VPY 2015).

SECTION 1. Public and Private Sector Participation. The following are hereby directed to support the celebration of VPY 2015:

SECTION 2. Support of Government Agencies. All other departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the National Government as well as Local Government Units are likewise enjoined to give full support and cooperation to the Department of Tourism in the exercise of its tasks under this Proclamation.

SECTION 3. Funding. All concerned agencies are authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Proclamation, subject to existing budgetary, accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 30th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Fifteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA JR. Executive Secretary