MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 242

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM 05 SEPTEMBER TO 05 OCTOBER OF EVERY YEAR AS “NATIONAL TEACHERS’ MONTH”

WHEREAS, the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) designated 05 October of every year as “World Teachers’ Day,” which is a day to celebrate the central role that teachers play in guiding the children, youth and adults through the life-long learning process;

WHEREAS, there is a need to generate widespread awareness and support for World Teachers’ Day here in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, it is essential to revitalize the image of teaching as a vocation by increasing public awareness on the value of teachers in Philippine society and national development;

WHEREAS, the occasion can be used to celebrate the unique role and service that teachers play in guiding families, strengthening communities, and building the nation;

WHEREAS, to contribute to the growth and development of the teaching profession in the country as well as to publicly express appreciation to teachers, both active and retired, a Teachers’ Month Campaign (TMC) was conceived in July 2008 by the Metrobank Foundation, Inc. (MBFI), De la Salle Philippines (DSLP), Philippine Business for Education (PBEd), and Campaigns Social Response (CSR), with the special participation of the Department of Education (DepEd) and the support of key business institutions;

WHEREAS, owing to its success, the Campaign has generated more support from government, private companies, and major organizations in 2009 and 2010; and

WHEREAS, Presidential Proclamation No. 41 (s. 2010) declared the first Friday of September to 05 October 2010 as National Teachers’ Month.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from 05 September to 05 October of every year as “National Teachers’ Month.”

In this regard, and as recommended by the TMC Steering Committee, I also endorse the recitation of the National Prayer for Teachers (Annex A) during the same period.

Accordingly, all concerned departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the national government, the various local government units, the private sector and the public at large are hereby enjoined to actively participate and support activities and programs for the celebration thereof.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24 th day of August, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary

ANNEX A

A PRAYER FOR TEACHERS

Giver of All Wisdom and Greatest of all Teachers,

Look upon our teachers with love

Grant them the resolve

To nurture our eager minds

And to never give up on us who fall behind

Bless their hearts

For they rejoice when we succeed

And encourage us when we fail

Endow them with gentle patience

For the path of learning is never easy

Kindle a spirit of passion in them

It is the flame that ignites the love of learning in us

Help them see the potential in each student

Their belief in us means much more than the grade we make

Instill in them a commitment to keep on learning

It shows us to not fear new knowledge and experiences

Inspire them to touch the future

They influence how big a dream we dream for ourselves

Bless our teachers who have come before

For their work endures to this day

Let the light of Your example shine upon all teachers:

To build up with their words

To love with their mind

To share with their heart

Amen.

PANALANGIN PARA SA MGA GURO

Tagapagkaloob ng Lahat ng Kaalaman at Guro ng mga guro

Bigyan po Ninyo ng pagkalinga ang aming mga guro

Biyayaan Ninyo sila ng kahandaang

Linangin ang aming murang isipan

At huwag magsawa kapag ‘di makahabol ang turuan

Pagpalain nawa ang kanilang mga pusong

Nagdiriwang sa tuwing kami’y nagwawagi,

At nag-aalo sa tuwing kami’y nadadaig

Pagkalooban Ninyo sila ng mahinahong pagtitiyaga

Sapagkat ang landas ng kaalaman ay hindi madali

Pagningasin Ninyo sa kanila ang maapoy na diwang

Nagpapaliyab sa kagustuhan naming matuto

Tulungan Ninyo silang makita ang galing sa bawat mag-aaral

Wala sa marka ang halaga kundi sa pananalig nila

Ikintal Ninyo sa kanila ang walang pagkauhaw sa karunungan

At bagong kaalaman at karanasan ay ‘di dapat katakutan

Turuna po Ninyo silang masgilang abutin ang alapaap

Kasinsigla at kasintayog ng sarili naming pangarap

Pagpalain po Ninyo ang mga gurong nauna sa amin

Ang nagawa nila ay napapakinabangan pa rin

Tanglawan po ng Inyong mabuting halimbawa ang kaguruan

Upang makapagtayo sila sa pamamagitan ng kanilang pangungusap

Uapng makapagmahal sila sa pamamagitan ng kanilang isipan

Upang makapagbahagi sila sa pamamagitan ng kanilang puso

Siya nawa