MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 294

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ADVISER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM AND DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, it is evident that there are growing movements to propose reforms in the 1987 Constitution to reflect the changed political, economic and social situation of our country, and thereby frame a fundamental law that could provide our people with an enduring framework within which they could achieve peace, unity, and progress;

WHEREAS, there is need to provide for an office which shall specifically address and attend to these various movements and their proposals for reforms;

WHEREAS, under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation – The office of the Presidential Adviser for constitutional Reform (OPACR) is hereby created under the Office of the President to be headed by the Presidential Adviser for Constitutional Reform (PACR), who shall have the rank and emoluments of a Cabinet Secretary.

SEC. 2. Powers and Functions of the Office of the Presidential Adviser for Constitutional Reform – The PACR shall exercise the following powers and functions:

a. Study and advice the President on matters and concerns relative to changes in and reforms of the 1987 Constitution, including fundamental changes in the political structure of the Government;

b. Conduct consultations and undertake liaisons with the public and private sectors;

c. Recommend to the President policies, strategies, programs and mechanisms conductive to the attainment of the necessary fundamental changes and reforms; and

d. Submit and periodic reports to the President and perform such other functions as the President may direct.

SEC. 3. Organizational Support. – The PACR shall be assisted by a Deputy Presidential Adviser who shall have the rank of an Undersecretary and two (2) Assistant Secretaries. The PACR is hereby authorized to formulate the organization structure of its office and engage the services of consultants as may be necessary, consistent with existing laws.

SEC. 4. Assistance. – The OPACR may call upon any agency of the Government for such assistance as may be necessary in the performance of its functions.

SEC. 5. Funding. – Funding for the initial operations of the OPACR shall be provided by the Office of the President. Succeeding appropriations shall be included in the budget proposal for the Office of the President.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause. – All orders, rules, regulations, and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of March, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Source: CDAsia