MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 382

DESIGNATING THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AS LEAD AGENCY IN THE NATIONWIDE OBSERVANCE OF THE NATIONAL FOOD FORTIFICATION DAY EVERY 7 TH OF NOVEMBER

WHEREAS , micronutrient deficiencies have persisted as a public health problem, affecting a significant proportion of the population, resulting in adverse physical, mental, social and economic consequences to individuals, communities and country;

WHEREAS , food fortification, one of the impact programs of the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition, is the long-term solution and most cost-effective strategy in addressing the micronutrient malnutrition problem which affects the most vulnerable population particularly mothers and young children;

WHEREAS , in 1995 ASIN Law (RA 8172) and in 2000 the Food Fortification Law (RA 8976) mandate the compulsory fortification of salt with iodine and rice with iron, flour with vitamin A and iron, oil with vitamin A, sugar with vitamin A respectively, to ensure a steady supply of the essential micronutrients to the communities;

WHEREAS , the food industry has committed to support the implementation of the said laws by ensuring availability and affordability of fortified food products nationwide;

WHEREAS , food fortification being one of the components of the Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) Act (RA 8980) aimed at enhancing the quality and extent of basic health, nutrition, psychosocial and early education services through institutionalization of a system that is comprehensive and sustainable with multi-sectoral and inter-agency collaboration at all levels;

WHEREAS , under the Local Government Code of 1991 (RA 7160) the local government shall be responsible for the implementation of basic health services including promotion, regulation and monitoring with assistance from the Department of Health and other concerned National Government Agencies.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby designate November 7, 2004 of every year as Food Fortification Day and order the following:

SECTION 1. Lead Agency. The Department of Health, through Secretary of Health, shall lead in the implementation of the National Food Fortification Day on November 7, 2004. As such, he shall be empowered to call upon all agencies of the Government for assistance in the implementation of this Executive Order, including but not limited to the following:

A. Department of Agriculture B. Department of the Interior and Local Government C. Department of Education D. Department of Trade and Industry E. Department of Social Welfare and Development F. Academe, Civil Society and Non-Government Organizations G. Local Government Units through the Council of Leagues (Barangay Captains, Councilors, Mayors, Governors)

As the lead agency, the Department of Health shall formulate and disseminate guidelines and procedures on the implementation of this Executive Order, provide technical assistance to LGUs; conduct national and regional advocacy and social mobilization activities; and provide all the needed logistics and promotional materials in a timely manner and monitor all the activities at the local levels.

Sec. 2. Responsibilities of the Department of Agriculture (DA). The DA, through the Department Secretary, shall issue and disseminate appropriate memorandum circulars to all Directors of DA offices involved in the implementation of RA 8976 and RA 8172 such as the National Food Authority, Philippine Coconut Authority, Sugar Regulatory Administration and National Nutrition Council.

Sec. 3. Responsibilities of the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG). The DILG, through the Department Secretary, shall issue and disseminate memorandum circular to all local chief executives for the efficient and effective nationwide observance of the National Food Fortification Day.

Sec. 4. Responsibilities of the Department of Education (DepEd) . The DepEd, through the Department Secretary, shall issue memorandum circular to all public and private primary and secondary schools to ensure that the teachers and school health officials will assist in the promotion of the National Food Fortification Day among the school population, parents and the community as a whole.

Sec. 5. Responsibilities of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) . The DTI, through the Department Secretary, shall issue memorandum circular to all field offices to ensure availability of affordable fortified staples in the market nationwide.

Sec. 6. Responsibilities of the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD). The DSWD, through the Department Secretary, shall issue memorandum circular to all field offices and day care centers to participate in the promotion and social mobilization to support the National Food Fortification Day in coordination with the LGUs.

Sec. 7. Participation of the Academe, Non-Government Organizations and Civil Society. All non-government organizations, members of the civil society and the academe are encouraged to contribute to the success of the observance of the National Food Fortification Day through promotional campaign, social mobilization and other appropriate means.

Sec 8. Local Government Units through the Council of Leagues (Barangay Captains, Councilors, Mayors, Governors). The Council of Leagues are encouraged to contribute to the success of the observance of the National Food Fortification Day through promotional campaign and mobilization of health personnel to monitor and submit report on the conduct of said event in their areas of jurisdiction.

Sec. 9. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 301-400]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.