MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 195

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE COORDINATION OF PHILIPPINE HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO IRAQ

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a member of the United Nations, has actively contributed to and participated in the various initiatives of the UN Security Council aimed at providing assistance to Iraq as stipulated in UNSC Resolutions 661 (1990), 985 (1995), 1284 (1999), 1472 (2003) and other relevant resolutions;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has contributed significantly to the United Nations initiatives for Iraq as evidenced by the deployment of elements of the Armed Forces for Iraq (UNGCI) for service as a humanitarian assistance protection force, as well as participation in the “Oil for Food” Program for Iraq;

WHEREAS, there is a need to coordinate the Philippine Government’s efforts aimed at contributing to the immediate humanitarian needs to the Iraqi people;

NOW THEREFORE I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force for the Coordination of Philippine Humanitarian Assistance to Iraq.

SECTION 1. Composition. – The Task Force shall be comprised of the following officials (or their duly-designated representatives):

SECTION 2. Role. – It is recognized that international assistance to Iraq will be done in an environment which will undergo three general stages: one, the present action led by the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA); two, the establishment of the interim authority in Iraq; and three, establishment and/or re-establishment of United Nations assistance and related programs in Iraq.

The Task Force shall immediately formulate a consolidated plan of proposed Philippine Assistance for the immediate needs of the Iraqi nation, taking into account the evolving assistance environment. Such assistance shall include:

a. Philippine participation in UN, ORHA and other humanitarian, medical and related activities for Iraq.

b. Other relevant Philippine participation for assistance to Iraq.

The Task Force shall also perform the following functions:

a. Conclusion of arrangements with receiving/host governments whereby the Philippine personnel contingent in Iraq are not put at personal risk from application of local law when deployed abroad upon orders;

b. Conduct of public information, education and communication campaign on the hazards and risk, if any, involved in the sending of peacekeeping/humanitarian missions.

The Task Force shall establish a Technical Working Group to discuss in detail guidelines, programmes and projects to accomplish the abovementioned areas of Philippine participation in humanitarian assistance to post-war Iraq.

SECTION 3. Separability Clause. – If, for any reason, any part of this Order shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, other parts of provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 4. Repealing Clause. – All executive orders, proclamations, memorandum orders or memorandum circulars inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity. – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon its signing.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of April in the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.