MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 647

AUTHORIZING AN EMINENT PERSONS GROUP TO OVERSEE THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF NASUGBU, BATANGAS TOURISM

Section 1. Declaring of Policy . – Consistent with the avowed policy of the State to promote tourism in the country, the sustainable development of Nasugbu, Batangas as a priority tourism destination is hereby declared. To this end the government shall plan, undertake, and cause the implementation of support projects and programs to preserve the attractiveness of Nasugbu, Batangas as a major tourism destination.

Section 2. Creation of a Special Tourism Zone. – Areas included in the Nasugbu Tourism Development Plan prepared by the Municipality of Nasugbu and validated by the Philippine Tourism Authority as Tourism Priority Areas are hereby proclaimed as a Special Tourism Zone.

Section 3. Empowering Eminent Persons to Oversee Nasugbu Tourism Development – To ensure the effective implementation of the above-stated policy, there is hereby recognized the existence of a group of eminent persons concerned with the sustainable development of Nasugbu tourism. From such a group, the President of the Philippines shall designate a Nasugbu Eminent Persons Group, composed of a Chairman and at least four (4) Members, empowered to oversee the sustainable development of Nasugbu tourism in behalf of the President of the Philippines and the Secretary of Tourism.

Section 4. Territorial Scope – The territorial scope of Nasugbu special Tourism Zone shall cover the areas included in the Nasugbu Tourism Development Plan prepared by the Municipality of Nasugbu and validated by the Philippine Tourism Authority.

Section 5. Principal Area of Activity. – The principal area of activity of the Eminent Persons Group shall be in Nasugbu, Batangas

Section 6. Powers. – The Eminent Persons Group shall have the following powers:

Section 7. Private Sector Nature. – So long as the Eminent Persons do not require government funding for their activities, they shall retain theirprivate sector character. If they so request and receive government funding for their activities, they shall acquire the nature of government officials and shall therefore be subject to laws, rules and regulations applicable to government officials.

Section 8. Group Secretary. – the Eminent Persons Group shall have a Group Secretary who shall be a government official to be appointed by the President of the Philippines.

Section 9. Administration and Control of the Philippine Tourism Authority. – The Philippine Tourism Authority, through the Group Secretary of the Eminent Persons Group in coordination with the Municipal Government of Nasugbu, shall exercise administration and control over Nasugbu Special Tourism Zone pursuant to Section 5 (D) of PD 564.

Section 10. Appropriations. – The amount necessary for the compensation and operating expenses of the Group Secretary shall be appropriated out of the funds of the Philippine Tourism Authority.

Section 11. Separability Clause. – If any provision of this Executive Order or the application of such provision is declared unconstitutional or illegal, the remaining provisions shall not be affected by such declaration.

Section 12. Repealing Clause. – All orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 13. Effectivity. – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, 03 August 2007.

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Executive Order Nos. : 601-700]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.