MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 498

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE SENIOR PRESIDENTIAL ADVISER ON ELECTORAL REFORMS

WHEREAS , a credible electoral process is vital to the maintenance of a democratic state and stability of a nation;

WHEREAS , it is important to maintain the sanctity and credibility of the electoral process as well as institution(s) that is/are conferred by the Constitution with the exclusive charge of the enforcement and administration of all laws relevant to the conduct of elections for the purpose of insuring free, orderly, honest, peaceful and credible elections;

WHEREAS , one of the 10-point agenda of this Administration is to automate our electoral process as one of the principal means to achieve national harmony;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1 . Creation and Mandate . – There is hereby created an Office of the Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms, to examine the whole electoral process and system, and make the necessary recommendations to the President towards the establishment of greater efficiency, modernization and credibility of the said electoral system.

SECTION 2. Appointment . – Former Chief Justice Hilario Davide Jr. is hereby appointed as the Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms. In the performance of his functions, he may enlist the assistance of various eminent persons known for their integrity and probity.

SECTION 3. Functions . — The Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms shall have, among others, the following functions:

a) Whenever appropriate, in consultation with the appropriate groups, individuals and sectors involved or conversant with our electoral system, review the said electoral process and make recommendation/s thereon, indicating what may be implemented by the President, or what may be referred to the Commission on Elections, or what may be referred to Congress by way of legislation, or what may be referred to a constituent body by way of Constitutional amendment;

b) Assist the President in searching for worthy appointees to the institution(s) conferred by the Constitution with the charge of the enforcement and administration of laws relevant to the conduct of election; and

c) Perform such other functions as the President may direct

SECTION 4. Technical and Administrative Support . — The Office of the President shall provide technical and administrative support to the Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms in the performance of his functions. For this purpose, the Executive Secretary is hereby authorized to detail any personnel from any government office to assist the Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms.

SECTION 5. Agency Assistance . — The departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities including government owned or controlled corporations are hereby directed to extend such assistance and cooperation as the Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms may need in the discharge of his functions.

SECTION 6. Funds . — The Office of the President shall provide the necessary funds for the operations of the Office of the Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms.

SECTION 7 . Submission of Report . – The Senior Presidential Adviser on Electoral Reforms shall submit his report and recommendations to the President not later than sixty (60) days from the commencement of his work.

SECTION 8 . Effectivity . — This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Executive Order Nos. : 401-500]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.