MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 695

DEVOLVING FULLY BURNHAM PARK TO THE CITY GOVERNMENT OF BAGUIO

WHEREAS, the Philippines has the competitive edge in tourism in the natural wonders of our country and the natural warmth of its people;

WHEREAS, the role of the National Government is to provide the roads to those wonders and the means to take the tourists there rather than to manage resorts;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. (EO) 224, dated February 10, 1995, transferred the administration, maintenance, management and operation of the Burnham Park Reservation from the Philippines Tourism Authority (PTA), to the City Government of Baguio;

WHEREAS, the transfer has been effected since November 1997 by virtue of a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) entered into among the management of Burnham Park has been a financial drain on PTA, Baguio City and the National Parks Development Committee (NPDC);

WHEREAS, by virtue of the MOA the NPDC shall work, facilitate and extend to the employees of Burnham Park casual appointments to replace Job Order appointment.

WHEREAS, under EO 224 the City Government of Baguio cannot encumber, mortgage, or alienate any portion of the Park;

WHEREAS, under EO 224 all revenues and collections generated from the operation of the Park shall accrue to the treasury of the City Government of Baguio and shall be used solely for the management, maintenance, operation and development of the Park;

WHEREAS, under EO 224 the Department of Tourism and the PTA shall continue to provide promotional ; support and technical assistance for the operation and further development of the Park;

WHEREAS, the City Government of Baguio assures that it has the capability and capacity to operate, manage, maintain and further develop Burnham Park;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby order:

SECTION 1. Transfer of Control and Further Development – Aside from administration, maintenance, management and operation as provided by Executive No. (EO) 224, the control and further development of Burnham Park, including all facilities and improvements thereon except those specified in Section 3 of EO 224, are hereby transferred from the Philippine Tourism Authority (PTA) to the City Government of Baguio.

SECTION 2. National Parks Development Committee (NPDC) Employees – The NPDC Employees shall be transferred to the City Government of Baguio, which may rationalize the personnel complement of the resort in accordance with Civil Service rules and regulations.

SECTION 3. Control and Supervision – The City Government of Baguio shall have full control of the administration, operation, management, maintenance and further development of Burnham Park.

SECTION 4. Qualification of Prohibited Act – The City Government of Baguio shall not encumber, mortgage or alienate any portion of the Burnham Park unless approved by the Secretary of Tourism.

SECTION 5. Revenues – All revenues and collections generated from Burnham Park shall accrue to the treasury of the City Government of Baguio and shall first be used for the operation, management and maintenance of the Park. Any net profit not needed for management, operation and maintenance of Burnham Park shall be shared equally by the City and the PTA.

SECTION 6. Promotions and Technical Assistance – The Department of Tourism shall provide the same promotional support and technical assistance for Burnham Park as privately-run tourist facilities.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause – All other executive issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2008). [Executive Order Nos. : 601 – 700]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.