MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 82

CREATING A TASK FORCE FOR THE EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAND ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (PROGRAM)

WHEREAS , the rational administration and management of the country’s land resources are vital to the optimum allocation and utilization thereof as engine of sustainable economic development;

WHEREAS , judicious land management and administration is vital in effectively fighting poverty, promoting economic growth and managing resources in a sustainable manner;

WHEREAS , it is imperative that the efforts of concerned government agencies and instrumentalities be coordinated in order to address efficiently and effectively the problems associated with the management and administration of the country’s land resources.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a Land Administration and Management Program Task Force (Task Force) to ensure the expeditious implementation of the Program, including the Project of the World Bank and Australian Government related to the Program. The Task Force shall be under the Office of the Executive Secretary and shall consist of seven (7) members. Unless modified by the President thru actual designation, the Task Force shall be composed of the following:

SEC 2. The Task Force shall have the following functions and duties:

1. Provide leadership, direction and guidance for the full and speedy implementation of the Program.

2. Elicit close coordination and full support and cooperation of all government agencies and instrumentalities as well as the private sector to ensure the success of the program.

3. Report to the President and the Cabinet on the status of the project and present issues and concerns that need presidential decision and action.

4. Perform such other functions and duties as may be necessary and appropriate to achieve the objectives of the Program.

SEC. 3. Executive Order No. 129, series of 1999, creating the Interagency Coordinating Committee on land administration and management program is hereby repealed. However, the inter-agency coordinating committee secretariat referred to therein, shall provide administrative, technical and secretarial support to the Task Force in the performance of its duties and functions. Moreover, all funds and assets, if any there be, belonging or pertaining to said committee shall be transferred to the Task Force, subject to accounting and auditing regulations. Appropriations for the Task Force for FY 2003 and onwards shall be incorporated in the budget proposals of the Office of the President.

SEC 4. All other orders, circulars and issuances inconsistent herewith are hereby deemed superseded and amended accordingly.

SEC 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13 th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .