MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 247

MANDATING THE SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TO COORDINATE NATIONAL TRANSIT TRANSPORT

WHEREAS, the ASEAN Framework Agreement on the Facilitation of Goods in Transit (“Framework Agreement”) was signed on 16 December 1998 in Hanoi, Vietnam;

WHEREAS, ASEAN member countries have agreed to harmonize and simplify their domestic rules, regulations and administrative procedures relating to transit transport in accordance with the Framework Agreement;

WHEREAS, Article 29.1 of the Framework Agreement provides that a National Transit Transport Coordinating Committee (NTTCC) shall be established in each ASEAN member country for the effective and efficient coordination, monitoring and implementation of the said Framework Agreement.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order :

SECTION 1. The Secretary of Transportation and Communications shall coordinate national transit transport with the following objectives:

a. To provide a consultative forum, on a national-level, for a concerted effort to simplify and harmonize formalities, procedures and documentation used in transit transport in international trade;

b. To propose responsive transit transport and trade-related policies, rules, regulations and practices;

c. To increase public awareness and acceptance of the practices, methods and benefits of transit transport operations in both the public and private sectors.

SEC. 2. In pursuit of said objectives the following shall assist the Secretary:

Assistant Secretary, Office of ASEAN Affairs Department of Foreign Affairs

Undersecretary for Planning Department of Public Works and Highways

Commissioner, Bureau of Customs

Administrator, Maritime Industry Authority

General Manager, Philippine Ports Authority

General Manager, Cebu Ports Authority

Executive Director, Civil Aeronautics Board

General Manager, Manila International Airport Authority

General Manager, Mactan-Cebu International Airport Authority

SEC. 3. The Secretary shall prepare recommendations and provide policy advice and support in the area of transit transport relating to international trade for consideration of the appropriate agencies in the Executive Branch.

SEC. 4. The Secretary shall prepare and issue the implementing rules and regulations of this Executive Order within sixty (60) calendar days from the date hereof.

SEC. 5. All Presidential directives, issuances, order, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed and modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. If any provision of this Executive Order and its Implementing Rules and Regulations in held invalid, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and continue to be in force and effect.

SEC. 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Executive Order Nos. : 201-300]. Manila : Malcañang Records Office.