MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 406

CREATING A SPECIAL TASK FORCE TO ADDRESS THE HUMAN TRAFFICKING PROBLEMS SPECIALLY THOSE INVOLVING FILIPINO ENTERTAINERS IN JAPAN AND VESTING SUCH POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES APPURTENANT THERETO

WHEREAS , the Annual Report of the US State Department cited Japan as a destination for Asian women and children trafficked for forced labor and sexual exploitation;

WHEREAS , the Japanese Diet enacted Law 73 amending its Immigration Control Act to address the problem;

WHEREAS , Japan’s new rules require entertainers to possess two (2) years relevant schooling or two (2) years experience as entertainers outside Japan;

WHEREAS , the new rules will affect thousands of Filipino entertainers and their families, jeopardizing their status, livelihood and economic survival;

WHEREAS , it is imperative that the Philippine Government takes positive actions to help fight the human trafficking problem to protect and safeguard the status of our legitimate Filipino entertainers;

WHEREAS , under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987 and Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1772, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Executive Department for expediency and efficiency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Sec. 1. Creation and Function of a Special Task Force . – There is hereby created a Special Task Force on Human Trafficking concerns to fight human trafficking and for the protection of our Filipino workers in Japan, attached to the Department of Labor and Employment hereinafter referred to as the “Task Force”. Its principal mission is to establish friendly and cordial relations through dialogues with Japanese authorities with respect to the status and welfare of Filipino entertainers in Japan affected by Japan’s new Immigration Policy.

The Task Force shall focus on data gathering, investigation and analysis, and in formulating and developing programs, inputs, and systems to help achieve Philippine-Japan objectives in solving the human trafficking problem.

Sec. 2. The Special Task Force shall be under the supervision of the Secretary of the Department of Labor and Employment with members thereof drawn from the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Department of Justice (DOJ), National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), Bureau of Immigration (BI), and a representative from the Industry to be designated for the purpose.

Sec. 3. Oversight Committee . – There is hereby created an Oversight Committee, chaired by the Secretary of Labor and Employment, to ensure the active participation and cooperation of government agencies and instrumentalities involved in the Human Trafficking Problem. The members of the Committee shall be composed of the following: Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs; Secretary, Department of Justice; Director, National Bureau of Investigation; and Commissioner, Bureau of Immigration.

Sec. 4. Assistance and Cooperation . – In addition to the abovementioned agencies, all other government agencies are hereby directed to actively cooperate with and support the anti-trafficking campaign.

Sec. 5. Funding . – There is hereby appropriated out of the Special Activities fund, the amount of Two Million Pesos for the initial operation of the Task Force.

Sec. 6. Implementation . – This Executive Order shall be self-implementing and no additional rules and regulations shall be necessary to commence implementation.

Sec. 7. Repeal . – All orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Sec. 8. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Executive Order Nos. : 401-500]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.