MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 314

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON VALUES FORMATION (PCVF)

WHEREAS , there exists the Filipino’s strong desire to see the establishment and institutionalization of just and moral governance;

WHEREAS , this Administration has emphasized good governance from the very start as a cornerstone of its program;

WHEREAS , it is imperative that there be a continuing and intensified drive against graft and corruption, patronage politics, apathy, passivity, mendicancy, factionalism and lack of patriotism as a stated purpose and critical lynchpin of the success of this Administration.

WHEREAS , similar efforts by previous administrations to institute moral recovery programs must be further strengthened;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers and authority vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created the Presidential Commission on Values Formation (PCVF). This Commission shall be headed by a Chairperson, with the rank of Presidential Adviser and six (6) Members to be appointed by the President for a term which is co-terminus with that of the President.

SEC. 2. The PCVF shall be under the Office of the President (OP) and shall be subject to its supervision and control.

SEC. 3. The PCVF shall serve as the lead agency by which government may work hand-in-hand with civil society and the private sector in the establishment of a strong foundation for moral value formation in the government bureaucracy.

SEC. 4. The PCVF shall prepare the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of this Order and submit the same to the President for approval. Upon approval thereof, the PCVF shall subsequently proceed to design and implement programs such as but not limited to, seminars and congresses directed to the purpose of inculcating values such as honesty, modesty, integrity and good work ethics in the government bureaucracy.

Sec. 5. The PCVF shall make periodic recommendations to the President with regard to any duly supported and substantiated information on incorrigible and undesirable government personnel. Upon the written approval of the President, the PCVF may appear as complainant in any case filed pursuant to such recommendations before the appropriate government agency.

Sec. 6. The PCVF shall coordinate with and support non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the private sector in the effort to eradicate from the government bureaucracy, every form or manner of graft and corruption, patronage politics, apathy, passivity, mendicancy, factionalism and lack of patriotism and to replace the same with honest public service and love of country.

Sec. 7. The funds to support and implement this Order shall be taken from source as may be identified by the Department of Budget and Management, subject to applicable accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Sec. 8. All previous Executive Orders, other Presidential issuances and rules and regulations which are inconsistent herewith are hereby modified accordingly.

Sec. 9. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 400]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.