MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 897

ALLOWING/PERMITTING THE RECOGNITION OF REGISTERED NURSES’ TRAINING AND PRACTICE AS EQUIVALENT HOSPITAL WORK EXPERIENCE FOR EMPLOYMENT PURPOSES

WHEREAS, employment either local or foreign, require adequate nursing experience for successful engagement;

WHEREAS, in view of the adequate nursing experience being required as a precondition to employment, many nurses are forced to work voluntarily in government and private hospitals as well as related healthcare facilities;

WHEREAS, in view of the aforementioned situations, some hospitals and other healthcare facilities have been requiring and collecting exorbitant fees from nurses for their corresponding training and practice;

WHREAS, such practices are inimical to the general welfare, professional development, and attainment of adequate experience of nurses;

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize such practices in order to protect the welfare of our nurses;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Recognition of Volunteer Training and Practice of Nurses. Pursuant to this Order, it is hereby allowed that the volunteer practice and/or training obtained by nurses in government and private hospitals, as well as other healthcare facilities, may be given due recognition as equivalent hospital work experience.

Section 2. Regulation of Fees – To the extent that the Secretary of Health and the Chairman of the Commission on Higher Education are authorized by law or existing rules and regulations, they shall regulate the training and practice including the collection of certification fees or any other similar fees from nurses in the course of their volunteer practice and/or training including, but not limited to, the prohibition of collection of fees herein mentioned, if circumstances warrant.

Section 3. Issuance of Rules and Regulations. – The Secretary of Health and Chairman of the Commission on Higher Education shall jointly issue the appropriate implementing rules and regulations to effectively carry out the goals and intents of this executive order.

Section 4. Allowance for Transportation and Meals. Pursuant to this Order, the registered nurses may be given transportation and meal allowance by the said government and private hospitals, as well as other healthcare facilities subject to the availability of funds.

Section 5. Issuance of Certificate of Completion of Hospital Work Experience. Upon completion of the volunteer practice and/or training by the registered nurses, the concerned hospital and other related healthcare facilities shall immediately issue the corresponding Certificate of Completion of Hospital Work Experience.

Section 6. Repealing Clause. All orders, proclamations and issuances or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order, are hereby amended, repealed, or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of June in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) LEANDRO R. MENDOZA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2010). [Executive Order Nos. : 831 – 910]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.