MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 301

ESTABLISHING A GREEN PROCUREMENT PROGRAM FOR ALL DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS , the Government recognizes its lead role in protecting the environment and preserving the country’s natural resources;

WHEREAS , the Government also recognizes, as a large consumer bloc in itself, that every product/service purchased has impact on the environment;

WHEREAS , Article 4 Section 27 of Republic Act 9003, otherwise known as “Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000” provides that DTI shall formulate and implement a coding system for packaging materials and products to facilitate waste recycling and reuse;

WHEREAS , there is an urgent need to establish an integrated program of green procurement that will bring about the recognition and rewarding of efforts of the industry sector in producing environmentally-sound products;

WHEREAS , a systematic and comprehensive National Ecolabelling Program is necessary to support a Green Procurement policy not only in all Government offices but with the general public as well.

NOW, THEREFORE, I GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Establishment of a Green Procurement Program in all Government Agencies. All government departments, offices and agencies are hereby ordered to establish their perspective “Green Procurement Program”. The purposes of this program are as follows:

i. To promote the culture of making environmentally- informed decisions in government, especially in the purchases and use of different products.

ii. To include environmental criteria in public tenders, whenever possible and practicable.

iii. To establish the specifications and requirements for products of services to be considered environmentally advantageous.

iv. To develop incentive programs for suppliers of environmentally sound products and services.

SEC. 2. Implementation. All Departments and agencies shall submit their respective green procurement programs to the National Ecolabelling Program Board (ELPB) within 6 months from effectivity hereof. The Program shall target a timetable of full implementation within eighteen (18) months from effectivity of this Order. The ELPB shall in turn submit a regular report to the Office of the President through the President Management Staff, on the performance and compliance of the different agencies with this Order.

SEC. 3. Third-Party Verification. The ELPB shall serve as a competent third-party verifier of claims on the environmental soundness of products and services. The ELPB shall provide a list of all certified environmentally sound products, which list shall be updated regularly to reflect additions or deletions based on criteria to be established by ELPD.

SEC. 4. Funding. Appropriate funding needed to implement the Green Procurement Program of each Department/Agency shall be taken from their respective available funds. By virtue of Republic Act 9003, the Department of Trade and Industry shall ensure allocation of funds for the operations of the Ecolabelling Program of the Philippines.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City Manila, this 29th day of March , in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 400]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.