MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 208

CREATING A PUBLIC-PRIVATE SECTOR TASK FORCE ON THE SECOND GLOBAL FILIPINO NETWORKING CONVENTION IN MANILA IN NOVEMBER, 2003

WHEREAS , the Overseas Filipinos have been called the New Heroes of the Philippines by this administration;

WHEREAS , these overseas Filipinos are continually exposed to new trends, technologies and lifestyles that could be harnessed to contribute enduring economic, social and political structures that would help build a strong Republic;

WHEREAS , realizing the important contributions that could be expected from overseas Filipinos if properly linked and empowered, the First Global Filipino Networking Convention was implemented at the Moscone Center in San Francisco, California on August 31-September 1, 2002 with over 3,000 Filipinos in attendance;

WHEREAS , the first Global Filipino Networking Convention saw a community of Filipinos reaching out in solidarity and oneness of spirit; and further, that future conventions of this nature could be the venue for the organization of an International Federation of Filipino Associations (IFFA);

WHEREAS , the Convention seeks to advocate the importance of networking to promote the concept of Global Filipino being linked with each other across boundaries through SHARING – Sharing knowledge, technology, experiences, and resources to help each other and to help the country;

WHEREAS , the Global Filipino referred here is one who has roots in the Philippines and who resides overseas temporarily or permanently, who is willing to participate in activities that would continually assert his position in the Global marketplace for his benefit and that of his country;

WHEREAS , encouraged by the success of the First Convention, the Convention Committee deemed it crucial to hold the 5-day 2nd Global Filipino Networking Convention in the Philippines at the Philippine International Convention Center (PICC), Manila in November 2003 with a target attendance of 4,000;

WHEREAS , the homecoming of a substantial number of these overseas Filipinos is a positive gain in all areas, contributing to the economy, becoming an immediate boon to the tourism and service industries, opening trade and investment opportunities, providing a venue for crafting economic projects that would help in the alleviation of poverty in the country, as well as in promoting and re-invigorating for the overseas Filipinos and their families in the Philippines;

WHEREAS , the theme of the 2nd Global Filipino Networking Convention is, “A Homecoming: A Renewal, the Blossoming of Opportunities”; and

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the creation of Public-Private Sector Task Force on the 2nd Global Filipino Networking Convention.

SECTION 1. Government Support . – All cabinet secretaries and their departments and all other instrumentalities of government are hereby directed to extend and provide full support towards the planning and successful implementation of the 2nd Global Filipino Networking Convention.

SEC. 2. Composition . – The Task Force shall be composed of the government officials and representatives from the private sector as follows:

SEC. 3. Functions. – The Task Force shall coordinate public and private sector participation in organizing and holding the Global Convention. In particular, it shall develop and implement an action plan to maximize and enhance this participation, including:

3.1. Organizing working groups to take care of security, transportation, accommodation, publicity and promotions, marketing, programs for local government units, merchandising, preparation of convention programs, travel and tour facilitation, hospitality, and protocular arrangements, shipping and participation campaign, among others;

3.2. Mobilizing the private sector participation in all matters that would require the latter’s resources and facilities for the success of the Convention;

3.3. Implementing agreements and contracts, grant incentives and honorarium, subject to applicable laws, rules and regulations;

3.4. Monitoring regularly the progress of the Convention’s preparations to ensure its smooth and successful implementation;

3.5. Reporting to the Office of the President to ascertain, among others, the support and timely coordination of efforts of the government agencies concerned.

SEC. 4. Executive Committee . – An Executive Committee composed of the Task Force Honorary Chair, Chair, Co-Chair and designated Private Sector Representatives is hereby created. The Task Force may authorize the Executive Committee to act on urgent matters on its behalf.

SEC. 5. Existence . – The Task Force shall cease to exist after submitting a final report to the Office of the President at the end of the Convention.

SEC. 6. Separability Clause . – If for any reason, any part or provision of this Order should be held unconstitutional and invalid, other parts or provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 17TH day of MAY, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.