MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 16

CONSTITUTING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE TO MITIGATE THE EFFECTS OF THE EL NIÑO/LA NIÑA PHENOMENON

WHEREAS , the El Niño/La Niña phenomenon may have a grave impact on the peoples’ lives, environment, health, and socio-economic conditions in terms of loss of life, disruption of production, livelihood opportunities, disruption of essential services, and damage to property and national infrastructure;

WHEREAS , the El Niño/La Niña phenomenon has serious adverse impact on agriculture, particularly rice and corn production, which may affect the availability and distribution of food in the country;

WHEREAS , coordinated effort must be undertaken to prepare for the El Niño/La Niña phenomenon to minimize its adverse effects on our people;

WHEREAS , there is a need to constitute a Task Force to enhance inter-agency coordination in the formulation and implementation of measures to mitigate the effects of the El Niño/La Niña, particularly in agriculture.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Constitution of the Presidential Task Force to Mitigate the Effects of the El Niño/La Niña Phenomenon . There is hereby constituted a Presidential Task Force to Mitigate the Effects of the El Niño/La Niña Phenomenon (hereinafter referred to as the “Task Force”). The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 2. Functions of the Task Force . The Task Force shall have the following functions:

a) Formulate a comprehensive disaster preparedness and rehabilitation plan for the El Niño/La Niña phenomenon, to help the public cope with the phenomena and to minimize its disastrous effects;

b) Regularly monitor the implementation of the plan;

c) Conduct a massive information campaign to educate the public on the El Niño/La Niña phenomenon and the needed interventions to reduce its expected adverse impact in the country;

d) Enlist the assistance and support of any government agency on instrumentality as well as civil society in pursuance of its functions and objectives;

e) Identify possible funding sources to implement the activities of the Task Force in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management; and

f) Undertake such other functions as may be necessary to fulfill its objectives.

SEC. 3. Working Committees . The Task Force members shall constitute its members into working committees, each focused on different functional concerns. Such arrangements may focus on:

a) Agriculture, Natural Resources and Water Management b) Early Warning System and Information Campaign c) Energy and Power, Public Works, Transportation and Telecommunication d) Consumer Protection, Social Services, Health and Rescue and Relief

SEC. 4. Administrative Support . The Bureau of Soils and Water Management shall serve as the secretariat to the Task Force, with the assistance of the Office of the Civil Defense.

SEC. 5. Abolition of the Presidential Task Force on La Niña Phenomenon . The Presidential Task Force on the La Niña Phenomenon (constituted pursuant to Administrative Order dated August 19, 1998) is hereby abolished. For this purpose, the Presidential Task Force on the La Niña Phenomenon shall submit a terminal report to the President, through the Executive Secretary, copy furnished the Presidential Management Staff. The personnel and funds of the Secretariat of the Task Force of the La Niña Phenomenon are hereby transferred to the Presidential Task Force on the El Niño/La Niña Phenomenon.

SEC. 6. Assistance from Other Government Entities . All government agencies and local government units are directed to extend full support to the Presidential Task Force on the El Niño/La Niña Phenomenon.

SEC. 7. Reporting Requirements . The Task Force shall submit reports to the President every two weeks through the Executive Secretary, copy furnished the Presidential Management Staff, on the status of its activities.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause . All issuance, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 9. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and one.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RENATO C. CORONA Presidential Chief of Staff

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2001). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.