MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 220

DIRECTING THE ADOPTION OF THE CODE OF GOOD GOVERNANCE FOR THE PROFESSIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 14, Article XII of the Constitution, “the sustained development of a reservoir of national talents consisting of Filipino scientist xxx professionals xxx high-level technical manpower xxx shall be promoted by the State. “; (underscoring supplied)

WHEREAS, good governance is one pillar of a strong republic;

WHEREAS, by virtue of the provisions of Section 5 and 7(a) of Republic Act No. 8981, otherwise known as the PRC Modernization Act of 2000, the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC), hereinafter called the Commission, is empowered to adopt policies, such as professional standards and principles designed to enhance and maintain high professional, technical, and ethical standards in the practice of the professions;

WHEREAS, the adoption of the Code of Good Governance will promote and establish ethical awareness and competency among Filipino professionals to make them accountable to their public liability and fully fulfill their professional obligation to their clients; and

WHEREAS, the Code will empower professionals not only to upgrade or improve their technical and ethical proficiency but also to keep them abreast with modern trends and technology in their respective professions, thereby assuring the highly qualitative and globally-competitive professional services, and secure the safety and protection of the public.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Code of Good Governance for the Professions in the Philippines shall be adopted by all registered professionals.

SEC. 2. The Governance Advisory Council and the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) are hereby directed to undertake measures, including networking with government agencies and civil society, to effectively implement and enforce the Code through the Professional Regulatory Boards (PRBs) under the Commission’s supervision and control.

SEC. 3. The PRC shall, after consultation with and upon recommendation of the various Boards, issue the necessary guidelines and procedures for the enforcement of the Code.

SEC. 4. Repealing Clause. – Any executive issuance, orders or provisions thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are deemed modified or repealed.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of June, in the year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2003). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.