MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 11

CREATION OF AN OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE FOR THE ENTRY OF
A NEW MAJOR PLAYER IN THE PUBLIC TELECOMMUNICATIONS
MARKET

WHEREAS, it is the objective of this Administration to ensure reliable,
inexpensive and secure telecommunications services in the country;

WHEREAS, telecommunications is an essential infrastructure to a country’s
economic development and competitiveness;

WHEREAS, based on the Global Information Technology Report 2016 of the
World Economic Forum, the Philippines has one of the most expensive
telecommunications services in South East Asia, with an affordability level for entry-
level broadband services higher than the threshold set by the United Nations
Broadband Commission;

WHEREAS, the International Telecommunications Union, the specialized
agency of the United Nations for information and communications technologies
(ICT), ranks the Philippines as one of the lowest among the members of the
Association of South East Asian Nations in its |CT Development Index 2017;

WHEREAS, the entry of a new major player in the telecommunications market
is a matter of paramount national interest which shall redound to the benefit of the
public by ensuring genuine competition in the country’s telecommunications industry;

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure that the entry of a new major player in
the telecommunications market shall be undertaken in an integrated and transparent

manner;

WHEREAS, Section 5 of Republic Act (RA) No. 7925 or the “Public
Telecommunications Policy Act of the Philippines’ mandates the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC), as the principal administrator of said law,
to do the following:

a. Adopt an, among others, administrative process which would facilitate the
entry of qualified service providers and adopt a pricing policy which would
generate sufficient returns to encourage them to provide basic
telecommunications services in unserved and underserved areas;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

b. Promote consumers welfare by facilitating access to telecommunications
services whose infrastructure and network must be geared towards the needs
of individual and business users; and

c. Protect consumers against misuse of a telecommunications entity's monopoly
or quasi-monopolistic powers by, but not limited to, the investigation of
complaints and exacting compliance with service standards from such entity;

WHEREAS, under Section 5 of RA No. 10844, otherwise known as the
“Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT). Act of 2015”,
the DICT shall be the primary policy, planning, coordinating, implementing, and
administrative entity of the Executive Branch of the government that will plan,
develop, and promote the national ICT development agenda;

WHEREAS, Section 15 of the same law provides that the NTC shall be an
attached agency of the DICT for policy and program coordination; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution provides for the
President's power of control over executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW THEREFORE, e RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of an Oversight Committee for the Entry of a New
Major Player in the Public Telecommunications Market. An Oversight Committee
for the Entry of a New Major Player in the Public Telecommunications Market
(hereinafter “Oversight Committee”) is hereby created, and shall be composed of
representatives of the following agencies:

a. DICT, as Chairperson;
b. Department of Finance, as Vice-Chairperson;
c. Office of the Executive Secretary; and
d. National Security Adviser.
The DICT shall provide the necessary secretariat support to the Oversight
Committee.
SECTION 2. Powers and Functions of the Oversight Committee. The
Oversight Committee shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Assist NTC in the formulation of the Terms of Reference (TOR) for the
selection and assignment of radio frequencies, pursuant to the DICT
Memorandum Circular No. 001-08, to ensure consistency with the objectives
of this Order;

b. Oversee compliance of the NTC and other implementing agencies with the
provisions of the aforementioned TOR;

c. Ensure timely implementation pursuant to the timeline established by the
DICT and NTC;

d. Call upon other government agencies for assistance as the circumstances
and exigencies may require; and

e. Exercise such incidental powers as may be necessary for the proper exercise
of its powers and functions herein provided.

SECTION 3. Support of Concerned Government Agencies. For the
effective implementation of this Order, all concerned government agencies are
hereby directed to provide the necessary support and assistance to the NTC and the
Oversight Committee by, among others, streamlining and expediting their respective
procedures for the issuance of the permits, licenses and/or certificates necessary for
the rolling out of the plans, facilities and other infrastructure that may be required for
the operation of the new major player, strictly in accordance with the provisions of
RA No. 9485 or the “Anti-Red Tape Act of 2007”.

SECTION 4. Sunset Clause. Except for purposes of winding up its
operations, the Oversight Committee shall be functus officio. within thirty (30)
calendar days from the selection and assignment of the frequencies subject of the
above-mentioned TOR, to a new major player in the public telecommunications
market.

SECTION 5. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected
shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All orders, proclamations, rules, regulations or parts
thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 6th day of April , inthe
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eighteen.

 

By the President:

   
  

————__"y fu . crcstinnne soars OHNE
a ens
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA MALA-AMANG RECORDS OFFICE
Executive Secretary d

CERTIFIED COPY

   

ET aa TT
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 005364

 

i
Lhe oyna,
Litt, concer ff PCFvo
i) DIRECTOR 111 {
_—_—

$e Y-h- 2g - enaicnaiccersacen