MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 29

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES ON THE INTERRUPTION OF PERIODS
FOR THE FILING OF CASES, APPEALS, PETITIONS FOR REVIEW,
AND OTHER PLEADINGS WITH THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF
THE PHILIPPINES DURING THE ENHANCED COMMUNITY
QUARANTINE

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) No. 23 (s. 1992) was issued to prescribe
rules and procedures on the investigation of administrative disciplinary cases against
elective local officials of provinces, highly urbanized cities, independent component
cities, component cities, and cities and municipalities in Metro Manila;

WHEREAS. AO No. 22 (s. 2011) was promulgated to govern appeals and
petitions for review filed with the Office of the President;

WHEREAS, through Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020), the President declared a
State of Calamity throughout the Philippines for a period of six (6) months and imposed
an Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) throughout Luzon due to COVID-19 starting
47 March 2020 until 12 April 2020, unless earlier lifted or extended as circumstances
may warrant; .

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 1 4469 was enacted to authorize the President
to exercise powers necessary and proper to mitigate, if not contain, the transmission of
COVID-19;

WHEREAS, Section 4(z) of RA No. 41469 empowers the President to move
statutory deadlines and timelines for the filing and submission of any document, the
payment of taxes, fees, and other charges required by law, and the grant of any benefit
as a temporary emergency measure to respond to the crisis brought by the pandemic in
order to ease the burden on individuals under Community Quarantine; and

WHEREAS, since the implementation of the ECQ, the mobility of people over
Luzon and even in certain jurisdictions in Visayas and Mindanao has been heavily
restricted, and lawyers, law firms, and postal services have nat been included in the list
of exempted individuals, entities, and services from the ECQ;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Philippines,
by virtue of the powers vested In me by law, do hereby promulgate the following
guidelines to govern the administrative disciplinary cases, appeals to of petitions for
review filed with the Office of the President for the duration of the ECQ, as follows:

SECTION 1. Coverage. These guidelines shall be applicable to all appeals,

petitions for review, and administrative disciplinary cases filed against: (a) governors,
and members of the sangguniang panlalawigan; (b) mayors, vice mayors, and members

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

of the sangguniang panlungsod of highly urbanized cities, independent component
cities, and component cities; (c) mayors, vice mayors, and members of the Sangguniang
panlungsod or bayan, of cities or municipalities in Metro Manila: and (d) all presidential
appointees, and other matters mandated by law, rules and regulations to be filed with
the Office of the President.

SECTION 2. Interruption of the Period to File Pleadings and Render
Judgments. The reglementary periods for the commencement of appeals, petitions for
review, and administrative disciplinary cases, filing of pleadings, appearances, motions,
notices, and all other papers shall be deemed interrupted during the entire duration of
the ECQ until the lifting thereof by the Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of
Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) or the Office of the President.

It is likewise understood that the reglementary periods for the rendition of
judgments, resolutions, and orders shall also be deemed interrupted during said period.

SECTION 3. Suspension of Proceedings. The proceedings scheduled to take
place during the covered period under the ECQ shall be deemed cancelled and shall be
rescheduled upon the lifting of the ECQ by the IATF or the Office of the President.

SECTION 4. Exceptions. The foregoing provisions shall not be applicable to
urgent cases which are necessary to enable the government to act expeditiously on
matters affecting the current public health emergency.

The guidelines set forth herein shall also be without prejudice to any relevant
future directive of the IATF or the Office of the President.

SECTION 5. Retroactive Application. The suspension of the periods shall be
effective beginning 17 March 2020.

SECTION 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 7. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby modified accordingly
for the entire duration of the ECQ.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila this 7th day of April in the Year of Our Lord, Two
Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President: . hy

f&

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary