MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 3%4

DIRECTING STRICT COMPLIANCE BY ALL AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT WITH
TRANSPARENCY, ACCOUNTABILITY AND GOOD GOVERNANCE
POLICIES AND MEASURES IN THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS

WHEREAS, Article I, Sections 27 and 28 of the Constitution declare it a policy of
the State to maintain honesty and integrity in the public service, take positive and effective
measures against graft and corruption, and implement a policy of full public disclosure of
transactions involving public interest;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 or the “Government Procurement Reform
Act,” has instituted measures to ensure transparency in the procurement process and in
the implementation of procurement contracts, as well as accountability of public officials
directly or indirectly involved in the same, and, under warranted circumstances, private
parties that deal with the government;

WHEREAS, Sections 18, 93 and 94 of the General Provisions of RA No. 11465 or
the “General Appropriations Act (GAA) for Fiscal Year (FY) 2020,” require transparency
in the disbursement of public funds through posting of financial and physical reports of
government programs, and reporting on the status of infrastructure projects;

WHEREAS, ensuring a people-centered, clean and efficient governance is one of
the key pillars of the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2017 to 2022, and towards this
goal, the country continuously implements strategies to strengthen public financial
management and accountability; and

WHEREAS, the government is committed to ensure fair, transparent and non-
discriminatory competition for purchases of goods and services, and embraces the
broader purpose of promoting good governance, and the efficient and effective
management of public resources,

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Philippines,
by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby
order:

Section 1. Transparency and Accountability in Procurement. Transparency
and accountability in all government transactions, especially in procurement processes,
shall be observed. To this end, all agencies and instrumentalities of the government shall
strictly comply with the relevant provisions on transparency and accountability in the
procurement process under RA No. 9184 and its Revised Implementing Rules and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Regulations (RIRR), the GAA, resolutions of the Government Procurement Policy Board
(GPPB) and other relevant laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. Transparency Portals. The Philippine Government Electronic
Procurement System (PhilGEPS) shall be the primary source and repository of information
on government procurement. The PhilGEPS shall be user- and mobile-friendly, up-to-
date, and compliant with the requirements for the maintenance of a Transparency Seal
under Section 94 of the GAA for FY 2020 and the corresponding provisions in succeeding
GAAs, as well as the relevant policies on website content and web accessibility prescribed
by the Department of Information and Communications Technology.

Procuring agencies shall use and maintain their official websites and social media
platforms as secondary source of critical procurement information for the public. Agencies
which do not have existing social media platforms are hereby directed to maintain one, for
purposes of complying with this Order.

The PhilGEPS shall allow observers, duly authorized by the concerned Bids and
Awards Committee (BAC), to monitor the procurement proceedings on-line, provided, that
such observers do not have any direct or indirect interest in the contract to be bidded out,
as prescribed in Section 13 of the RIRR of RA No. 9184.

Section 3. Transparency on Infrastructure Projects. Pursuant to Section 93 of
RA No. 11465, all departments, bureaus, agencies and offices of the Executive
department, including government-owned or -controlled corporations and government
financial institutions, and state universities and colleges, shall ensure transparency in the
procurement of infrastructure projects by posting on their official websites and social
media platforms the following information:

a. Project title, location and detailed description; approved budget for the contract;
and winning contractor and the detailed estimates of the bid as awarded, within
thirty (30) calendar days from entering into the contract;

b. Start of construction, target date of completion, completion rate, project status and
the reason/s in case of delay;

c. Source of fund, implementing office, responsible official, contact number and
electronic mail address; and

d. Detailed actual cost of the project, variations issued, if any, within thirty (30)
calendar days from the issuance of a certificate of completion.

Section 4. Post-Contract Award Disclosures. On top of the existing advertising
requirement under RA No. 9184 and its RIRR, RA No. 11465 and other relevant laws,
except contracts with implications on national security, all agencies and instrumentalities
of the Executive department shall publish in their respective official websites and social
media platforms the following post-award information:

Project name;

Approved budget for the contract;

Contract period;

Name of winning bidder and its official business address;

Amount of contract awarded;

Date of award and acceptance; and

Implementing _ office/unit/division/bureau of the concerned agency or
instrumentality.

ampaocp

For contracts involving projects with an approved budget of 50 Million and above,
the foregoing post-award information shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation, in addition to posting the same on the respective official websites and social
media platforms of the agencies concerned.


Section 5. Blacklisting. Pursuant to the Uniform Guidelines for Blacklisting of
Manufacturers, Suppliers, Distributors, Contractors and Consultants, the GPPB shall
prepare the Consolidated Blacklisting Report every quarter, based on the submitted
Blacklisting Orders, and disseminate the same to procuring entities and the Commission
on Audit. The report shall be further posted on the GPPB website, the PhilGEPS and the
official website and social media platform of the procuring entity, and shall indicate the
number of times a person/entity has been blacklisted, the type of offense/violation
committed, the penalty imposed, and the blacklisting agency concerned.

Section 6. Sanctions. Non-compliance with the foregoing directives shall be a
ground for administrative action(s) against the erring public official or employee in
accordance with civil service laws, rules and regulations, and other relevant laws.

Section 7. Funding. The funds necessary for the implementation of the foregoing
directives shall be sourced from the regular appropriations of the agencies or
instrumentalities concerned.

Section 8. Implementing Guidelines. The Department of Budget and
Management, in coordination with the GPPB, shall formulate guidelines, as may be
necessary, for the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 9. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall continue
to be in full force and effect.

Section 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication
in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of October , in the
year of our Lord Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

“

ae
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary ¢(

 

Office of the President /
MALACAHANG RECORDS OFFICE

ED COPY

  

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 3
PRRD 2016 - 015568