eS ARAVA A cS

afd?

PARAS}

 

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 31

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF DUTY ALLOWANCE TO GOVERNMENT
PERSONNEL WHO VOLUNTEER FOR DEPLOYMENT TO THE COVID-19
MEGA SWABBING FACILITIES

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 922 (s. 2020) declared a State of Public Health
Emergency throughout the Philippines due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and enjoined all
government agencies and local government units (LGUs) to render full assistance and
cooperation with each other and mobilize the necessary resources to address the COVID-
19 situation;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020) declared a State of Calamity in the
entire country for a period of six (6) months, and imposed an Enhanced Community
Quarantine (ECQ) over the whole of Luzon beginning 17 March 2020 to 12 April 2020,
which was thereafter extended until 30 April 2020;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 112 (s. 2020) further extended the ECQ in the
National Capital Region (NCR), imposed an ECQ in other high risk geographic areas and
a General Community Quarantine (GCQ) in all other areas in Luzon, Visayas and
Mindanao until 15 May 2020, and authorized the Inter-Agency Task Force for the
Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) to impose, lift or extend a
community quarantine in any province, highly-urbanized city or independent component
city in the country after 15 May 2020;

WHEREAS, as part of the national strategy to manage the current pandemic by
increasing the government's COVID-19 testing capacity, the IATF approved the
establishment and operation of four (4) Mega Swabbing Facilities (MSFs) in the Enderun
Colleges in Taguig City, Philippine Arena in Bulacan, Mall of Asia in Pasay City and
Palacio de Maynila in Manila;

WHEREAS, in response to the call for volunteers, a number of government
personnel have been enlisted to work in the MSFs and other designated COVID-19
swabbing and test results processing facilities, where exposure to health risks is an
occupational hazard; and

WHEREAS, paragraph 4(g[x]) of Congressional Joint Resolution No. 4 (s. 2009)
authorizes the grant of allowances and benefits to employees across agencies under
specific conditions and situations related to the actual performance of work, subject to
prescribed rates, guidelines and regulations, as may be determined by the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM);

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of
the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order.

 

Re

 

&

 

 

Section 1. Grant of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance. National government agencies
(NGAs) and government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) are hereby authorized
to grant their respective volunteer personnel who are deployed for work in the MSFs and
other designated swabbing and test results processing facilities, located in areas under any
form of ECQ or GCQ, a COVID-19 Duty Allowance in an amount not exceeding the sum of
P500 per day plus a maximum of 25% of monthly basic salary (MBS) per person.

The grant of P500 per day per person shall be computed as follows:

P500 x number of days deployed in the designated

swabbing or test results processing facility during the quarantine period
Meanwhile, the maximum of 25% of MBS per person shall be pro-rated based on the

number of days that a government personnel is deployed in the designated facility during

the quarantine period as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

| No. of Days Deployed Percentage of the Incentive
L 3to7 25%

| 8 to 12 50%

13 to 17 75%

| __18 or more Cees 100% J

 

 

 

Personnel who are already entitled to Hazard Pay, including the COVID-19 Hazard
Pay under Administrative Order (AO) No. 26 (s. 2020), Hazardous Duty Pay, Hazard
Allowance, Special Risk Allowance under AO No. 28 (s. 2020), or other similar benefits
under existing laws, issuances, rules and regulations, or any combination thereof, such as
public health workers, public social workers, science and technology personnel and military
and uniformed personnel, shall continue to be entitled to such benefits, or the COVID-19
Duty Allowance, whichever is higher.

The period within which the government personnel shall be required to undergo
mandatory quarantine after their respective deployment to the MSFs or other swabbing or
test results processing facilities, pursuant to approved protocols, shall be on official time.

Section 2. Conditions on the Grant of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance. The heads
of government agencies may grant the COVID-19 Duty Allowance to their volunteer
personnel without need of further approval by the DBM, provided that the following
conditions are met:

a. The personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions, or engaged
through contract of service (COS), job order (JO) or other similar schemes;

b. The personnel have been deployed in the MSFs or other swabbing or test results
processing facilities on the prescribed official working hours by the head of agency
or office during the period of implementation of any form of ECQ or GCQ in the
location of such MSFs or designated swabbing and test results processing facilities;
and

c. The rate of the Duty Allowance shall be based on the number of days an employee
is deployed for work or the requisite training, as certified by the head of the
designated facility or the supervising officer of such work station.

 

against the following sources:

a. For NGAs, the amount required for personnel occupying regular, contractual or
casual positions shall be charged against their available released Personnel
Services (PS) allotments, while the amount required for COS or JO workers shall
be charged against their available released Maintenance and Other Operating
Expenses (MOOE) allotments, without need for prior authority from the DBM,
provided that all authorized mandatory expenses shall have been paid first. Should
an NGA have insufficient PS or MOOE allotments, as the case may be, to cover the
full amount of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance, a lower but uniform rate may be
granted; and

b. For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets for Fiscal Year 2020. Should a GOCC have
insufficient funds to cover the full amount of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance, a lower
but uniform rate may be granted.

Section 4. Guidelines on the Grant of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance. As may
be necessary, the DBM shall issue supplemental guidelines for the effective

Section 3. Fund Sources of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance. The funds needed
for the grant of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance to qualified personnel shall be charged
= implementation of this Order.

Section 5. Retroactivity. The grant of the COVID-19 Duty Allowance shall be
effective from the beginning of operations of MSFs and other designated swabbing and
test results processing facilities.

Section 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 7. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately. following its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 15th day of June jn the Year of Our Lord, Two
Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

rt 8

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

   

|
° {
’ ¥
(CB Wkeeods dibataae Sats aterecs
|

ATTY. CONCEPCION ZENG E. ‘panic

  

lg 6- ee wm —-—dD'ARECTOR IV