MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 26

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF HAZARD PAY TO GOVERNMENT
PERSONNEL WHO PHYSICALLY REPORT FOR WORK DURING
THE PERIOD OF IMPLEMENTATION OF AN ENHANCED

COMMUNITY QUARANTINE RELATIVE TO THE COVID-19
OUTBREAK

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 922 (s. 2020) declared a State of Public Health
Emergency in recognition of the COVID-19 public health event as a threat to national
security, and to prompt a whole-of-government approach in addressing the COVID-
19 outbreak in the country;

WHEREAS, upon the recommendation of the Inter-Agency Task Force for the
Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases in the Philippines (IATF) established
under Executive Order (EO) No. 168 (s. 2014), the President directed the adoption of
stringent social distancing and community quarantine measures and guidelines in
the National Capital Region (NCR), effective 15 March 2020, to contain the spread of
COVID-19;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020) declared a State of Calamity in
the entire country for a period of six (6) months, imposed an Enhanced Community
Quarantine over the entire Luzon effective 17 March 2020 and expiring on 13 April
2020, and enjoined government agencies and LGUs to render full assistance to and
cooperation with each other, and mobilize the necessary resources to undertake
critical, urgent and appropriate disaster response aid and measures in a timely
manner, in light of the COVID-19 situation;

WHEREAS, as part of such social distancing and Enhanced Community
Quarantine measures, the Memorandum from the Executive Secretary dated 16
March 2020 directed the adoption of work from home and skeletal workforce
arrangements in the Executive Branch to ensure the delivery of services to the
public;

WHEREAS, government employees and workers engaged through contract of
service (COS) or job order (JO), whose services are urgently necessary and who
physically report for work during the period of an Enhanced Community Quarantine
are inevitably exposed to health risks and hazards; and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Congressional Joint Resolution No. 4 (s. 2009) authorizes the
grant of Hazard Pay to government personnel exposed to hazardous situations, such
as, but not limited to, disease-infested places, which pose occupational risks or perils
to life;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Grant of the COVID-19 Hazard Pay. National government
agencies (NGAs), including state universities and colleges (SUCs) and government-
owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), are authorized to grant COVID-19
Hazard Pay to personnel who physically report for work during the implementation of
an Enhanced Community Quarantine in their respective work stations, in an amount
not exceeding P500 per day per person, which shall be computed as follows:

. _ number of days physically reporting
CON IS Hazalail ey Ce for work during the quarantine period

Personnel who are already entitled to Hazard Pay, Hazardous Duty Pay,
Hazard Allowance or other similar benefits under existing laws, issuances, rules and
regulations, such as public health workers, public social workers, science and
technology personnel and military and uniformed personnel, shall continue to be
entitled to such benefits or the COVID-19 Hazard Pay, whichever is higher.

SECTION 2. Conditions on the Grant of the COVID-19 Hazard Pay. The
heads of government agencies may grant the COVID-19 Hazard Pay to their
personnel without the need for further approval of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), provided the following conditions are met:

a. The personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions, or are
engaged through COS, JO or other similar schemes;

b. The personnel have been authorized to physically report for work at their
respective offices or work stations on the prescribed official working hours by
the head of agency or office during the period of implementation of Enhanced
Community Quarantine measures in the area of such office or work station;
and

c. The rate of COVID-19 Hazard Pay shall be based on the number of days an
employee physically reports for work using the formula under Section 1
hereof.

SECTION 3. Fund Sources of the COVID-19 Hazard Pay for Employees in
the Executive Branch. The funds needed for the grant of the COVID-19 Hazard
Pay to employees in the Executive Branch shall be charged against the following
sources:

a. For NGAs and SUCs, the amount required for personnel occupying regular,
contractual or casual positions shall be charged against their available
released Personnel Services (PS) allotments, while the amount required for
COS or JO workers shall be charged against their available released
Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) allotments, without
need for prior authority from the DBM, provided that all authorized mandatory
expenses shall have been paid first. Should an NGA or SUC have insufficient
PS or MOOE allotments, as the case may be, to fully cover the COVID-19
Hazard Pay at the rate of ®500 per day per person, a lower but uniform rate
may be granted for all qualified personnel; and

b. For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets (COBs) for Fiscal Year (FY) 2020.
Should a GOCC have insufficient funds to fully cover the COVID-19 Hazard
Pay at P500 per day per person, a lower but uniform rate may be granted for
all qualified personnel.

SECTION 4. COVID-19 Hazard Pay for Employees in the Legislative and
Judicial Branches and Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees
in the Senate, House of Representatives, the Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman
and other independent constitutional bodies vested with fiscal autonomy, who
physically report for work during the quarantine period, and have adopted similar
work arrangements as provided in Section 2(b) of this Order, may likewise be
granted the COVID-19 Hazard Pay not exceeding P500 per day per person,
chargeable against the available released PS allotments of their respective
agencies, subject to the other conditions under Section 2 hereof. Should there be
insufficient funds to fully cover the COVID-19 Hazard Pay at the rate of P500 per day
per person, a lower but uniform rate may be granted for all qualified personnel.

SECTION 5. COVID-19 Hazard Pay for Employees in LGUs. The grant of
the COVID-19 Hazard Pay to employees in LGUs, including those in the barangays,
who physically report for work during the quarantine period, and have adopted
similar work arrangements as provided in Section 2(b) of this Order, shall be
determined by their respective Sanggunians depending on the LGU’s financial
capability, at rates not exceeding P500 per day per person, subject to: (a) the PS
limitation in LGU budgets under Republic Act (RA) No. 7160, and (b) the other
conditions under Section 2 hereof, chargeable against the FY 2020 local government
funds. Should an LGU have insufficient funds to fully cover the COVID-19 Hazard
Pay at the rate of P500 per day per person, a lower but uniform rate may be granted
for all qualified personnel.

SECTION 6. COVID-19 Hazard Pay for Employees in Local Water
Districts (LWDs). LWDs which have adopted similar work arrangements as
provided in Section 2(b) of this Order may also grant the COVID-19 Hazard Pay to
their employees who physically report for work during the quarantine period, at rates
to be determined by their respective Boards of Directors (BOD), but not to exceed
P500 per day per person, chargeable against their respective BOD-approved COBs,
subject to the other conditions under Section 2 hereof. Should an LWD have
insufficient funds to fully cover the COVID-19 Hazard Pay at the rate of P500 per day
per person, a lower but uniform rate may be granted for all qualified personnel.

SECTION 7.

from the Ea raue. Sue 19 Hazard Pay for Employees in Agencies Exempted
GOCCSs exemnter een ePublic Act (RA) No. 6758, as amended. NGAs and
adontca ea €d trom the coverage of RA No. 6758, as amended, which have
asgRnih Bea arrangements as provided in Section 2(b) of this Order may
Nee e ID-1 9 Hazard Pay to their employees who physically report for

rk during the quarantine period at rates to be determined by their respective
governing boards or agency heads, but not to exceed P500 per day per person,
subject to the other conditions under Section 2 hereof. Should there be insufficient
funds to fully cover the COVID-19 Hazard Pay at the rate of P500 per day per
person, a lower but uniform rate may be granted for all qualified personnel.

SECTION 8. Guidelines on the Grant of the COVID-19 Hazard Pay. As

may be necessary, the DBM shall issue supplemental guidelines for the effective
implementation of this Order.

| SECTION 9. Similar Benefit for Health Workers in the Private Sector.
Private hospitals and other health facilities are strongly encouraged to grant a similar
benefit to their health workers and staff exposed to the perils of the COVID-19.

SECTION 10. Retroactive Application. The grant of the COVID-19 Hazard
Pay shall be effective beginning 17 March 2020.

SECTION 11. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 12. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed
or modified accordingly.

SECTION 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila this 23rd day of March inthe Year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

‘w
SALVADOR C. i oa

Executive Secretary

 
 

Office of the Preskient
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 4
PRRD 2016 - 014415