MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 37

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SERVICE RECOGNITION INCENTIVE
TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES FOR FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2020

WHEREAS, under Section (17)(iv) of Congress Joint Resolution (JR) No. 4 dated
17 June 2009, the President, upon recommendation of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), is authorized to update the Compensation and Position
Classification System (CPCS) for civilian personnel and Base Pay Schedule for military
and uniformed personnel, as well as the policies on and levels of allowances, benefits
and incentives applicable to all government personnel;

WHEREAS, the DBM has recommended updating the policies on and levels of
incentives applicable to all government personnel through the grant of a one-time
incentive, to recognize and further encourage the unwavering commitment and
dedication of government employees in performing their work, their continued support
and collaborative efforts in the delivery of services to the public, as well as their diligence
in the effective and efficient performance of their respective functions;

WHEREAS, Section (4)(h) of JR No. 4 authorizes the grant of (a) incentives to
reward an employee's loyalty to government service and contributions to the agency's
continuing viable existence; (b) incentives as rewards for exceeding agency financial and
operational performance targets to motivate employee efforts toward higher productivity;
and (c) other existing benefits to be categorized by the DBM as incentives; and

WHEREAS, government employees deserve to be rewarded for their collective
and unceasing participation in and invaluable contribution to the Administration's
continuing efforts toward the establishment of streamlined government processes and
more responsive delivery of public services, especially in the midst of the public health
emergency caused by the COVID-19 pandemic;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of
the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Service Recognition Incentive for Employees in the Executive
Department. This Order authorizes the grant of a one-time Service Recognition Incentive
(SRI) at a uniform rate not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000.00) for each of the
following personnel in the Executive Department:

a. Civilian personnel in national government agencies (NGAs), including those in

state universities and colleges (SUCs) and government-owned or -controiled
corporations (GOCCs), occupying regular, contractual or casual positions: and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

b. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department of

National Defense, and uniformed. personnel of the Philippine National Police,
Bureau of Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology under
the Department of the Interior and Local Government, the Bureau of Corrections
under the Department of Justice, the Philippine Coast Guard under the
Department of Transportation, and the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority under the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.

SECTION 2. Conditions on the Grant of the SRI. The grant of the SRI shall be

subject to the following conditions:

The civilian personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions;

. The personnel are still in the government service as of 30 November 2020;

The personnel have rendered at least a total or an aggregate of four (4) months
of satisfactory service as of 30 November 2020, inclusive of services rendered
under any of the alternative work arrangements prescribed by the Civil Service
Commission;

. Those who have rendered less than a total or an aggregate of four (4) months of

Satisfactory service as of 30 November 2020 shail be enttitled to a pro-rated share
of the SRI, as follows:

 

 

 

Length of Service Percentage of the Incentive

 

 

 

Less than 1 month 10 %

 

and

The employees have not received any additional year-end benefit in FY 2020 over
and above the benefit authorized under Republic Act (RA) No. 6686, as amended
by RA No. 8441.

SECTION 3. Exclusion from the Grant of the SRI. Those engaged without

employer-employee relationship and whose compensation are funded from non-
Personnel Services (PS) appropriations/budgets are excluded from the grant of the SRi,
such as:

a.

Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific activities
or services with expected outputs;

Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework
basis;

Student workers and apprentices; and

d. Individuals and groups of people whose services are engaged through job orders,
contracts of service or others similarly situated.

SECTION 4. Funding Source of the SRI for Employees in the Executive
Department. The funding source for the grant of the SRI to employees in the Executive
Department shall be governed by the following:

a. For NGAs, including SUCs, and military and uniformed personnel, the amount
required shall be charged against the availabie released Personnel Services (PS)
allotments of the respective agéncies under Republic Act No. 11465 or the "FY
2020 General Appropriations Act (GAA)’;

b. In case of deficiency, the amount required may be charged against the
Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses allotment of the concemed
government agency, subject to the rules on modification of allotments under
Section 70 of the General Provisions of the FY 2020 GAA, and other pertinent
budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

c. For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets (COBs) for FY 2020 only; and

d. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the full amount of
the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the
NGA or GOCC.

SECTION 5. SRI for Employees in the Legislative and Judicial Departments
and Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees in the Senate, House of
Representatives, Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman and Constitutional Offices vested
with fiscal autonomy may likewise be granted a one-time SRI by their respective heads
of offices at a uniform rate not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000) each,
chargeable against the available released allotment of their respective agencies, subject
to the conditions set in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified funding source prove
insufficient to cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid
to all qualified employees of the concerned office.

SECTION 6. SRI for Employees in Local Government Units (LGUs).

a. The grant of the one-time SRI to employees in LGUs, including those in the
barangays, shall be determined by their respective Sanggunians depending on the
LGU's financial capability, subject to the PS limitation in LGU budgets under RA
No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code of 1991,” and the conditions set in
Section 2 hereof, at a uniform rate not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos
(P10,000.00), chargeable against their respective FY 2020 local government
funds. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the full
amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified
employees of the L.GU; and

b. In determining the amount of the SRI, the Sanggunians shall exercise prudence
and judicious use of government funds,: ensuring that the expenditure is
reasonable and will not, in any way, adversely affect the delivery of services to the

public.

SECTION 7. SRI for Employees in Local Water Districts (LWDs). LWDs may
also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined by their Boards
of Directors (BOD), which shall not exceed Ten Thousand Pesos (?10,000.00) each,
chargeable against their respective BOD-approved FY 2020 COBs only, subject to the
conditions set in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient
to cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all
qualified employees of the LWD.

SECTION 8. SRI for Employees in Agencies Exempted from the Coverage of
RA No. 6758, as Amended. NGAs and GOCCs exempted from the coverage of RA No.
6758, as amended, may also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be
determined by their governing boards or agency heads, which shall not exceed Ten
Thousand Pesos (10,000.00) each, chargeable against the NGA’s available funds and
the GOCC’s FY 2020 COB, subject to the conditions set in Section 2 hereof. Should the
identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower
but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the concerned agency.

SECTION 9. Payment Date. The payment of the SRI to all qualified government
employees shall not be earlier than 21 December 2020.

SECTION 10. Supplemental Guidelines. As may be necessary, the DBM shall
issue supplemental guidelines to effectively implement this Order.

SECTION 11. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order is declared
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid
and subsisting.

SECTION 12. Repealing Clause. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed
or modified accordingly.

SECTION 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 18th of December __, in the year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty

   
  
   

By the President:

_

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CePY

  

FX

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary { ATTY, CONCEPCION

|
|
i
}

 

oa
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 016021