MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 18

ACCELERATING RURAL PROGRESS THROUGH ROBUST
DEVELOPMENT OF SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES IN THE
COUNTRYSIDE

WHEREAS, Article II, Section 21 of the Constitution provides, among others,
that the State shall promote comprehensive rural development;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 7916 or the “Special Economic Zone Act of
1995,” as amended by RA No. 8748, declares it a policy of the State to actively
encourage, promote, induce and accelerate a sound and balanced industrial,
economic and social development of the country in order to provide jobs to the people
especially those in the rural areas, increase their productivity and their individual and
family income, and thereby improve the level and quality of their living condition
through the establishment, among others, of special economic zones in suitable and
strategic locations in the country;

WHEREAS, RA No. 7916, as amended, established the legal framework and
mechanisms for the integration, coordination, planning and monitoring of special
economic zones, industrial estates/parks, export processing zones and other
economic zones (ecozones), and created the Philippine Economic Zone Authority
(PEZA) to review proposals for and endorse to the President the establishment of
ecozones;

WHEREAS, the 0+10-Point Socio-Economic Agenda of the Administration
calls for the promotion of rural and value chain development toward increasing
agricultural and rural enterprise productivity and rural tourism, as well as investing in
human capital development through matching skills and training, to meet the demand
of businesses and the private sector;

WHEREAS, there is a need to promote rural development, ensure inclusive
growth in the countryside, and create robust economic activity and wealth generation
in areas outside Metro Manila;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws, do
hereby order:

Section 1. Development and Support for Ecozones in the Countryside. The
Department of Information and Communications Technology, Department of Trade

and Industry, Department of Transportation, Department of Public Works and
Highways, Technical Education and Skills Development Authority, and PEZA are
hereby directed to hasten human capital and infrastructure development, as well as to
provide needed interventions to strengthen ecozones in the countryside, and ensure
the development of backward and forward linkages of industries in and around such
ecozones.

Section 2. Moratorium on the Processing of Applications for Ecozones in
Metro Manila. To complement existing strategies and policies on rural development,
the PEZA shall no longer accept, process oF evaluate applications for the
establishment of ecozones in Metro Manila immediately upon the effectivity of this
Order and until such moratorium is lifted. The herein moratorium shall not prevent
locator companies from commencing their operations on existing ecozones in Metro
Manila.

Section 3. Transitory Provision. An application endorsed by PEZA and
already submitted to the Office of the President (OP) as of the date of effectivity of this
Order shall not be covered by the moratorium under Section 2 in the following
instances:

a. Where such application already pending with OP is found to be without
deficiencies in its supporting documents;

b. Where the OP, even prior to the effectivity of this Order, has already notified
PEZA of deficiencies in the supporting documents, and PEZA satisfactorily
addresses such deficiencies within thirty (30) days from the effectivity date
of this Order;

c. Where the OP, after the effectivity of this Order, notifies PEZA of deficiencies
in the supporting documents, and PEZA satisfactorily addresses the noted
deficiencies within thirty (30) days from receipt of notice of such deficiencies.

The exclusion of an application from the herein moratorium shall not be
construed as a guarantee that the same will be granted.

Section 4. Agency Support. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or
instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or —controlled
corporations, are hereby directed to render the necessary support in the
implementation of this Order.

Section 5. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 6. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed, amended
or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately after its
publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of June

, in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Nineteen.

 

By the President:

nw

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary b

   

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 010937

 

——
Office af the President _
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

3 CERTIFIED COPY

  
  

|
FERROAIIO-ERAD |
| te ome _—dDIRECTOR IV |