MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 40

.

IMPLEMENTING THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORM PROJECT AND
CREATING AN INTERAGENCY GOVERNING BOARD FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, the updated Philippine Development Plan 2017 — 2022 emphasizes the
role of local government units (LGUs) in promoting local investment, social protection, and
delivery of other basic services;

WHEREAS, the National Government has embarked on a series of continuing reforms
to strengthen local governance, improve local resource mobilization, and public financial
management through a programmatic approach;

WHEREAS, the Local Government Reform Project (LGRP), in partnership with the
Asian Development Bank (ADB), aims to boost local government revenue mobilization through
improvements on the administration and management of real property taxes;

WHEREAS, the Project Administration Manual of the LGRP provides guidance on
administrative and financial management requirements to ensure timely implementation of the
Project, within the approved budget, and in accordance with the policies and procedures of
the National Government and the ADB;

WHEREAS, the LGRP has a project horizon of four (4) years with the Bureau of Local
Government Finance of the Department of Finance (DOF) as the Executing Agency, and
several key National Government agencies as implementing partners;

WHEREAS, to ensure the successful implementation of the LGRP, and as part of its
implementing arrangements, there is a need to convene an interagency body that will set the
policy direction of the Project, and ensure proper complementation, cooperation and
coordination of executing and implementing agencies, and relevant stakeholders; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution provides that the President shall
have control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do
hereby order: :

Section 1. Creation. There is hereby created an Interagency Governing Board (IGB),
with the DOF Secretary as Chair and representatives from the following agencies and entities,
as members: :

a. National Economic and Development Authority;
b. Department of Budget and Management;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Department of the Interior and Local Government;

Department of Information and Communications Technology;

Bureau of Internal Revenue;

Bureau of Local Government Finance (BLGF);

One (1) representative each from the Leagues of Provinces, Cities, and
Municipalities;

One (1) representative from a Non-Government Organization, which may be
from a women's organization; and

i. One (1) representative from the Private Sector.

The designated alternate to the DOF Secretary as IGB Chair, shall be the
Undersecretary of the Revenue Operations Group of the DOF. The IGB representatives from
the government sector shall not be lower than an Assistant Secretary or its equivalent, to be
designated by the head of agency, while the representatives from the private sector shall be
appointed by the IGB Chair, upon the endorsement of their respective organizational heads.

z ampao

The IGB shall convene at least twice a year, or as may be necessary upon the call of
the Chair. The DOF-BLGF shall perform secretariat services to the IGB.

Section 2. Function. The IGB shall, to the extent permitted by relevant laws, rules
and regulations, perform the following:

a. provide policy direction and oversight function in the implementation of the LGRP
relative to: (i) property valuation and assessment reform activities; (ii) project strategy
and direction; and (iii) project oversight and coordination,

b. ensure the attainment of the following major outputs of the LGRP within its
implementation timetable: (i) strengthen institutional development and policy support
for property valuation; (ii) implement property tax valuation database and information
systems; (iii) enhance real property taxation of selected LGUs; and (iv)
professionalize local assessors and strengthen capacity of LGUs;

c. review overall project strategy and direction to ensure its continuing relevance, as
well as its alignment with government policies, programs and priorities;

d. promulgate policy guidance on appropriate measures to address consequent issues
and challenges, as may be later identified during project implementation;

e. oversee LGRP activities and monitor compliance of implementing agencies especially
with respect to their commitments and deliverables; and

f. callon other agencies of the government and other stakeholders to extend full support
to the LGRP, including its policy reform agenda.

Section 3. Funding. Expenditures for the conduct of consultative meetings,
workshops and similar activities of the {GB and its implementing partners, necessary for the
effective implementation of the Project, shall be charged against the funding allocations of the
LGRP. This notwithstanding, implementing partners are not precluded from including
allocations for subsequent LGRP-related activities in their annual agency appropriations -
under the General Appropriations Act, subject to the usual budgeting process and accounting
rules and regulations.

Section 4. Dissolution. The IGB shall be deemed dissolved on 34 July 2024, unless
extended by the President. Before the date of its dissolution, the IGB shall publish its
accomplishment report detailing the activities, projects or programs implemented in
accordance with the LGRP’s four (4) major outputs under Section 2(b) of this Order, the budget
utilized, evaluation of the Project and recommendations. A copy of the accomplishment report
shall be submitted to the President through the Office of the Executive Secretary.

Section 5. Separability. Should any part or provision of this Order be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall continue to

be in full force or effect.
Section 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of April , in the year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-One.

 

By the President:

t¢
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary wv

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 017097

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIZUED COPY |