MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 45

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SERVICE RECOGNITION INCENTIVE TO
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES FOR FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2021

WHEREAS, Section (4)(h) of Congress Joint Resolution (JR) No. 4 (s. 2009)
authorizes the grant of (i) incentives to reward an employee's loyalty to government service
and contributions to the agency's continuing viable existence; (ii) incentives as rewards for
exceeding agency financial and operational performance targets to motivate employee
efforts toward higher productivity; and (iii) other existing benefits to be categorized by the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) as incentives;

WHEREAS, Section (17)(iv) of JR No. 4 provides that the President, upon the
recommendation of the DBM, is authorized to update the Compensation and Position
Classification System for civilian personnel and the Base Pay Schedule for military and
uniformed personnel, as well as policies on and levels of allowances, benefits, and
incentives applicable to all government personnel;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) Nos. 19 (s. 2019) and 37 (s. 2020)
authorized the grant of Service Recognition Incentive to government employees for Fiscal
Years 2019 and 2020, respectively, in recognition of their hardwork, commitment and
dedication to public service;

WHEREAS, the government continues to acknowledge all public servants for their
collective and unceasing participation in and invaluable contribution to the establishment
of streamlined government processes and responsive delivery of services to the public,
especially in the midst of the prevailing public health emergency due to the COVID-19
pandemic; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative to provide reasonable incentives and assistance to our
public servants, who are impacted not only by the pandemic, but also by various natural
calamities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of
the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Service Recognition Incentive for Employees in the Executive
Department. This Order authorizes the grant of a one-time Service Recognition Incentive
(SRI) at a uniform rate not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos (10,000.00) for each of the
following personnel in the Executive Department:

a. Civilian personnel in national government agencies (NGAs), including those in
state universities and colleges (SUCs) and government-owned or -controlled

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

corporations (GOCCs), occupying regular, contractual or casual positions; and

. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department

of National Defense, and uniformed personnel of the Philippine National Police,
Bureau of Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology under
the Department of the Interior and Local Government, the Bureau of Corrections
under the Department of Justice, the Philippine Coast Guard under the
Department of Transportation, and the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority under the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.

SECTION 2. Conditions on the Grant of the SRI. The grant of the SRI shall be
subject to the following conditions:

a.

b

Cc

Qa

e.

The civilian personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions;
The personnel are still in the government service as of 30 November 2021;

The personnel have rendered at least a total or an aggregate of four (4) months
of satisfactory service as of 30 November 2021, inclusive of services rendered
under any of the alternative work arrangements prescribed by the Civil Service
Commission;

Those who have rendered less than a total or an aggregate of four (4) months of
satisfactory service as of 30 November 2021 shall be entitled to a pro-rated share
of the SRI, as follows:

 

 

 

Length of Service Percentage of the Incentive
[ Less than 1 month | 10 %

 

and

The employees have not received any additional year-end benefit in FY 2021 over
and above the benefit authorized under Republic Act (RA) No. 6686, as amended
by RA No. 8441.

SECTION 3. Exclusion from the Grant of the SRI. Those engaged without
employer-employee relationship and whose compensation are funded from non-Personnel
Services (PS) appropriations/budgets are excluded from the grant of the SRI, such as:

a.

Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific activities
or services with expected outputs;

. Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework

basis;

Student workers and apprentices; and

 

d. Individuals and groups of people whose services are engaged through job orders,
contracts of service or others similarly situated.

SECTION 4. Funding Source of the SRI for Employees in the Executive
Department. The funding source for the grant of the SRI to employees in the Executive
Department shall be governed by the following:

a. For NGAs, including SUCs, and military and uniformed personnel, the amount
required shall be charged against the available released Personnel Services (PS)
allotments of the respective agencies under RA No. 11518 or the "FY 2021
General Appropriations Act (GAA)’;

In case of deficiency, the amount required may be charged against the
Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses allotment of the concerned
government agency, subject to the rules on modification in allotments under
Section 72 of the General Provisions of the FY 2021 GAA, and other pertinent
budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

b. For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets (COBs) for FY 2021 only; and

c. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the maximum
allowable rate of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified
employees of the NGA or GOCC.

SECTION 5. SRI for Employees in the Legislative and Judicial Departments and
Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees of the Senate, House of
Representatives, Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman and Constitutional Offices vested
with fiscal autonomy may likewise be granted a one-time SRI by their respective heads of
office at a uniform rate not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos (P1 0,000.00) each, chargeable
against the available released allotment of their respective agencies, subject to the
conditions set in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient
to cover the maximum allowable rate of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid
to all qualified employees of the concerned office.

SECTION 6. SRI for Employees in Local Government Units (LGUs).

a. The grant of the one-time SRI to employees in LGUs, including those in the
barangays, shall be determined by their respective sanggunians depending on the
LGU's financial capability, subject to the PS limitation in LGU budgets under RA
No. 7160 or the "Local Government Code of 1991," and the conditions set forth in
Section 2 hereof, at a uniform rate not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos
(? 10,000.00), chargeable against their respective FY 2021 local government funds.
Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the maximum
allowable rate of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified
employees of the LGU; and

b. In determining the amount of the SRI, the sanggunians shall exercise prudence and
judicious use of government funds, ensuring that the expenditure is reasonable and
will not, in any way, adversely affect the delivery of services to the public.

SECTION 7. SRI for Employees in Local Water Districts (LWDs). LWDs may also
grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined by their Boards of
Directors (BOD), which shall not exceed Ten Thousand Pesos (P.10,000.00) each,
chargeable only against their respective BOD-approved FY 2021 COBs, subject to the
conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified funding source prove
insufficient to cover the maximum allowable rate of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount
shall be paid to all qualified employees of the LWD.

®

SECTION 8. SRI for Employees in Agencies Exempted from the Coverage of RA
No. 6758, as Amended. NGAs and GOCCs exempted from the coverage of RA No. 6758,
as amended, may also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined
by their governing boards or agency heads, which shall not exceed Ten Thousand Pesos
(P-10,000.00) each, chargeable against the NGA's available funds and the GOCC's FY
2021 COB, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified
funding source prove insufficient to cover the maximum allowable amount of the SRI, a
lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the concerned agency.

SECTION 9. Payment Date. The payment of the SRI to all qualified government
employees shall not be earlier than 21 December 2021.

SECTION 10. Supplemental Guidelines. As may be necessary, the DBM shall issue
supplemental guidelines to effectively implement this Order.

SECTION 11. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 12. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which, are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SECTION 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24th day of December , in the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-One.

 

By the President:

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary