MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 32

EXPEDITING THE REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS OF
INFRASTRUCTURE FLAGSHIP PROJECTS ON WATER SECURITY

WHEREAS, the State recognizes that investments in adequate infrastructure
are necessary to fulfill the commitment of the Philippines under the Sustainable
Development Goals of ensuring universal and equitable access to safe and affordable
drinking water for all by 2030;

WHEREAS, acceleration of infrastructure development in water resources is
one of the key pillars under the Philippine Development Plan 2017 — 2022;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9485, as amended by RA No.
11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act
of 2018,” declares it a policy of the State to promote integrity, accountability and proper
management of public affairs and public property, as well as to establish effective
practices aimed at the efficient turnaround of the delivery of government services and
the prevention of graft and corruption in government;

WHEREAS, under Sections 5 and 17(f) of RA No. 9485, as amended, the Anti-
Red Tape Authority (ARTA) shall review existing laws, executive issuances and local
ordinances, and recommend the repeal of the same if deemed outdated, redundant,
and adds undue regulatory burden to the transacting public, as well as recommend
policies, processes and systems to improve regulatory management to increase the
productivity, efficiency and effectiveness of business permitting and licensing
agencies;

WHEREAS, persistent low water levels in existing reservoirs especially those
servicing Metro Manila, along with increasing demand and competing use over limited
water supply call for the development of new water resources, and acceleration of
water infrastructure development as an overarching strategy in pursuit of water
security and as an important approach in dealing with the challenges of climate change
through innovative interventions and technologies;

WHEREAS, agency processes and procedures have routinely and excessively
delayed infrastructure flagship projects on water security resulting in increased costs

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

and hampering the delivery of clean, stable, adequate and affordable water to the
detriment of the Filipino people;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the National Government to pursue institutional
reforms such as streamlining processes of concerned agencies to encourage and
guide investments in water supply, sewerage and sanitation, and expedite the
approval and processing of infrastructure flagship projects on water security, while
respecting property rights and protecting public safety and the environment; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VIl of the 1987 Constitution vests in the
President the power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices, as
well as the mandate to ensure faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Infrastructure Flagship Projects on Water Security.
Infrastructure flagship projects on water security refer to the identified water-resource
projects in the list of infrastructure flagship projects approved by the National
Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) as of 17 February 2020, and shall cover
other similar projects that will be approved and identified as such by the National
Government pursuant to relevant laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. Evaluation and Approval Process. All agencies shall give priority
to complete reviews and approvals of infrastructure flagship projects on water security,
strictly within the processing time and deadlines established by law. If a government
office or agency fails to approve or disapprove an original application or request for
issuance of license, clearance, permit, certification or authorization within the
prescribed processing time, where all the required documents have been submitted
and fees paid, and no reason or explanation in writing was provided therefor, the said
application or request shall be deemed approved.

For this purpose, the Presidential Adviser for Flagship Programs and Projects
(PA-FPP) and the NEDA shall directly coordinate with the head of the relevant issuing
agency to establish, in a manner consistent with law, ways to expedite the issuance
of pertinent licenses, clearances, permits, certifications or authorizations, especially
those required under Presidential Decree No. 1586 (s. 1978), Administrative Order
No. 42 (s. 2002) and RA No. 8371 and their implementing rules and regulations.

Section 3. Reports and Sanctions. Consistent with Section 17 of RA No. 9485,
as amended, the ARTA shall monitor and evaluate the compliance of agencies with
the law, specifically with Sections 9(b), 10 and 11 thereof, and issue notices of warning
to erring and/or noncomplying government officials or employees.

Within twenty (20) working days from the submission of complete requirements
and every week thereafter, until appropriate action is undertaken on the application for
the required license, clearance, permit, certification or authorization, the relevant
issuing agency shall submit a written report to the PA-FPP and the NEDA, copy
furnishing the ARTA, regarding the status of the application, as well as issues


encountered and the cause/s for delay or inaction, with advice on the corrective
measures that may be undertaken, as appropriate.

Section 4. Expedited Process and Reengineering Systems and
Procedures. Heads of relevant agencies shall, within the limits prescribed by law,
accelerate the permitting process of all infrastructure flagship projects on water
security and render assistance necessary to support the PA-FPP and the NEDA.

The ARTA shall ensure that local permits and barangay clearances related to
infrastructure flagship projects on water security shall be applied, issued, and obtained
strictly in accordance with the prescribed processing time under RA No. 9485, as
amended.

Without prejudice to Sections 2 and 3 above, and Administrative Order No. 23
(s. 2020), the ARTA, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Order, shall
review and recommend to the Office of the President the repeal of outdated, redundant
and unnecessary licenses, permits, certifications or authorizations being required by
national government agencies and local government units in the processing and
approval of licenses, permits, certifications or authorizations for all infrastructure
flagship projects on water security.

Section 5. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions hereof which are not affected
shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All other issuances inconsistent with this Order are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 26t#ay of August , in the Year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

cs

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDE,

Executive Secretary usiaridins Receaoe OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ATV. CONCEPCIOR ZENE. FERROLIRO-ENAD
3 i r-wis DIRECTOR Ny

    
    

PRRD 2016 - 015224