MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO.4

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO FORMULATE THE
NECESSARY POLICIES, RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE
PURPOSE OF ENSURING THAT THE KEY PROPERTIES, ASSETS
AND OTHER INSURABLE INTERESTS OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE
COMPREHENSIVELY AND ADEQUATELY INSURED

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 656, or the Property Insurance Law,
established a Property Insurance Fund, later renamed as the General Insurance
Fund (GIF) by Presidential Decree (PD) No. 245 (s. 1973), to indemnify or
compensate the Government for any damage to, or loss of, its properties due to fire,
earthquake, storm or other casualty;

WHEREAS, under RA No. 656, the national government agencies and local
government units, except those belonging to municipalities below first class, are
required to insure with the GIF, their properties, assets and other interests against
any insurable risk;

WHEREAS, during the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction in 2015, insuring government properties and assets is regarded as
one of the valuable components of a country’s disaster risk financing strategy that is
vital to improve its resiliency against natural disasters;

WHEREAS, notwithstanding the above-mentioned laws, the Commission on
Audit indicated in its reports that there are still agencies whose properties, assets,
facilities and other insurable interests are currently not insured or substantially
underinsured, thereby not providing them with adequate insurance protection;

WHEREAS, One (1) Billion Pesos have been allocated under the National
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund of the FY 2017 General
Appropriations Act for the insurance coverage of government facilities against
natural calamities, subject to the guidelines to be issued by the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM), Department of Finance (DOF) and the Government
Service Insurance System (GSIS) for the purpose;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, there is a need to prescribe the necessary policies, rules and
regulations to ensure that the key properties, assets and other interests of the
Government, especially the high-risk items, are provided with comprehensive and
adequate insurance coverage;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Committee on Government
Property Insurance. An _ Inter-Agency Committee on Government Property
Insurance is hereby created to formulate the necessary policies, rules and
regulations, which shall ensure that key properties, assets and other insurable
interests of the Government are insured comprehensively and adequately.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

a. DOF - Chairman

b. Office of the Executive Secretary - Co-Chairman

d. Insurance Commission, DOF - Member

e. GSIS - Member

The DOF, through the Bureau of the Treasury, shall provide the necessary
technical and administrative support services to the Inter-Agency Committee.

The Inter-Agency Committee shall likewise consult other government
agencies or instrumentalities and other stakeholders concerned in the formulation of
the necessary policies, rules and regulations on the matter, as may be necessary.

Section 2. Functions of the Inter-Agency Committee. The Inter-Agency
Committee shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate the necessary policies, rules and regulations that shall
ensure that key properties, assets and other insurable interests of the
Government are properly and adequately insured;

b. Develop the appropriate monitoring and reporting mechanisms that
could be adopted to ensure that all key properties, assets, facilities and
other insurable interests of the Government are _ insured
comprehensively and adequately;

Cc. Assess the utilization and management of the GIF presently being
administered by the GSIS;

d. Review and evaluate the existing inventory of all government
properties, assets, facilities and other insurable interests that are
actively insured;

e. Define and determine high-risk key government properties, assets and
other public facilities which should be insured annually; and

te Propose appropriate legislative measures or executive issuances, as
necessary, as regards insuring key government properties, assets,
facilities and other insurable interests.

Section 3. Submission of Terminal Report to the President. The Inter-
Agency Committee shall submit a terminal report to the President within one (1) year
after the Committee has been convened.

The Inter-Agency Committee shall cease to exist after it has submitted its
terminal report to the President.

Thereafter, the DOF shall continue to undertake, as necessary, the vital
activities related to ensuring that all key properties, assets, facilities and other
insurable interests of the Government are comprehensively and adequately insured,
including inventory of key properties and assets of the government, as well as
implementing the monitoring and reporting mechanisms to ensure that government
agencies continue to insure their properties and follow the guidelines prescribed by
the Inter-Agency Committee.

Section 4. Funding. The funds necessary for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against the current appropriation of the members of the Inter-
Agency Committee and other appropriate funding sources, subject to existing
budgeting, accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Separability. Should any part or provision of this Order be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall
continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All orders, rules or regulations, issuances, or any part
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th day of August , in the
Year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Seventeen.

 

By the President:

L Gee
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary AF

 

PRRD 2016 - 003026