MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 38

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF GRATUITY PAY FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2020 TO CONTRACT OF SERVICE AND JOB ORDER
WORKERS IN GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, Section 18, Article Il of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to affirm labor as a primary social economic force, and to promote the welfare of
workers;

WHEREAS, various government agencies have engaged workers under contract
of service (COS) and job order (JO) schemes;

WHEREAS, the Commission on Audit (COA)-Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) Joint Circular (JC) No. 2 (s. 2020) or the “Updated Rules and
Regulations Governing COS and JO Workers in the Government,” prescribes the existing
policies and guidelines on the engagement of services of these workers;

WHEREAS, COS and JO workers in the government are paid salaries/wages
equivalent to the daily salaries/wages of comparable positions in government and a
premium of up to 20% of such salary/wage. However, they do not enjoy benefits accorded
to government employees such as the Personnel Economic Relief Allowance, Mid-Year
and Year-End Bonuses and Performance-Based Bonus among others, considering that
they have no employer-employee relationship with the government:

WHEREAS, granting a year-end Gratuity Pay to COS and JO workers is a well-
deserved recognition of their hard work in implementing programs, projects and activities,
including those which are part of the emergency COVID-19 response efforts of the
government;

WHEREAS, COS and JO workers, together with other government personnel, are
required by their respective agencies to report for work regardless of the varying forms
of community quarantine to ensure the continuous and responsive delivery of
government services;

WHEREAS, COA-DBM JC No. 14 (s. 2020) or the “Interim Guidelines Governing
COS and JO Workers in Government for the Duration of the State of Calamity and
Community Quarantine Due to Corona Virus Disease,” integrates the work schedule of
COS and JO workers in the alternative work arrangements adopted by various
government agencies during the period of implementation of community quarantine;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 20 (s. 2020) authorized the grant of Gratuity
Pay to JO and COS workers in government for fiscal year (FY) 2019; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests the President with
control over all the executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of
the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Grant of Gratuity Pay. Ail workers whose services are engaged ©
through COS and JO, who have rendered a total or an aggregate of at least four (4)
months of actual satisfactory performance of services, as stipulated in their respective
contracts, as of 15 December 2020, and whose contracts are still effective as of same
date, may be granted a one-time Gratuity Pay not exceeding Three Thousand Pesos
(3,000) each. .

s

Those who have rendered less thar! four (4) months of actual satisfactory
performance of service, as stipulated in their-respective contracts, as of 15 December
2020, and whose contracts are still effective as of same date, may also be granted the
one-time Gratuity Pay, on a pro rata basis, as follows:

 

Length of Service a Amount of Gratuity. Pay
3 months or more but less than 4 months | Not exceeding 82,000
2 months or more but less than 3 ménths | Not exceeding P1,500

Less than 2 months ie Not exceeding P1,000

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For purposes of this Order, actual service shall refer to services rendered on-site,
i.e., the COS and JO workers physically report for work at their designated stations.
Subject to the discretion of the Agency Head and the availability of funds, services
rendered by COS and JO workers offsite during the period of community quarantine, i-e.,
work from home arrangement, may also be considered as actual service.

SECTION 2. Coverage. This Order shall cover workers whose services are
engaged through COS and JO by national government agencies (NGAs), state
universities and colleges (SUCs), government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs) and local water districts (LWDs).

SECTION 3. Funding Source. Funds needed to implement this Order shall be
chargeable against the following sources:

a. For NGAs and SUCs, against their respective available Maintenance and Other
Operating Expenses (MOOE) allotment for the same program, activity or project
(P/A/P) where the compensation of workers engaged through COS and JO are
sourced, subject to approval of the Agency Head;

b. In case of deficiency, the agencies may request the DBM for additional funds
charged against their identified savings generated from the entirety of their
respective MOOEs, subject to approval of the President pursuant to pertinent

provisions of Republic Act No. 11465 or the “FY 2020 General Appropriations Act
(GAA),” and existing laws and issuances; and

c. For GOCCs and LWDs, against their. respective approved corporate operating
budgets.

SECTION 4. Use of Savings. Requests for the use of savings under Section 3(a)
hereof shall be submitted by NGAs and SUCs to the DBM not later than five (5) working
days from the effectivity of this Order, for endorsement to the Office of the President. All
such requests shall be supported by the following documents:

a. Report on the number and names of workers engaged through COS and JO
qualified for Gratuity Pay, as certified by the head of the human resource
management unit and endorsed by the Department Secretary or Agency Head
concerned; and

b. Certification from the budget officer that the required amount from the existing ©
MOOE allotment is free from any obligation and may be declared as savings
pursuant to Section 67 of the General Provisions of the FY 2020 GAA, to cover
the funding requirements for the grant of Gratuity Pay, likewise endorsed by the
Department Secretary or AGENSY Head concerned.

The DBM shall release the corssponding Special ‘Allownent Release Order and
Notice of Cash Allocation, as needed, upon approval of the President.

SECTION 5. Grant of Gratuity Pay in Local Government Units (LGUs). LGUs
are encouraged to adopt in their respective offices the grant of Gratuity Pay to workers
whose services are engaged through COS and JO, utilizing appropriate and available
funding sources from their respective local government funds.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations and other issuances or
parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION’S8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of December in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

By the President:

ee
sa.vkoor C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary