MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 10

CENTRALIZING ALL GOVERNMENT EFFORTS FOR THE
REINTEGRATION OF FORMER REBELS AND CREATING FOR
THE PURPOSE AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE

WHEREAS, this Administration is committed to attaining a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace under the rule of law, which is the basic
foundation for economic development and national prosperity;

WHEREAS, the government shall pursue a comprehensive, integrated and
community-based national program that is locally implemented to address the
legal status and security of former rebels, as well as their economic, social and
psychological rehabilitation needs, and provide immediate to long-term
interventions that are supported by strengthened institutions to ensure effective
implementation and attainment of these desired outcomes,

WHEREAS, the National Government has two existing programs for former
rebels, to wit: (a) the Comprehensive Local Integration Program, which seeks to
contribute toward achieving the goal of permanent and peaceful closure of all
armed conflicts with non-state armed groups, and is administered by the
Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG); and (2) the PAyapa at
MAsaganang PamayaNAn (PAMANA) Program which targets community-based
development in conflict-affected areas, and is administered by the Office of the
Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP);

WHEREAS there is a need to -centralize-all government efforts for the
reintegration of former rebels in order to maximize their socio-economic and
political impact by ensuring the effective and efficient implementation thereof, and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution provides for the
President's power of control over executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Enhancement of the Comprehensive Local Integration
Program (CLIP). To attain the aforementioned objectives, the CLIP is hereby
enhanced (hereinafter, “E-CLIP”) by providing a complete package of assistance
to former rebels (FR) who were members of the Communist Party of the

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Philippines (CPP), New People’s Army (NPA), and National Democratic Front
(NDF) as well as their immediate family members, who have surfaced beginning
on the date of the effectivity of this Order and expressed their desire to abandon
armed struggle and become productive members of society. All FRs who surfaced
starting 1 July 2016 shall likewise be provided benefits from the E-CLIP in addition
to the CLIP package that they received.

SECTION 2. Centralizing all Government Efforts for the Reintegration
of FRs. The National Government shall centralize all government efforts to
reintegrate FRs (hereinafter collectively known as “Reintegration Efforts”) by
intensifying the linkage of the E-CLIP with the PAMANA, with due regard to the
individual needs of FRs and their families, as well as the entire community.

For this purpose, an Inter-Agency Task Force for the reintegration of FRs,
to be known as Task Force Balik-Loob, is hereby created, composed of
representatives, with a rank not lower than Undersecretary, from the Department
of National Defense (DND), DILG, OPAPP, Office of the President (OP) and the
National Housing Authority (NHA). The Task Force shall be chaired by the DND
representative, who may _ invite such other government agencies or
instrumentalities to the Task Force, as he may deem necessary.

The Task Force shall be assisted by a Secretariat which shall be composed
of technical staff drawn from the above-stated agencies.

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions of Task Force Balik-Loob. As the
central coordinating body that will supervise the Reintegration Efforts, the Task
Force shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Develop the Strategic Communication (StratCom) Plan and the
Implementing Guidelines governing the Reintegration Efforts;

b. Address implementation issues at the national and local levels;

c. Coordinate with concerned local government units (LGU) to ensure the
effective and timely implementation of the Reintegration Efforts;

d. Provide capability assistance to concerned LGUs;

e. Prepare a coordination, monitoring, evaluating and reporting mechanism
that shall-be-used_by_all-concerned_agencies in checking the status of the
Reintegration Efforts, particularly their responsiveness, effectiveness, and

sustainability;

f. Prepare regular consolidated reports on the implementation of the
Reintegration Efforts to be submitted to the OP;

g. Regularly review and update the StratCom Plan, Implementing Guidelines
and other mechanisms to ensure the responsiveness and effectiveness of
the Reintegration Efforts; and

h. Call upon the assistance and cooperation of all concerned government
agencies for the effective implementation of this Order.

SECTION 4. Convergence of Government Assistance. All relevant
government agencies are hereby directed to extend the following necessary
assistance to the Task Force:

a. Provide the needed materials, equipment, implements, technology, and
other requirements, to FRs through the concerned LGUs, as may be
determined by the Task Force;

b. Mandate their regional or provincial units to support the LGUs in the
implementation of the Reintegration Efforts at the provincial or
city/municipal level;

c. Pursuant to their mandate, include in their respective annual budgets the
funds needed to provide assistance to the Reintegration Efforts, and

d. Enter into agreements necessary to fully implement the provisions of this
Order.

SECTION 5. Funding. Subject to existing budgeting, accounting and
auditing laws, rules and regulations, the amount necessary for the implementation
of this Order shall be charged, whenever applicable, against the existing allocation
for PAMANA and the respective budgets of the concerned agencies, and,
whenever necessary, the Contingent Fund, or other funding source as may be
determined by the Department of Budget and Management.

The succeeding year’s appropriations for the Reintegration Efforts shall be
included in the annual budgets of the concerned agencies, subject to the usual
budget preparation process.

SECTION 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. The members of the
Task Force shall issue rules and regulations for the effective implementation of
this Order within sixty (60) days from its effectivity.

SECTION 7. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, issuances, or any
part thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed,
amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Separability. Should any part or provision of this Order be
held unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions not affected thereby
shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

 

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 3rd dayof April in
the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Eighteen.

By the President:

e

wt
SALVADOR C. wepiape

Executive Secretary

 

PUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 004790