\ Se
a se

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 48

DIRECTING ALL NON-BANK GOVERNMENT ENTITIES TO
FORMULATE INVESTMENT GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORKS FOR
FOREIGN EXCHANGE DERIVATIVES TRANSACTIONS

WHEREAS, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), as central monetary authority,
provides policy directions in the areas of money, banking and credit, and exercises
supervision over the operations of banks, as well as regulatory powers over the
operations of finance companies and non-bank financial institutions;

WHEREAS, in line with continued reforms in banking regulations, especially on
foreign exchanges, the BSP, through Circular No. 1124 (s. 2021), lifted the requirement
of prior Monetary Board (MB) approval for foreign exchange (FX) derivatives transactions
of non-bank government entities to promote ease of use of FX resources, and streamline
procedures and requirements relative to FX transactions;

WHEREAS, derivatives are contracts between two or more parties, which derive
its value on an agreed-upon underlying financial asset, index or security, such as bonds,
commodities, currencies or stocks;

WHEREAS, similar to other investments, and by its nature, derivatives
fundamentally involve the assumption of risks;

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 292 (s. 1987) or the “Administrative Code
of 1987,” the Department of Finance (DOF) is mandated to ensure the efficient
management of the government's financial resources, and serves as its steward of sound
fiscal policies;

WHEREAS, there is a need to institute sufficient monitoring safeguards and risk
management mechanisms in FX derivatives transactions to protect the National
Government's fiscal and economic interests in non-bank government entities;

WHEREAS, the regulation of FX derivatives transactions of non-bank government
entities supports the objective to configure the country’s public sector debt profile, such
that government debt involves extended maturities, and ensures an optimum mix of
currencies, to minimize the impacts of drastic currency movements; and

WHEREAS, Article Vil, Section 17 of the Constitution provides that the President
shall have control of all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of
the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Government Oversight on FX Derivatives Activities of Non-Bank
Government Entities. To ensure efficient and judicious utilization of government
resources, and subject to existing laws, the DOF shall oversee all FX derivatives activities
of all non-bank government entities, including government-owned or -controlled
corporations (GOCC) such as, but not limited to, the Government Service Insurance
System, Social Security System, Home Development Mutual Fund, and Philippine Health

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Insurance Corporation, as well as other government entities not regulated by the BSP
(hereafter, “Covered Entities”).

SECTION 2. Approval of investment Governance Frameworks. All Covered
Entities shail formulate their respective Investment Govemance Frameworks, to be
approved by the Board of Directors or Trustees, or the Head of Agency, as the case may
be, covering, at the minimum, the following areas: (i) risk management; (ii) qualifications
of treasury professionals; (iii) gperations; (iv) controls; and (v) accounting and reporting
procedures. All Investment Governance Frameworks shall be submitted to the DOF for
approval.

The Secretary of Finance may disapprove or defer approval of investment
Govemance Frameworks on the ground of non-compliance with the requirements under
the Implementing Guidelines to be issued under this Order, provided that the Covered
Entity concemed shall be given an adequate opportunity to comply, and/or to address
the concerns relative to its submission.

SECTION 3. Quarterly Reports. Covered Entities shall submit to the DOF at the
end of every quarter, a report on FX derivatives outstanding, a mark-to-market valuation
report, if applicable, and such other reports as may be required under the Implementing
Guidelines to be formulated pursuant to this Order. To evaluate and analyze the impacts
of such FX derivatives transactions on the financial exposure of the goverment, such
reports shall be included in the GOCC’s Liabilities and Processing Tool of the DOF, as
may be appropriate.

SECTION 4. implementing Guidelines. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Order, the Secretary of Finance shall promulgate implementing Guidelines, which
shall include, among others, the content of the Investment Governance Frameworks of
Covered Entities.

SECTION 5. Transitory Provision. Covered Entities that have executed FX
derivatives transactions prior to the issuance of this Order are given forty-five (45) days
from the issuance of the Implementing Guidelines to submit to the DOF their respective
Investment Governance Frameworks, as well as the required reports on FX derivatives
outstanding under Section 3 of this Order.

SECTION 6. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order is declared invalid
or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 7. Repeal. Ail orders, rules, regulations and other issuances or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified
accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 244; day of May , in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

  

. . O'f€e cf the Przsitent
By the President: MALACABANG RECORDS OFFICE
q %
ro

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA,
Executive Secretary

 

PRRD 2016 - 022223