@EnSULon

 

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 44

DIRECTING THE ADOPTION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
NATIONAL COMPETITION POLICY

WHEREAS, Section 19, Article XII of the Constitution provides that the State
shall regulate or prohibit monopolies when the public interest so requires, and that no
combinations in restraint of trade or unfair competition shall be allowed;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 10667 or the “Philippine Competition Act,”
declares it a policy of the State to: (i) promote free and fair competition in trade,
industry and all commercial economic activities; (ii) prevent economic concentration
that unduly stifles competition, as well as those that lessen, manipulate or constrict the
discipline of free markets; and (iii) penalize all forms of anti-competitive behavior for
the purpose of protecting consumer welfare and advancing trade and economic
activity;

WHEREAS, Section 2(a) of RA No. 10667 provides that the State shall
establish a National Competition Policy, to be implemented by the National
Government and all of its political agencies;

WHEREAS, Section 12(0) of RA No. 10667 mandates the Philippine
Competition Commission (PCC) to assist the National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA), in consultation with relevant government agencies and sectors, to
prepare and formulate a National Competition Policy and implement the same;

WHEREAS, on 30 July 2020, the NEDA and PCC issued the National
Competition Policy through NEDA-PCC Joint Memorandum Circular No. 01-2020 (s.

WHEREAS, the National Competition Policy is in accordance with the strategic
outcomes envisioned under the Updated Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022, to
create an enabling and supportive economic environment with a strong and credible
competition policy that will level the playing field and encourage more investments;

WHEREAS, the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic to the economy
require swift and strong government actions to maintain market efficiency and
stimulate economic recovery; and

WHEREAS, an effective National Competition Policy is key in ensuring that
government responses and interventions follow competition principles in order to
address the market failures and distortions that may arise from the COVID-19 crisis;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 1. Adoption and Implementation of the National Competition
Policy (NCP). All national government agencies (NGAs), including departments,
bureaus, offices and instrumentalities, government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs), as well as local government units (LGUs), are directed to adopt and
implement, in accordance with their respective mandates, the NCP and its key
elements, as contained in NEDA-PCC Joint Memorandum Circular No. 01-2020 (s.

All government policies, rules, regulations and interventions shall support the
objectives of the NCP and foster a culture of competition.

For purposes of this Order, the term “GOCC” shall include government
instrumentalities with corporate powers, government financial institutions, and
government corporate entities as defined by RA No. 10149 or the “GOCC Governance
Act of 2011.”

SECTION 2. Integration with Performance-Based Bonus (PBB) and Seal
of Good Local Governance (SGLG). The Inter-Agency Task Force under
Administrative Order No. 25 (s. 2011) on the Harmonization of National Government
Performance, Monitoring, Information and Reporting Systems, in coordination with the
Civil Service Commission and the Career Executive Service Board, and the
Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), as Chairperson of the
Council of Good Local Governance under RA No. 11292 or “The Seal of Good Local
Governance Act of 2019,” are directed to integrate, as far as practicable, the adoption
of and compliance with the NCP and its key elements as part of the good governance
conditions criteria for the grant of PBB to government personnel, and the conferment
of the SGLG on LGUs, respectively. The AO No. 25 Task Force and the DILG shall
prescribe the corresponding conditions for eligibility for said benefits.

SECTION 3. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions which are not affected shall
continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 4. Repeal. All other orders, rules, regulations or issuances
inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of October , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty One.

 

By the President:

ee
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary t

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPP:
PRRD 2016 - 018795