MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 21
DIRECTING THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE MILE LONG PROPERTY

WHEREAS, the Mile Long property is a two (2)-hectare parcel of land located
in the Makati Central Business District registered under the name of the National
Government and administered by the Privatization and Management Office (PMO);

WHEREAS, Article Ill, Section 2 of Executive Order (EO) No. 323 (s. 2000)
empowers the PMO to take title to, possess and conserve assets transferred to it,
and engage external expertise as necessary to fulfill its tasks;

WHEREAS, to enable the National Government to exercise its rights as
owner of the Mile Long property, the PMO was expressly empowered to administer
the Mile Long property on behalf of the National Power Corporation, and perform all
acts necessary to protect the interests of the corporation;

WHEREAS, the PMO has been administering the Mile Long property, and has
taken measures to effectively manage and preserve the said property;

WHEREAS, the Bases Conversion and Development Authority (BCDA) has
been highly successful in developing booming economic centers in partnership with
the private sector, attracting investments, generating jobs and boosting the
economy; and

WHEREAS, the development of the Mile Long property, considering its
location in one of the country’s premiere business districts, will greatly contribute to
the generation of revenues for priority programs of the government, including, among
others, the pension program of military and uniformed personnel;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Development of the Mile Long Property. Subject to limitations
under existing laws, rules and regulations, the PMO shall, on behalf of the National
Government, enter into an appropriate contractual arrangement with the BCDA, to
enable the latter to administer, manage and redevelop the Mile Long property prior to
eventual disposition. The implementation of this provision may be charged against
appropriate funding sources or undertaken through the various modes of public-
private partnership allowed by law.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

The contractual arrangement between PMO and BCDA shall involve the
parcels of land covered by Transfer Certificate of Title (TCT) Nos. (458365) S-77242
issued by the Registry of Deeds of the City of Makati and shall not extend beyond
the boundaries defined in the technical description therein.

Section 2. Use of Proceeds. The Department of Budget and Management is
hereby directed to study, propose and/or take such measures as may be appropriate
so that the proceeds from the development of the Mile Long property shall be used
to fund the priority programs of the Government, including the pension program of
military and uniformed personnel, subject to the budgetary process and applicable
laws, rules and regulations.

Section 3. Technical Working Group (TWG) on the Mile Long property.
There is hereby created a TWG to study and formulate a redevelopment and
privatization plan for the Mile Long property. The TWG shall be composed of
representatives from the following agencies:

Department of Finance

Department of Budget and Management;
Bureau of the Treasury;

Privatization Management Office; and

Bases Conversion and Development Authority.

Section 4. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not affected thereby shall continue to be in
full force and effect.

Section 5. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations inconsistent with this
Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this29tUay of January , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty. :

 

By the President:

ae
SALVADOR C. MEDIAEDEA

Executive Secretary

}

“Office of the Presisie
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

 

ean ag

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 013973 2