Zeneca.

uty
te

cs
CTE ta

A

ae
MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

85;

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 03

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE
RECOVERY, RECONSTRUCTION, AND REHABILITATION OF THE
CITY OF MARAWI AND OTHER AFFECTED LOCALITIES

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 216 (s. 2017) was issued on 23 May 2017
declaring a state of Martial Law and suspending the privilege of the Writ of Habeas
Corpus in the whole of Mindanao for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days;

WHEREAS, following weeks of armed conflict, the City of Marawi sustained
significant damage to its public infrastructure and utilities, as well as private
properties located therein, thereby displacing thousands of its residents,

WHEREAS, the loss of lives and widespread destruction require a unified and
comprehensive effort on the part of the National Government to rehabilitate the City
of Marawi and other affected localities;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and
existing laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force for the Recovery,
Reconstruction, and Rehabilitation of Marawi City. An Inter-Agency Task Force
for the Recovery, Reconstruction, and Rehabilitation of Marawi City, to be known as
Task Force Bangon Marawi, is hereby created to be composed of the following:

Chairperson:
Secretary of National Defense (DND)

Vice-Chairperson:
Secretary of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)

Members:

Chief-of-Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)
Secretary of Education (DepEd)

Secretary of Budget and Management (DBM)

Secretary of Energy (DOE)

Secretary of Health (DOH)

Secretary of Information and Technology (DICT)

Secretary of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)
Secretary of Science and Technology (DOST)

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

x
Secretary of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD)
Secretary of Trade and Industry (DTI)
Secretary of Transportation (DOTr)
Chairperson of the Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA)
Chairperson of the Mindanao Development Authority (MinDA)
Chairperson of the National Electrification Administration (NEA)
General Manager of the National Housing Authority (NHA)
ee of the National Economic and Development Authonty
(NEDA)
Director-General of the Technical Education and Skilis Development
(TESDA)
Secretary of the Office of the Cabinet Secretary (OCS)
Administrator of the Office of Civil Defense (OCD)
Chief of the Philippine National Potice (PN P)}
Representative of the Office of the President

The Chairperson may invite such other government agencies of
instrumentalities to the Task Force as he may Geem necessary

The Secretary of National Defense as head of Task Force Bangon Marawi
shall have operational control and supervision of the said Task Force and the overall
responsibility to ensure that the objectives of this Order are accomplished.

Section 2. Functions of Task Force Bangon Marawi. The Task Force, in
coordination with the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, shall have the
following functions and responsibilities:

a. Organize and deploy a quick response team that will provide for the
immediate needs of displaced and/or adversely affected families;

b. Conduct a post-conflict needs assessment of Marawi City and, based thereon,
develop and implement a Bangon Marawi Comprehensive Rehabilitation and
Recovery Program for the City of Marawi and other affected localities,

c. Facilitate and oversee the construction of temporary and/or permanent
shelters for displaced persons;

d. Coordinate the immediate restoration of public utilities, such as water and
electricity, and the repair and re-construction of public buildings and
infrastructure;

e. Attend to the health, sanitation, food, and other basic needs of affected
residents;

f. eee an environment conducive to the revival of business and livelihood

g. Ensure the restoration and maintenance of peace and order; and

h. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

The Chairperson may call upon and request the assistance of
government agencies, tocal government units, and the private sector, a ad
governmental organizations and civic organizations, to assist in the rehabilitation of
the City of Marawi and other affected areas.

The Chasperson is hereby directed to consult with ‘
rehabilitation of predominantly Mustim localities. Muslim leaders in the

Section 3. Task Force Sub-Commi Task Force
7 ommittees. The members of Ta

Bangon Marawi shall organize themselves into sub-committees, under the
supervision of the Head of the Task Force, as follows:

a. Sub-Committee on Reconstruction - To be headed by the DPWH, shall be
primarily responsible for the immediate repair, rehabilitation and fe-
construction of public schools, national roads and bridges, and government
buildings.

b. Sub-Committee on Housing — To be headed by the OCS. shall be primarily
responsible for the immediate rehabilitation and construction of temporary OF
permanent shelters, and the restoration of water, electricity, and other public
utilities therein,

c. Sub-Committee on Health and Social Welfare — To be co-headed by the
DSWD and DOH, shail be primarily responsible for taking measures to
provide sanitation and health facilities, medical supplies, food, potable water,
and other basic necessities,

c Sub-Committee on Business and Livelihood — To be headed by the DTI,
shall implement an active campaign for the immediate revival of businesses
and livelihood projects in the city; and

d. Sub-Committee on Peace and Order — To be headed by the DILG, shall be
responsible for the restoration and maintenance of peace and order, and the
continuity of public services in the city,

The Task Force may create such other sub-committees as it may deem
necessary for the effective implementaton of this Order.

Section 4. Support of Other Government Agencies. All departments,
bureaus, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities of the government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations, are hereby directed to provide full
support, assistance, and cooperation to Task Force Bangon Marawi.

Section 5. Funding. The resources needed for the implementation of this
Order shall be sourced from available funds of the member agencies of the Task
Force and such other appropriate funding sources as the Department of Budget and
Management may identify, including the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Fund. subject to existing budgeting, accounting and auditing laws.
rules and regulations. ,

Section 6. Reports. Task Force Bangon Marawi shall submit monthly
progress reports, ee bi eurener of this Order to the President, through
the Secretary nal . until such time that the
ells ouny endbecarone fense objectives of the Task

Section 7. Separability. Snould any part or provision of this Order

be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provision fected reby
shal\ continue to be in full force and effect. SE eS a

Section 8. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, issuances or any part
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed, amended,
or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect upon publication in a
newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 28th day of June, in the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By the President: SES
aOR,
eats

i ee as an oy8
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA Lease

Executive Secretary A

   

O
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 002776

  
   

prnaremeeran iment

  

Ori e 10
MALACANANG RECORDS C
NAT Se PAY DHA TED 1 NIE
CENRPISTRD Coa.

 
  

i

1 ATTY, CONCRRCE BRENT © Prawn re NA
eCTOR MI

0 a ee own