MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 25

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 10 (S. 2018), ENTITLED
“CENTRALIZING ALL GOVERNMENT EFFORTS FOR THE
REINTEGRATION OF FORMER REBELS AND CREATING FOR THE
PURPOSE AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE”

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) No. 10 (s. 2018) centralizes all
government efforts for the reintegration of former rebels who were members of the
Communist Party of the Philippines, New People’s Army, and National Democratic Front
through the Enhanced Comprehensive Local Integration Program (E-CLIP);

WHEREAS, there is a need to expand the coverage of the E-CLIP to facilitate the
reintegration to civilian life of other rebels who have similarly chosen to lay down their
arms and become productive and law-abiding members of society;

WHEREAS, Section 17(a) of Republic Act No. 7160 or the “Local Government
Code of 1991,” as amended, provides that local government units (LGUs) shall
discharge the functions and responsibilities of national agencies and offices devolved to
them pursuant to the Code, as well as those necessary, appropriate or incidental to the
efficient and effective provision of basic services such as but not limited to social welfare
services, programs and projects for rebel returnees;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution confers to the President the
power of control over all executive departments, bureaus, and offices, as well as the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws; and

WHEREAS, under Section 4, Article X of the Constitution, the President
exercises general supervision over local governments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Philippines,
by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Amendments to AO No. 10. (a) Section 2 of AO No. 10 is hereby
amended and renumbered as Section 1 to read as follows:

“SECTION 1. Centralizing all Government Efforts for the
Reintegration of Former Rebels (FRs) and Former Violent Extremists
(FVEs). The National Government shall centralize all government efforts
to reintegrate FRs / FVEs (hereinafter collectively known as “Reintegration

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Efforts”) by intensifying the convergence of various government
programs such as the E-CLIP and PAMANA Program, with due regard to

the individual needs of the FRs / FVEs and their families, as well as the
entire community.

For this purpose, an Inter-Agency Task Force for the reintegration
of FRs and FVEs, to be known as the “Task Force Balik-Loob,” is hereby
created composed of representatives, with a rank not lower than an
Undersecretary, from the Department of National Defense (DND),
Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), Department of
Social Welfare and Development, Office of the President (OP), National
Housing Authority, OPAPP, and Office of the Presidential Adviser on
Local Extremist Groups Concerns. The Task Force shall be chaired by
the DND representative, who may invite such other government agencies
or instrumentalities to the meetings of the Task Force, as may be deemed
necessary. The representatives of invited agencies shall have a rank
not lower than an Assistant Secretary or its equivalent.

The Task Force shall organize and designate the heads of two
(2) clusters that shall focus on FRs and FVEs, respectively.

The Task Force shall be assisted by a Secretariat, which shall be
composed of technical and administrative personnel from the member-
agencies of the Task Force under secondment, detail, or other appropriate
arrangement.”

(b) Section 1 of AO No. 10 is hereby amended and renumbered as Section 2 to read as
follows:

“SECTION 2. Coverage. The National Government shall pursue
genuine reintegration of FRs and FVEs by providing a complete
package of assistance specifically tailored to their needs and those
of their respective communities. This package of assistance applies
to:

a. FRs who are former members of the Communist Party of the
Philippines, New People’s Army and National Democratic Front who
have surfaced beginning 01 July 2016, as well as their qualified
beneficiaries; and

b. FVEs who are former members of the Abu Sayaff Group, Maute
Group, and other violent extremist groups, as may be identified by
the Task Force, who have surfaced beginning 01 July 2016, as well
as their qualified beneficiaries.”

(c) Section 3 of AO No. 10 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 3. Mandates. As the central coordinating body that will
supervise the Reintegration Efforts, the Task Force shall have the
following powers and functions:

Design and implement, in coordination with
agencies and the National Task Force to End Local Communist
Armed Conflict, a holistic assistance package or intervention
programs specifically designed to address the needs of FRs and
FVEs, including their family members and communities;

relevant government

b. Review and update the Strategic Communication (StratCom) Plan, as well
as programs, projects or activities of the Reintegration Efforts, ensure

implementation thereof, and monitor legal compliance of
beneficiaries;

, Monitor, evaluate and address implementation issues of the
Reintegration Efforts at the national and local levels, including the

creation of a comprehensive and systematic database accessible to
all concerned agencies;

d. Coordinate and call upon the assistance and cooperation of all
concerned government agencies or instrumentalities, LGUs, and the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, as well as
private or non-government entities, organizations, and groups for the
effective, timely and responsive implementation of the Reintegration
Efforts;

e. Provide capability assistance to concerned LGUs; and

f. Prepare a bi-annual report to be submitted to: (i) the OP, through the
Office of the Executive Secretary, on the implementation of the
Reintegration Efforts, including a validated list of actual beneficiaries
and the type of assistance they received; and (ii) the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM) on the utilization of funds provided
under the E-CLIP.”

(d) Section 5 of AO No. 10 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 5. Funding. Subject to applicable budgeting,
accounting, and auditing laws, rules, and regulations, the amount
necessary for the implementation of this Order shall be charged against
the existing appropriations for the E-CLIP under the General
Appropriations Act, as well as the respective budgets of the concerned
agencies, and such other funding source as may be identified by the DBM.

The succeeding year’s appropriations for the Reintegration Efforts
shall be included in the annual budgets of the concerned agencies,
subject to the usual budget preparation process.”

(e) Anew section is hereby inserted after Section 5 of AO No. 10 to read as follows:

“SECTION 6. Sanctions. Failure to comply with this Order shall
result in the filing of appropriate administrative cases pursuant to

the Civil Service Commission Rul

1e > es on Administrative Cases in the
Civil Service, the Local Governm

ent Code, as amended, and other

prosecute public officials and employees involved in any irregularity
and corruption in implementing the Reintegration Efforts.”

(f) Section 6 of AO No. 10 is hereby amended and renumbered as Section 7 to read as
follows:

“SECTION 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). The
Task Force shall issue the IRR of AO No. 10, as amended, within
sixty (60) working days from the effectivity of this Order. Thereafter,
member-agencies of the Task Force shall issue the necessary

Guidelines to implement the revised IRR within thirty days from its
effectivity.”

(g) Sections 7 (Repeal), 8 (Separability), and 9 (Effectivity) of AO No. 10 are hereby
renumbered as Sections 8, 9 and 10, respectively.

Section 2. Unaffected provisions. Except as expressly modified by this Order,
all other provisions of AO No. 10 shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 3. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, issuances, or any part
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified

accordingly.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th dayof March , in the year

Ryo

of our Lord, Two Thousand Twenty.

 

By the President:

a
qe
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

   
 

      

  

Executive Secretary a Pcie of i ee nee
CERTIFLED COPY
ATTY. CONCEPCION E. FERROLINO-ERAD
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 4 Y 244-ww DIRECTORIV

 

 

PRRD 2016 - 014408