MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERNO, 27

ESTABLISHING A FRAMEWORK FOR THE ACCEPTANCE
MANAGEMENT, DISTRIBUTION AND DELIVERY OF ALL MEDICINES,
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES, AND OTHER HEALTH
PRODUCTS DONATED TO THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT OR THE

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH FOR ADDRESSING THE COVID-19
SITUATION

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 922 (Ss. 2020) declared a State of Public Health
Emergency throughout the country due to COVID-19, and enjoined all government agencies
and local government units (LGUs) to render full assistance and cooperation, and mobilize
the necessary resources to undertake critical, urgent and appropriate responses and
measures to curtail and eliminate the COVID-19 threat:

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11469, or the “Bayanihan to Heal as
One Act,” declared a State of National Emergency over the entire country in view of the
continuing rise of confirmed cases of COVID-19, the serious threat of the pandemic to the
health, safety, security and lives of our countrymen, and the severe disruption of economic
activities;

WHEREAS, Section 4(j) of RA No. 11469 authorized the President, as a temporary
emergency measure, to ensure that the donation, acceptance, and distribution of health
products intended to address the COVID-19 public health emergency are not unnecessarily
delayed, and that health products for donation duly certified by the regulatory agency or
their accredited third countries with established regulations shall automatically be cleaied:

WHEREAS, RA No. 10121 or the “Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Act of 2010," established the Office of Civil Defense (OCD), which has the
primary mission of administering a comprehensive national civil defense and disaster risk
reduction and management program, and is tasked, among others, to create an enabling
environment for substantial and sustainable participation of civil society organizations,
private groups, volunteers, and communities:

WHEREAS, there is an imperative need to properly consolidate and manage all
donations of medicines, medical equipment and supplies, and other health products to
address COVID-19, whether given to the National Government as a whole or to the
Department of Health (DOH) specifically, and assist the latter in the efficient and expeditious
delivery of assistance to the public during the State of National Emergency;

WHEREAS, Section /(c) RA No. 6713 or the “Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards
for Public Officials and Employees,” prohibits public officials and employees from soliciting
or accepting, directly or indirectly, any gift, gratuity or anything of monetary value from any
person in the course of their official duties; and

WHEREAS, the govern

ment :
supplies and other medical recognizes that the outpouring of donations of medical

products, including crucial personal rotectiv
Cc e equi
Verner De ea as food to support health workers in the public ce
“Iv pangemic, are acts that are not intended to gain favors

! or t
influence government action but are acts of altruism and generosity of Filipinos a
government entities, foreign nationals, and foreign governments; | ;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the

Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constituti isti
laws, do hereby order: y Stitution and existing

SECTION 1. Consolidation of donations in the OCD. All donations to the National
Government or the DOH of medicines, medical equipment and supplies, and other health
products intended to address the COVID-19 situation, whether received or accepted from
foreign governments, private entities, non-governmental organizations, or any group or
individual, shall be coordinated with and transmitted to the OCD for consolidation.

Direct donations of the same classes of goods, from any of the same donors, to other
departments, bureaus, offices, state colleges or universities (SUCs), government-owned or
-controlled corporations (GOCCs), or government hospitals or medical facilities shall
continue to be allowed without need of consolidation in the OCD. Such donations, however,
shall be immediately reported by these recipient agencies and instrumentalities to the OCD
in connection with the authority of the latter to allocate assets under Section 2 of this Order.

SECTION 2. Inventory and allocation of donations. The OCD is hereby directed to
prepare an inventory of all the donations to the National Government and to DOH that would
be consolidated under the above section, and to coordinate with the DOH, the Department
of Social Welfare and Development, the Department of Labor and Employment, or any other
relevant agency, as well as the Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging
Infectious Diseases in the Philippines created under Executive Order No. 168 (s. 2014), in
the determination of which health facilities, beneficiary groups or establishments in the
country, public or private, are in need thereof.

The OCD shall similarly keep a record of the direct donations reported by the recipient
agencies and instrumentalities pursuant to the above section, and take the same into
consideration when assessing the need of such recipient agencies for further assistance
from the OCD. Provided that, if deemed necessary to ensure the attainment of the declared
national policy under RA No.11469, and subject to the approval of the Presidential Adviser
on Peace, Reconciliation and Unity pursuant to his oversight powers under Section 4 of this
Order, the OCD may reallocate such direct donations received by the other agencies, to
other health facilities, beneficiary groups or establishments in the country, public or private,
in greater need thereof.

SECTION 3. Distribution and Logistical Support. The Department of National
Defense shall provide the necessary logistical support to the OCD for the immediate
consolidation, distribution, and delivery of the donated medicines, medical equipment and
supplies, and other health products to the identified beneficiary facilities, groups Or

establishments.

SECTION 4. Oversight. The Presidential Adviser on Peace, Reconciliation and Unity,
as the designated Chief Implementer of the country’s declared national policy against
COVID-19, is hereby directed to oversee the abovementioned consolidation, management,


Inventory, recording and distribution of donations, and ensure the efficient and expeditious
distribution of assistance to the public.

SECTION 5. Agency Support. All relevant departments and agencies of the
government are directed to ensure expedited operational procedures for the processing of
importations and entry of foreign donations intended to address the COVID-19 situation, in
accordance with existing laws and regulations.

The Food and Drug Administration, and all other agencies concerned with the
certification and regulation of donated medicines, medical supplies and equipment, and
other health products are directed to adopt expedited procedures for their respective
accreditation or clearance, in accordance with RA No. 11469.

All other departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the National
Government, including SUCs and GOCCs, are hereby directed, and all LGUs are enjoined
2 render all the necessary assistance to the OCD for the effective implementation of this

rder.

| SECTION 6. Reporting. The OCD is hereby directed to render a weekly report to the
Office of the President, through the Executive Secretary, on the actions taken relative to the
Implementation of this Order.

SECTION 7. Direct donations of nominal value. The foregoing provisions do not
apply to direct donations of perishable goods such as food items, and goods of nominal
Value such as accommodation, transportation to and from their residence and workplace,
and other basic necessities for the use and consumption of public officials or employees
who are health workers for purposes of dealing with COVID-19, including those working at
the frontlines in the implementation of the community quarantine and ensuring the flow of
critical goods, within the duration of the present State of Calamity. Such direct donations,
whether solicited or not, shall continue to be allowed.

SECTION 8. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is held unconstitutional
or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

SECTION 9. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations. or other issuances or any part
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 31st day of March in the year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

      

iF te a = et
oo es ‘ ro

i Hae he
eet a8 es fi
We Steere an

   
   

     

By the President:

i

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

   
 

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

      
 

a

|

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 -— 014426