MALACANAN PALACE
h-A
BY THE  PRESIDENT 0F THE PHILIPPINES
ADIvllNISTRATIVE ORDER NO.15
AUTHORIZING  THE  SECRETARY  OF  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE
INTERloR  AND  LOCAL  GOVERNMENT  (DILG)  OR  THE  OFFICER-
lN€HARGE  (OIC)  TO  FILL TEMPORARY VACANCIES  IN  CERTAIN
LOCAL    ELECTIVE    OFFICES    TO    PREVENT    HIATUS    IN    AND
PARALYSIS 0F LOCAL GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
WHEREAS,  Section 46 of Republic Act No.  7160 (RA 7160),  otherwise known
as  the   Local  Government  Code  of  1991,   as  amended,   provides  for  the  rules  of
succession  when  there  is  a  temporary  vacancy  in  the  Office  of  the   Local  Chief
Executive;
WHEREAS]  there  being  a  lack  of provision  in  RA 7160  relative to the filling  of
temporary  vacancies  in  local  elective  positions  outside  those  in  Section  46  of  RA
7160,  jurisprudence   has   recognized   that  the   rules   of  succession   on   permanent
vacancies under Sections 44 and 45 of RA 7160 may apply to temporary vacancies;
WHEREAS,  there are instances when,  despite the application of the modes of
succession  under  RA  7160  or  for  reasons  that the  same  cannot  be  applied,  there
remain  vacant  positions  of  elective  local  officials,  which  vacancies  may  disrupt  the
delivery  of  basic  services  and  may  paralyze  local  government  operations  in  such
areas;
WHEREAS,    to   prevent   hiatus   in   and    paralyzation   of   local   government
operations,  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  provide  rules for the foregoing  exigencies,  in
conformity   with   the   Constitution,   the   Administrative   Code   of   1987,    RA   7160,
jurisprudence,  and other pertinent issuances on the matter;
NOW,    THEREFORE,    I,    RODRIGO    ROA    DUTERTE,    President   of   the
Phmppines,  by  virtue  of  the  powers  vested  in  me  by  the  Constitution  and  existing
laws, do hereby promulgate the following:
SECTION   1.   Temporary   Vacancy   in   the   Office   of   the   Local   Chief
Executive.  When  the  governor,   city  or  municipal  mayor,   or  punong  barangay  is
temporarily Incapacitated  to  perform  his duties for physical  or legal  reasons such as,
but  not  limited  to,  leave  of absence,  travel  abroad,  and  suspension  from  office,  the
vice-governor,   city   or   municipal   vice-mayor,   or  the   highest   ranking   sangguniang
barangay   member,   or,   in   case   of  inability   of  such   officials,   the   highest   ranking
sanggunian   member  or,   in  the  case  of  a  barangay,  the  second   highest  ranking
sangguniang    barangay   member,    shall   automatically   exercise   the   powers   and
perform  the  duties  and  functions  of the  local  chief  executive  concerned,  except the
power to appoint,  suspend,  or dismiss employees which can only be exercised  if the
period of temporary incapacity exceeds thirty (30) working days.
THE PRESIDENT OF TIH PIELIPPINES

For purposes of succession,  ranking  in the sanggunian shall be determined on
the  basis  of the  proportion  of votes  obtained  by  each  winning  candidate to the total
number   of  registered   voters   in   each   district   in   the   immediately   preceding   local
election.
SECTION 2. Temporary Vacancies in the Offices of the Vice-Governor or
Vice-lvlayor.  When  the  vice-governor  or  vice-mayor  is  temporarily  incapacitated  to
perform  his  duties  for  physical  or  legal  reasons  such  as,  but  not  limited  to,  leave  of
absence,  travel  abroad,  and  suspension from  office,  the  highest ranking  sanggunian
member or,  in  case of his  inability,  the second  highest ranking  sanggunian  member,
shall  be  designated  by  the  President,  through  the  Secretary  of the  DILG  (SILG)  or
the Olc-DILG.
SECTION   3.  Temporary  Vacancies   in   the  Sanggunian.   (A)  Temporary
vacancies in the sangguniang  panlalawigan,  sangguniang  panlungsod,  sangguniang
bayan,  and  sangguniang  barangay  shall  be  fHled  by  designation  by  the  President,
through the SILG or the Olc-DILG,
(a)        Except for the sangguniang  barangay,  only the  nominee of the  political
party under which the sanggunian member concerned  had  been elected and whose
elevation   to   the   position   next   higher   in   rank   created   the   last   vacancy   in   the
sanggunian  shall  be designated  in the manner hereinabove provided.  The person so
designated   shall   come  from   the  same  political   party  as  that  of  the  sanggunian
member who  caused  the  temporary  vacancy  and  shall  serve for the  duration  of the
temporarily vacant office.
(C)       ln  case  the  temporary  vacancy  is  caused  by  a  sanggunian  member
who  does  not  belong  to  any  political  party,  the  President,  through  the  SILG  or the
Olc-DILG,    shall,    upon   recommendation    of   the   sanggunian    concerned,    if   still
constituting a quorum, designate a qualified  person to fill the vacancy.
(D)        ln  case  of temporary vacancies  in  the  representation  of the  youth  and
the  barangays  in the  sanggunian,  said  vacancy shall  be filled  by  designation  by the
President,   through  the  SILG  or  the  Olc-DILG,   of  the  official   next  in  rank  of  the
organization concerned.
(E)        ln   case   of  temporary  vacancies   in  the   sangguniang   barangay,   the
President,  through  the  SILG  or  the  Olc-DILG,  shall,  upon  recommendation  of  the
sangguniang  barangay,  if still  constituting  a quorum,  designate  a  qualified  person to
fill the vacancy.
SECTION  4.  Otlier Temporary Vacancies.  In  local  government  units  (LGU)
where,  despite the  application  of the  modes  of succession  as  provided  in  the above
sections  or  for  reasons  which  render  the  said  modes  of  succession  inapplicable,
there   remain   vacancies   in   certain   local   elective   positions   which   may   effectively
hamper the operations of the  LGU concerned, the President. through the SILG or the
OIC-DILG,  shall  appoint or designate a qualified  person.
SECTION  5.  Qualifications  and  Powers  of the  Person  Designated.  Such
person  so  designated  pursuant to  Sections  2,  3,  and  4  of this  Administrative  Order
shall   exercise   the   powers   and   perform   the   duties   and   functions   of   the   local

government position concerned  as provided by law,  except making or participating in
any decision related to the following:
(1)       Appointment,  suspension  or dismissal  of local  government officials  and
employees;
(2)       Creation   and   filling-up   of   positions   whether   regular,    contractual   or
casual;
(3)       Reorganization of local government offices;
(4)       Solemnization of marriages;
(5)       Revision of duly approved local development plans; and
(6)      Approval  of contracts  other than  those  needed  to  keep the  day-to-day
operations going.
Provided,  that  the  person  designated  shall  act  with  the  highest  degree  of
integrity,  impartiality  and  fairness  at all  times;  Provided  further,  that the  person  duly
designated   must  possess   all  the  qualifications   and   none  of  the  disqualifications
prescribed for the corresponding electjve office.
Notwithstanding the abovementioned limitations on the duties and functions of
the  person  so  designated,  the  SILG  or  Olc-DILG  may  grant  said  person,   when
public  interest so  requires  and  when  necessary  to  prevent disruption  in  the  delivery
of  service,  the  authority  to  approve  contracts,   including  engaging   in  or  renewing
contracts of service,  provided that such authority is within the duties and functions of
the local government position concerned.
SECTION   6.   Simultaneous   Appointment   or   Designation.   In   case   of
multiple  vacancies  under the circumstances  provided  in  Sections  1,  2,  3,  and 4,  the
SILG   or  the   Olc-DILG   may   make   simultaneous   appointments   or   designations,
provided that the rules in the previous sections shall be strictly observed.
SECTION  7.  Caretaker of the  Lou.  Pending  the completion  of selection  and
appointment   or  designation   processes   referred   to   in   the   previous   sections,   the
remaining  local  elective  official/s  shall  administer  the  day-to-day  operations  of  the
LGU to ensure the continuous and effective delivery of public services therein.
Where  there  are  no  remaining  local elective  officials  to  administer the  day-to-
day  operations  of  the   LGU,   the   SILG  or  the   Olc-DILG   is   hereby  authorized  to
designate a caretaker therein.
SECTION  8.  Authority  to  Issue  Rules.  The  SILG  or  the  Olc-DILG  shall
issue  the   necessary   rules,   orders,   and   circulars   as   may  be   necessary  for  the
implementatjon  of this Administrative Order.
SECTloN  9.  Reportorial  Requirements.  The  SILG  or  the  Olc-DILG  shall
submit to  the  President,  through  the  Executive  Secretary,  a  quarterly  report on  the
implementation    of   this    Order.    However,    the    report    on    all    appointments    or
designations  made  pursuant  to  this  Order  should  be  made  wlthjn  fifteen  (15)  days
from such appointment or designatjon.
SECTloN   10.  Inter-agency  Cooperation.  All  government  agencies  in  the
Executive  Branch  are  directed  to  cooperate  and  extend  to  the  DILG  all  appropriate
assistance to carry out the objective of this Order.

•,`
SECTION   11.  Separability  Clause.   If  any  section  or  part  of  this  Order  is
declared   to   be   unconstitutional   or   invalid,   the   other   sections   or   provisions   not
otherwise affected shall  remain in full force and effect.
SECTION     12.    Repealing    Clause.    All    orders,     rules    and    regulations,
issuances,   or  any  part  thereof  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this  Order  are
hereby repealed,  amended or modified accordingly.
SECTION  13.  Effectivity.  This  Order  shall  take  effect  immediately  after  its
publication  in  a  newspaper of general  circulation.
DONE, inthe city of Manila, thisl3tnay of    December       in theyearofour
Lord, Two Thousand and  Eighteen.
By the President:
C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary
REPUBt,IC  0P  "B  PBII.IPPItlEB
PRRI)   2016   -   008659