MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 17

CONSTITUTING THE PHILIPPINE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR
THE EXPO 2020 DUBAI

WHEREAS, ithe Philippines has committed to participate in the Expo 2020
Dubai, which will be held in Jebel Ali, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, between 20
October 2020 and 10 April 2021, to promote before the world audience the
heritage, talent and ingenuity of the Filipino people, as well as showcase the
country’s vibrant economy, tourist destinations and emerging technological
innovations;

WHEREAS, the participation of the Philippines in the Expo 2020 Dubai
provides an excellent opportunity to further enhance the country’s presence in a
global scale, and promote the country’s commercial and public interests in the
Middle East, Africa and South Asia region;

WHEREAS, with the theme, “Connecting Minds, Creating the Future,” the
Expo 2020 Dubai offers a platform to foster creativity, innovation and global
cooperation, which will contribute to the country’s goal of vigorously advancing
science, technology and innovation as a strategy for long-term growth, consistent
with the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2017 — 2022;

WHEREAS, there is a need to facilitate the preparation and participation of
the Philippines in the Expo 2020 Dubai through inter-agency collaboration and
coordination; and

WHEREAS, Article VIl Section 17 of the 1987 Constitution confers on the
President the power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic

of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and
existing laws, do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Section 1. Creation. The Philippine Organizing Committee (POC) for the

participation of the Philippines in the Expo 2020 Dubai is hereby created to be
composed of the following:

a.

anmoaadcna»

them

Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), as Chairperson and
Commissioner-General;

. Secretary, Department of Tourism, as Vice Chairperson;

. Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs;

. Secretary, Department of Budget and Management (DBM);
. Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment;

Secretary, Department of Science and Technology; and

. Secretary, Department of Information and Communications Technology.

The POC members may designate their respective alternates to represent
in the committee. The alternates must have a rank of not lower than an

Assistant Secretary or its equivalent, and must be fully authorized to decide on
behalf of their respective principals. The designation of the alternates or
representatives shall be in writing, and must be duly submitted to the POC
Secretariat.

The POC Secretariat shall undertake and oversee the over-all preparation for

and the day-to-day operation of the Philippine participation in the Expo 2020 Dubai.
The Secretariat shall be complemented by personnel designated by the members of
the POC from their respective departments.

Section 2. Mandate. The POC shall exercise the following functions and

responsibilities:

a.

Formulate and implement a work plan, which contains the following:

i. appropriate theme, concept and message of the Philippines, which will
present the country as an ideal destination for trade, tourism and
investments, and showcase the best of Filipino culture and heritage,
while adhering to the over-all theme and sub-themes of the Expo 2020
Dubai;

ii. specific roles to be performed by relevant agencies under this Order, as
well as programs, activities and other incidents of participation in the
Expo 2020 Dubai; and

iii. proposed budget to cover expenses of participating in the Expo 2020
Dubai.

. Act as coordinating body between the private sector and other government

entities to ensure that all programs and activities indicated in the above work
plan, and all other directives subsequently issued relative to the participation
of the Philippines in the Expo 2020 Dubai are enforced;

Ensure that the benefits of the Philippine participation are maximized through
a concerted and cost-effective national approach;

. Employ and utilize sustainable architectural design, including materials that

may be adapted for re-use, whenever applicable;

. Ensure the safety and protection of government properties, exhibit materials

and equipment used for participating in the Expo 2020 Dubai:

f. Accept or receive sponsorship and gratuitous title of funds, materials and
devices essential for planning, implementing and managing the participation
of the Philippines in the Expo 2020 Dubai, subject to relevant laws and
existing government accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

g. Through the Commissioner-General, or his/her designated representatives,
enter into agreements, contracts or partnerships necessary for the
attainment of the objectives of this Order;

h. Undertake marketing and promotional activities, presentations and meetings

' consistent with the PDP 2017 — 2022 in order to generate business, trade

and investment opportunities, and showcase Philippine culture, heritage and
tourist destinations; and

i. Undertake any or all other measures necessary for the successful
participation of the Philippines in the Expo 2020 Dubai.

Section 3. Commissioner-General. The Commissioner-General shall act as
the contact person of the Expo 2020 Dubai Organizers, attend all activities that will
be required, and perform such other functions as may be necessary to ensure the
successful participation of the Philippines in the Expo 2020 Dubai, consistent with
the rules and regulations of the Bureau International des Expositions and the
participation guidelines and other issuances of the Expo 2020 Dubai Organizers.

Section 4. Agency Support. Consistent with their respective mandates, all
departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities of the government,
including government -owned or -controlled corporations and government financial
institutions, are hereby directed to render full assistance and cooperation to the
POC to effectively carry out the objectives of this Order.

Section 5. Funding. The funding requirements of the POC for Fiscal Year
(FY) 2019 shall be sourced from the Contingent Fund, subject to the approval of the
President, upon the recommendation of the DBM, and if necessary, from the current
year’s appropriations of the POC member agencies. Releases from the Contingent
Fund shall be made directly to the DTI as the lead implementing agency.

The funding requirement for FY 2020 shall be incorporated in the respective
budgets of the participating agencies under the General Appropriations Act.

In accordance with relevant laws, rules and regulations, and as may be
authorized by the Commissioner-General, the POC Secretariat may open a separate
bank account for all funds to be solicited in relation to the Philippine participation in
the Expo 2020 Dubai. A separate book of accounts shall be maintained by the POC
Secretariat for this purpose.

Balance of savings from operations and income generated from commercial
activities, and other donations or grants from other sources during the Expo 2020
Dubai, shall be held in trust by the POC in accordance with existing government
accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Any unexpended balance of the fund
for the purpose after all the obligations have been settled shall be reverted and
deposited to the National Treasury.

Section 6. Administrative Guidelines and Orders. The POC, through the
Commissioner-General, shall issue the necessary administrative and implementing
rules and guidelines within the mandate and authority granted under this Order.

Section 7. Reportorial Requirement. The POC, through the Commissioner-
General, shall submit quarterly reports of its accomplishments, not later than thirty
(30) days after the end of every quarter, and a final report within sixty (60) days
after the closing of the Expo 2020 Dubai, to the Office of the President and the
DBM. Such reports shall include the expenses, income generated, achievement,
economic impact and recommendation for future policy development and actions.

Section 8. Cessation. The POC shall be rendered functus officio sixty (60)
days after the submission of its final report as provided in Section 7 hereof, unless
otherwise ordered by the President.

Section 9. Repealing Clause. All issuances or parts thereof inconsistent or
contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 10. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order or any part
hereof is declared invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, the other portions not affected
thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Section 11. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of April , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand Nineteen.

 

By the President:

es
SALVADOR C. MEPIALDER

Executive Secretary

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

   

i
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 010049