MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 36

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF COVID-19 SPECIAL RISK
ALLOWANCE TO PRIVATE AND PUBLIC HEALTH WORKERS
DIRECTLY CATERING TO OR IN CONTACT WITH COVID-19
PATIENTS DURING THE STATE OF NATIONAL EMERGENCY

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 922 (s. 2020) declared a State of Public Health
Emergency in recognition of the COVID-19 public health event as a threat to national
security, and prompted a whole-of-government approach in addressing the COVID-19
outbreak in the country;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Republic Act (RA) No. 11469 or the Bayanihan to Heal
as One Act,” Administrative Order No. 28 (s. 2020) authorized the grant of a one-time
Special Risk Allowance to public health workers in light of the COVID-19 pandemic;

WHEREAS, RA No. 11494 or the “Bayanihan to Recover as One Act,” affirmed
the existence of a continuing national emergency in view of the unabated spread of
COVID-19 and the economic disruption ensuing from it;

WHEREAS, Section 4(h) of RA No. 11494 authorized the national government
to grant Special Risk Allowance (SRA) to all public and private health workers (HWs)
directly catering to or in contact with COVID-19 patients for every month that they are
serving during the state of national emergency as declared by the President; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to recognize the heroic and invaluable contributions
of our public health workers throughout the country, who bravely and unselfishly risk
their lives and health by being at the forefront of the national effort to address the
public health emergency;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Grant of COVID-19 SRA. National government agencies,
government-owned or -controlled corporations and local government units (LGUs) are
hereby authorized to grant COVID-19 SRA not exceeding P5,000 per month to public
and private HWs who directly cater to or are in contact with COVID-19 patients. The
COVID-19 SRA shall be in addition to any Hazard Pay, Hazardous Duty Pay, Hazard .
Allowance or other similar benefits under existing laws, issuances, rules and
regulations, and shall be exempt from income tax.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

x

For purposes of this Order, “public and private HWs” shall refer to medical,

allied medical and other personnel who directly provide treatment and support care to
COVID-19 patients.

Section 2. Conditions on the Grant of the COVID-19 SRA. The following

conditions shall be observed in the grant of the COVID-19 SRA to HWs:

a.

The public HWs are either: (i) civilian employees occupying regular, contractual
or casual positions, whether full or part-time; or (ii) workers engaged through
contract of service (COS) or job order (JO), including duly accredited and
registered Barangay Health Workers (BHWs), who are assigned to hospitals,
laboratories, or medical and quarantine facilities. In the case of LGUs, the list
of public HWs, including BHWs, shall be determined by their respective local
health boards;

The private HWs are assigned in the designated COVID-19 units of hospitals,
laboratories, or medical and quarantine facilities as certified by the DOH;

The public and private HWs provide critical and urgent services to respond to
the public health emergency during the state of national emergency;

. The public and private HWs physically report for work at their assigned work

stations on the prescribed official working hours, as authorized by the head of
agency/office during the state of national emergency, which place them in direct
contact with COVID-19 patients;

The grant of the COVID-19 SRA shall be pro-rated based on the number of
days that the public and private HWs physically report for work in a month, as
certified by the head of the hospital, laboratory, or medical and quarantine
facility, or his/her authorized representative, reckoned from 15 September 2020
until 19 December 2020, as follows:

P5,000 x number of days physically
22 days reporting for work during the month

 

COVID-19 SRA

All claims for the payment of SRA to public and private HWs shall be validated
by the Department of Health (DOH) and the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), respectively.

Section 3. Exclusion from the Grant of the COVID-19 SRA to Public HWs.

Those engaged without employer-employee relationship and funded from non-
Personnel Services appropriations/budgets are excluded, except as authorized under
Section 2 of this Order, from the grant of the SRA, such as the following:

a.

Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific
activities or services with expected outputs;

Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework
basis;

c. Student workers and apprentices; and

d. Individuals and group of individuals whose services are engaged through COS
or JO, including BHWs, who are not assigned to hospitals, laboratories, or
medical and quarantine facilities.

Section 4. Funding. The amounts required for the implementation of this
Order shall be sourced from the 13.5 Billion appropriated under Section 10(a) of
RA No. 11494 for health-related responses to COVID-19. The DBM shall release the
funds for the payment of the SRA, consistent with existing budgeting, accounting and
auditing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Guidelines on the Grant of the COVID-19 SRA. The DBM, in
coordination with the DOH, shall issue the guidelines necessary for the effective
implementation of this Order.

Section 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 7. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila this 16thday of Novemberin the Year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

ae
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA pe
Executive Secretary (r Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

   

t 1
| CERT

IFIED COPY

    
  
 

j ATTY. COMCEPCIOR ZERY £. FERROLING-ENAD

Seam ee ae A

PRRD 2016 — 015671