MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 12

DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO IMPLEMENT THE
NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY 2018 IN PURSUIT OF THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AND DEVELOPMENT GOALS DEFINED IN
AMBISYON NATIN 2040, PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2017-
2022 AND THE NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY 2017-2022

WHEREAS, pursuant to Executive Order (EO) No. 5 (s. 2016), all government
departments, offices and instrumentalities, including government-owned or —controlled
corporations (GOCCs) and local government units (LGUs), are directed to ensure that
their plans are consistent with the 25-year long-term collective vision of the Filipino
people entitled, “Ambisyon Natin 2040”;

WHEREAS, EO No. 27 (s. 2017) directs all government departments and
agencies, including GOCCs and LGUs, to implement the Philippine Development Plan
(PDP) 2017-2022 and Public Investment Program (PIP) 2017-2022, and align their
budgetary and department/corporate programs with the strategies and activities
identified therein, to ensure sustainability and consistency of strategies, policies,
programs and projects across government departments and agencies, and across
political subdivisions;

WHEREAS, among the foundations to attain the overall objectives of PDP 2017-
2022 is security, public order and safety;

WHEREAS, EO No. 16 (s. 2017) directed all government departments and
agencies, including GOCCs and LGUs, to adopt the National Security Policy (NSP)
2017-2022, with the aim of attaining a more secure, peaceful and prosperous Filipino
nation;

WHEREAS, there is a need to translate into concrete plans and programs the
policies and objectives laid down in the aforementioned NSP 2017-2022 in order to
realize the foregoing desired national security and development goals;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 4, Article Il of the 1987 Constitution states that the prime
duty of the Government is to serve and protect the people;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VIl of the 1987 Constitution provides for the
President's power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Philippines,
by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby
order:

SECTION 1. Formulation and Implementation of Strategy Plans and
Programs. Pursuant to their respective legal mandates, all government departments
and agencies, including GOCCs and LGUs, are directed to formulate and implement
relevant strategy plans and programs to execute the herein attached National Security

SECTION 2. Strategy Plan Alignment. All strategy plans and programs that
shall be formulated and implemented must, to the extent possible, support the
attainment of the twin goals of security and development, and the specific objectives of
the PDP 2017-2022 and the NSP 2017-2022.

SECTION 3. Initiation, Coordination and Oversight of Strategy Plan
Formulation and Implementation. The National Security Adviser (NSA) / Director-
General of the National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) is hereby directed to
initiate, coordinate and oversee the formulation and implementation of relevant strategy
plans and programs implementing the NSS 2018. Whenever necessary, the NSCS shall
provide technical assistance and support to government departments and agencies,
including GOCCs and LGUs, in the formulation of strategy plans. It shall be the
responsibility of the NSCS to consolidate all strategy plans to ensure coherence and
achieve synergy.

SECTION 4. Monitoring and Evaluation. The National Security Council (NSC)
is directed to coordinate the monitoring of the execution of strategy plans and programs.
Agencies implementing strategy plans must render monitoring and evaluation reports to
the NSC during the mid-course and terminal course of strategy plan execution.
Whenever necessary, the NSC shall provide technical assistance and support to these
agencies in the development of relevant monitoring and evaluation tools. Subject to
terms consistent with national security objectives, said agencies may also contract the
services of non-government and academic institutions in the development of monitoring
and evaluation tools, and/or in the actual conduct of monitoring and evaluation, as well
as in the conduct of impact assessment.

SECTION 5. Mainstreaming of the NSP and NSS to Government Plans. To
ensure a more deliberate and consistent pursuit of the security and development goals
and objectives, all government agencies are directed to mainstream the strategic goals
and essential elements of the NSP 2017-2022 and NSS 2018 into their respective

development plans, investment plans, annual plans and budget, annual procurement
plans and other relevant plans.

SECTION 6. Creation or Designation of Office with Primary Responsibility
(OPR). To ensure a deliberate, regular and continuous pursuit of the purpose of this
Order, the NSA/Director General of the NSCS is hereby directed to reorganize the
NSCS, structurally and functionally, and institutionalize the NSS formulation process
and the production of a National Intelligence Estimate. The NSA/Director General of the
NSCS shall designate an Executive Director and an office or unit at the NSC that shall
serve as the OPR for the dissemination, communication, monitoring and evaluation of
the NSS 2018. The OPR shall coordinate with the Office of the Cabinet Secretary in the
performance of these functions.

SECTION 7. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against the respective budgets of the concerned government
agencies. The succeeding years’ appropriation for the implementation of this Order shall
be incorporated in the budget proposal of the concerned government agencies, subject
to the usual budget preparation process.

SECTION 8. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 9. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby amended, repealed or modified
accordingly.

SECTION 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this2nd  dayof August jn the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Eighteen.

By the President:

as

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary &

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 007137