MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 5

CREATION OF AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE
UNIFIED IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING OF
REHABILITATION AND RECOVERY PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS
IN THE YOLANDA-AFFECTED AREAS

WHEREAS, Typhoon Yolanda caused widespread destruction, substantial
damage and death in several areas, including the provinces of Leyte, Southern
Leyte, Samar, Eastern Samar, Biliran, Negros Occidental, Cebu, Capiz, Aklan,
Antique, lloilo, Masbate, Palawan and Dinagat Islands (Yolanda-affected areas).

WHEREAS, delays in the implementation of various projects and programs
intended to help Yolanda-affected areas rehabilitate and recover are being
encountered due to the lack of coordination between and among government
agencies;

WHEREAS, ensuring the timely and efficient completion of the various
programs and projects is of paramount importance given that three (3) years have
lapsed since the passing of Typhoon Yolanda;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish a coordinating body in order to
ensure the efficient and effective coordination between various government agencies
and instrumentalities involved in Yolanda recovery and rehabilitation programs and
projects;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 99 (s. 2012) mandates the Office of
the Cabinet Secretary to ensure the timely execution and monitor the significant
impact of the targets under the annual performance and projects roadmap, and re-
align targets when needed; and

WHEREAS, EO No. 292 (s. 1987), otherwise known as the “Administrative
Code of 1987” states that the President shall have control over all executive
departments, bureaus and offices.

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force for the Unified
Implementation and Monitoring of Rehabilitation and Recovery Programs in
the Yolanda Corridor (IATF-Yolanda). There is hereby created an IATF-Yolanda
which shall be composed of the following:

Chairperson: Cabinet Secretary

Co-Chairpersons: Presidential Assistant for the Visayas
Presidential Assistant for Special Concerns

Members: Secretary, Department of Agriculture
Secretary, Department of Budget and Management
Secretary, Department of Education
Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government
Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways
Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and Development
Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry
Secretary, National Economic and Development Authority
Chairperson, Housing and Urban Development Coordinating
Council
Executive Director, National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council .
General Manager, National Housing Authority
Administrator, Land Registration Authority
Administrator, Local Waterworks Utilities Administration
Administrator, National Electrification Administration
Administrator, National Irrigation Administration
Administrator, Philippine Coconut Authority

The Office of the Cabinet Secretary, through the Cabinet Secretariat, shall provide
secretariat support to the IATF-Yolanda.

SECTION 2. Function of the IATF-Yolanda. The IATF-Yolanda shall serve
as the overall and central coordination committee of all executive departments,
agencies, bureaus, government-owned or -controlled corporations, and other
instrumentalities (hereinafter collectively known as “Government Agencies”) in
relation to the various aspects of implementation and monitoring of the rehabilitation
and recovery programs in Yolanda-affected areas.

SECTION 3. People’s Participation. The IATF-Yolanda shall consult
affected communities and non-government organizations in the crafting,
implementation, and evaluation of the various programs and projects covered by this
Order.

SECTION 4. Reports. The IATF-Yolanda shall submit reports to the
President, every month or as often as may be required by him, regarding the
implementation of this Order.

SECTION 5. Support of Government Agencies. All Government Agencies
as well as state universities and colleges are hereby directed, and local government
units are hereby enjoined, to provide the necessary support and assistance for the
implementation of this Order.

SECTION 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. The IATF-Yolanda may
issue such implementing rules and regulations (IRR), including specific guidelines,
flow charts and timelines, as may be necessary to implement this Order.

SECTION 7. Sanctions. In case the responsible officers of the concerned
agencies fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this Order and its IRR, said
officers shall be liable for administrative sanctions as may be provided in accordance
with civil service laws, rules and regulations including Civil Service Commission
Resolution No. 11-01502.

SECTION 8. Funding. The concerned agencies are authorized to charge
against their current available appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for
the implementation of this Order, subject to budgetary, accounting and auditing rules
and regulations. Additional funds and possible fund sources as may be necessary for
the implementation of this Order shall be identified by the Department of Budget and
Management.

SECTION 9. Separability. Should any provision of this Order be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid
and subsisting.

SECTION 10. Repeal. Memorandum Order (MO) No. 62 (s. 2013) and MO
No. 79 (s. 2015) are hereby repealed, and other issuances, orders, rules and
regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby
repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 11. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in a newspaper of general circulation. This Order shall be effective for a
period of three (3) years.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of August in the year of our
Lord Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By the President:

e¢
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

 

   

= Be

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 003041