MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 7

REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE TO
PROVIDE GREATER UNITY AND COHESION OF _ THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY, AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 68 (S. 2003), AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the country’s internal and external security situation necessitates
greater inter-agency collaboration in the collection, fusion and production of
accurate, relevant, reliable and timely intelligence for the formulation of national
security policies by the President and the National Security Council (NSC);

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide more focused and clearer delineation
of tasks among units/agencies involved in the gathering of intelligence on national
security issues and concerns, in order to preclude unnecessary duplication of
intelligence activities, ensure complete coverage of intelligence concerns as well as
promote the judicious use of government resources;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Administrative Order (AO) No. 68 (s. 2003), the
National Intelligence Committee (NIC) was organized to serve as advisory body to
the Director General, National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (DG, NICA), for the
coordination, integration, and fusion of all intelligence activities relating to the
preparation of the National Intelligence Estimate and in addressing issues of national
intelligence concerns;

WHEREAS, as the focal point for the direction, integration and coordination of
all government activities involving national intelligence as well as the preparation of
national intelligence estimates on local and foreign situations, it is imperative for the
NICA to ensure the vigorous involvement of various government departments and
agencies in the task of providing departmental intelligence to facilitate the production
of national intelligence, and enable the DG, NICA to more effectively carry out his
role as the principal adviser of the President on intelligence;

NOW, THEREFORE I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 1. Section 2 of AO No. 68 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 2. National Intelligence Committee. The NIC is hereby
reorganized and revitalized to serve as a vital mechanism for intelligence
management, and as an instrument for promoting greater unity and cohesion
of the Intelligence Community. The NIC, which shall continue to be chaired by
the DG, NICA, shall be composed of the following agencies:

a. Department of Foreign Affairs;

b. National Bureau of Investigation;

c. Bureau of Immigration;

d. Bureau of Customs;

e. Armed Forces of the Philippines;

f. Philippine National Police;

g. Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency;
h. Philippine Coast Guard; and

i. Office for Transportation Security

Each member-agency shall designate its highest ranking intelligence
official or its equivalent as permanent representative to the NIC.

The NIC, through the DG, NSC, is authorized to call upon any
department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the government to become
its member and/or to provide assistance in the acquisition and production of
information/intelligence on a regular basis, specifically those necessary in the
performance of its function/s. The heads or chiefs of said government entities
shall give preferential attention to such requests.

The NIC may designate or invite resource persons from relevant units
of the government which are not necessarily involved in intelligence work, but
could otherwise provide relevant data to fill in information gaps, support
intelligence buildup and boost efforts of meeting or satisfying particular
intelligence requirements.

The NIC may review its existing standing committees, technical
working groups and secretariat to determine retention, dissolution,
replacement or creation of other related committees and groups to make the
NIC more organized, proactive and effective in fulfilling its mandate.

The NIC shall continue to be assisted by the Regional Intelligence
Committees (RIC) that have already been institutionalized in all regions of the

country to promote and enhance intelligence fusion. The RICs shall be
composed of heads/representatives of intelligence units at the regional level.”

SECTION 2. All orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof,
which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SECTION 3. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22nd dayof September ,in
the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Seventeen.

 

By the President:
qa VE

I oor C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 003837

vw