MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 30

DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICES TO FORMULATE AND
ISSUE GUIDELINES ON THE INTERRUPTION OF PERIODS FOR
THE FILING OF DOCUMENTS, PAYMENT OF TAXES, CHARGES
AND OTHER FEES, AND CANCELLATION OF PROCEEDINGS
BEFORE THEIR RESPECTIVE OFFICES, AND ON THE MOVEMENT
OF TIMELINES FOR THE RELEASE OF BENEFITS

WHEREAS, the President issued Proclamation No. 922 (s. 2020) declaring a
State of Public Health Emergency throughout the Philippines due to the COVID-19
situation, and has called all government agencies and local government units (LGUs)
to undertake appropriate measures to curtail and eliminate the COVID-19 threat;

WHEREAS, through Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020), the President declared a
State of Calamity throughout the Philippines for a period of six (6) months and
imposed an Enhanced Community Quarantine throughout Luzon;

WHEREAS, in view of the serious threat to the health, safety, security, and
lives of the Filipino people posed by COVID-19, Republic Act (RA) No. 11469,
otherwise known as the “Bayanihan to Heal As One Act,” was enacted to authorize
the President to exercise powers that are necessary and proper to carry out the
tasks needed to mitigate, if not contain, the transmission of COVID-19 and its
adverse effects to the lives of Filipinos; and

WHEREAS, Section 4(z) of RA No. 11469 provides that the President shall
have the power to move statutory deadlines and timelines for the filing and
submission of any document, the payment of taxes, fees, and other charges required
by law, and the grant of any benefit as a temporary emergency measure to respond
to the crisis brought by the pandemic in order to ease the burden on individuals
under community quarantine;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the Memorandum from the Executive Secretary
dated 28 March 2020 (Memorandum), the President directed the Secretary of the
Department of Finance (DOF) to implement Section 4(z) of RA No. 11469; and

WHEREAS, the same Memorandum states that the exercise of the authorities

stated therein by the departments and agencies concerned shall be without prejudice
to the direct exercise thereof by the President at any time;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW, THE
Philippines. by yj; REFORETILOR
» DY vj » 4 RODRIGO
O hereby Aree rlue of the POWers Vested in cy Ba peceant qolmtie
0. 11469 and other laws,

SECTION 4

. ; . Direct

Notwithstanding, and in ere mers Guidelines. Any law to the contrary
quarantine, al) heads © ease the social and economic burden of community

of de

government, including FOR agencies, offices, and instrumentalities of the
government financial astitifis €nt-Owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs),

GUs, are h NS (GFls), state universities and colleges (SUCs), and
ereby directed, whil
independent oe , while the heads of other branches of government and
i Constitutional bodies are hereby enioi
issue rules or guidelin ereby enjoined, to immediately formulate and
qlisrantineoftainina es on the following, to be applied in areas under community

O Individuals coming from such areas, as the case may be:

a. Interruption of reglementary periods for the commencement of actions and
Claims; the filing of pleadings, appearances, motions, notices, and all other
Papers; and the rendition of judgments, resolutions, and orders for the
duration of the community quarantine:

. Cancellation of proceedings and the rescheduling thereof after the lifting of
community quarantine;

. Acceptable justifications for the failure of litigants or their counsel, as well
as Claimants, to comply with reglementary periods or to appear at legal

proceedings, if they are coming from jurisdictions where quarantine
protocols restrict their movements;

d. Suspension of deadlines for the payment of monetary obligations and/or

the submission of documents, for the duration of community quarantine;
and

e. Movement of timelines for the grant of any benefit, to allow the release
thereof to individuals during community quarantine.

Notwithstanding sub-paragraphs (a), (6), and (c) above, reglementary periods
and proceedings for urgent cases which are necessary to enable the government to

act expeditiously on matters affecting the current public health emergency shall not
be interrupted or cancelled.

The foregoing directive shall apply only in relation to areas where community
quarantine was declared in accordance with the rules issued by the Inter-Agency
Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) or the
Office of the President, until the date that the same is lifted by the same office that

made the declaration, provided the lifting be also in accordance with the rules of the
IATF or the Office of the President.

SECTION 2. Compliance with the Directives of Higher Authorities. The
heads of the above agencies shall ensure that their rules or guidelines are consistent
with the directives of the IATF and the Office of the President, and are in compliance
with existing laws, rules, and regulations. Such rules or guidelines shall be without

Bec to future directives or orders to be issued by the IATF or the Office of the
resident pursuant to RA No. 11469.

For agencies, GOCCs, GFls and SUCs attached to or under the supervision
of executive departments, their compliance with this directive shall further be subject
to the supervision of such departments. LGUs shall be deemed to be under the

supervision of the Department of the Interior and Local Government for purposes of
implementing this Order.

SECTION 3. Existing guidelines issued by government agencies. All
issuances previously released by agencies pertaining to the extension, interruption
or movement of the periods and timelines set by law for the filing of documents,
conduct of proceedings, payment of taxes, fees, and other charges, and the grant of
any benefit or claim due to COVID-19 are hereby adopted and ratified insofar as they
are consistent with the guidelines set forth by the IATF and the directives of the
Office of the President.

SECTION 4. Submission of Relevant and Timely Recommendations to
the IATF. All heads of departments, agencies, offices, and instrumentalities of the
national government are encouraged to provide relevant and _ timely
recommendations to the IATF regarding the implementation of this Order.

SECTION 5. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed
or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila this 21 say of April in the Year of Our Lord, Two
Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

{ &
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

Office of the Presklent

 

Pare it it te
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 014442

 

rae J
i eee
ae 7
Patek.