ae

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO, 20

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF GRATUITY PAY FOR FISCAL YEAR
2019 TO JOB ORDER AND CONTRACT OF SERVICE WORKERS IN
GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, the State affirms labor as a primary social economic force and
promotes the welfare of workers;

WHEREAS, various government agencies have engaged workers under job
order (JO) and contract of service (COS) schemes;

WHEREAS, the Civil Service Commission (CSC)-Commission on Audit (COA)-
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Joint Circular (JC) No. 1 (s. 2017) or
the “Rules and Regulations Governing COS and JO Workers in the Government,” as
amended by CSC-COA-DBM JC No. 1 (s. 2018), provides the existing policies and
guidelines on the engagement of services of these workers;

WHEREAS, these workers are paid salaries/wages equivalent to the daily
salaries/wages of comparable positions in government and a premium of up to 20%
of such salary/wage. However, they do not enjoy benefits accorded to government
employees such as the Personnel Economic Relief Allowance, Mid-Year and Year-
End Bonuses and Performance-Based Bonus among others, considering that they
have no employer-employee relationship with the government;

WHEREAS, granting a year-end Gratuity Pay to JO and COS workers is a well-
deserved recognition of their hard work;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 2 (s. 2017) authorized the grant of
Gratuity Pay to JO and COS workers for fiscal year 2016;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution and Section 1,
Chapter 1, Title |, Book III of Executive Order No. 292 (s. 1987) or the “Administrative
Code of 1987,” vest the President with control over all the executive departments,
bureaus and offices; ,

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 1. Grant of Gratuity Pay. All workers whose services are engaged
through JO and COS, who have rendered a total or an aggregate of at least four (4)
months of satisfactory performance of services as stipulated in their respective
contracts as of 15 December 2019, and whose contracts are still effective as of same
date, may be granted a one-time Gratuity Pay not exceeding Three Thousand Pesos
(P3,000) each.

Those who have rendered less than four (4) months of satisfactory performance
of services as stipulated in their respective contracts as of 15 December 2019, and
whose contracts are still effective as of same date may also be granted the one-time
Gratuity Pay, on a pro rata basis, as follows:

 

Length of Service Amount of Gratuity Pay |
3 months or more but less than 4 months | Not exceeding P2,000
2 months or more but less than 3 months | Not exceeding P1,500
Less than 2 months Not exceeding #1,000

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SECTION 2. Coverage. This Order shall cover workers whose services are
engaged through JO and COS by national government agencies (NGAs), state
universities and colleges (SUCs), government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs) and local water districts (LWDs).

SECTION 3. Funding Source. Funds needed to implement this Order shall be
chargeable against the following sources:

a. For NGAs and SUCs, against their respective available Maintenance and Other
Operating Expenses (MOOE) allotment for the same program, activity or project
(P/A/P) where the compensation of workers engaged through JO and COS are
sourced, subject to approval of the Agency Head.

In case of deficiency, the agencies may request the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) for additional funds charged against the identified savings
of such agencies generated from the sources mentioned in Section 73 of the
General Provisions of the FY 2019 General Appropriations Act (GAA), subject
to approval of the President pursuant to pertinent provisions of the FY 2019
GAA on the use of savings and existing laws and issuances; and

b. For GOCCs and LWDs, against their respective approved corporate operating
budgets.

SECTION 4. Use of Savings. Requests for the use of savings under Section
4(a) hereof shall be submitted by NGAs and SUCs to the DBM not later than five (5)
working days from the effectivity of this Order, for endorsement to the Office of the
President, supported by the following documents:

a. Report on the number and names of workers engaged through JO and COS
qualified for Gratuity Pay, as certified by the head of the human resource
management unit and endorsed by the Department Secretary or Agency Head
concerned; and

b. Certification from the budget officer that the required amount from the existing
MOOE allotment is free from any obligation and may be declared as savings
pursuant to Section 73 of the General Provisions of the FY 2019 GAA, to cover
the funding requirements for the grant of Gratuity Pay, likewise endorsed by the
Department Secretary or Agency Head concerned.

The DBM shall release the corresponding Special Allotment Release Order and
Notice of Cash Allocation, as needed, upon approval of the President.

SECTION 5. Grant of Gratuity Pay in Local Government Units (LGUs).
LGUs are encouraged to adopt in their respective offices the grant of Gratuity Pay to
workers whose services are engaged through JO and COS, utilizing appropriate and
available funding sources from their respective local government funds.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations and other issuances or
parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10thday of January jn the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty.

—T
By the President: re

th
Aa ___» & h&

 

SALVADOR C. PIDTAL aE
Executive Secretary

 

 

i i
REPUBLIC OF THE PHIL
PRRD 2016 ~ 013815