MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 23

ELIMINATING OVERREGULATION TO PROMOTE EFFICIENCY OF
GOVERNMENT PROCESSES

WHEREAS, Section 20, Article Il of the Constitution recognizes the
indispensable role of the private sector, encourages private enterprise, and provides
incentives to needed investments;

WHEREAS, under Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9485, as amended by
RA No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service
Delivery Act of 2018,” the State is mandated to maintain a program for the adoption
of simplified requirements and procedures that will reduce red tape and expedite
business and nonbusiness related transactions in government;

WHEREAS, increasing competitiveness and the ease of doing business are
pillars of this Administration’s Ten-Point Socio-economic Agenda;

WHEREAS, excessive regulations at all levels of government, which are more
than necessary to implement their respective mandates, create high costs on
businesses, inhibit job creation, and discourage private sector investment;

WHEREAS, under Section 17 of RA No. 9485, as amended, the Anti-Red
Tape Authority (ARTA) is mandated to implement various ease of doing business
and anti-red tape reform initiatives aimed at improving the regulatory environment to
be more conducive to business operations;

WHEREAS, pursuant to RA No. 9485, as amended, the ARTA shall
coordinate with all government offices in the review of existing laws and executive
issuances, and recommend the repeal of the same if deemed outdated, redundant
and adds undue regulatory burden to the transacting public;

WHEREAS, Section 3(c), Rule IV of the Implementing Rules and Regulations
(IRR) of RA No. 11032, requires all government agencies to review their respective
Citizen's Charters, especially on the procedures, steps, processing time,
documentary requirements and fees, with the end view of identifying and eliminating
costly, redundant, unnecessary, ineffective and outdated regulations;

WHEREAS, RA No. 11234 or the “Energy Virtual One-Stop Shop Act,” aims
to ensure timely completion of energy-related projects by, among others, eliminating
duplication, redundancy and overlapping mandates in documentary submissions and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

processes, and for such purpose, the Energy Virtual One-Stop Shop (EVOSS)
Steering Committee was established with the Office of the President as Chairperson,
and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President
the power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Elimination of Overregulation. All national government agencies
covered by Section 3 of RA No. 9485, as amended, are directed to hasten the reform
of their processes in order to eliminate overregulation. They shall retain only such
steps, procedures and requirements as may be necessary to fulfill their legal
mandates and policy objectives. All processes in excess thereof, including those
which are redundant or burdensome to the public, shall be deemed manifestations of
overregulation and shall be removed accordingly.

In pursuit of the reforms directed herein, the entirety of an agency's processes
for the availing of its services shall be subject to scrutiny, from the most established
and longstanding aspects thereof to the most recent. The imposition of tedious or
time-consuming regulations on socially beneficial activities, as to render such activity
impossible or extremely difficult to undertake, shall be especially targeted for reform.

Section 2. Compliance. The ARTA, pursuant to its mandates under RA No.
9485, as amended, in coordination with the Anti-Red Tape Unit established per
covered agency, shall monitor and ensure compliance with this directive to eliminate
overregulation.

Within sixty (60) working days from the effectivity of this Order, all national
government agencies covered under Section 3 of RA No. 9485, as amended, shall
provide the ARTA, copy furnished the Office of the President, with a Compliance
Report on how their respective Citizen’s Charters conform with the requirements of
RA No. 9485, as amended. In particular, the Compliance Report shall contain the
following:

a. List of regulations issued by the covered agency that govern each type of
service offered to the public;

b. Particular steps or procedures, requirements and processing times
necessary to be accomplished per service, as indicated in the agency's
revised/updated Citizen's Charter;

c. The legal basis for each regulation, as well as the legal or policy
justification for each step or procedure and requirement; and

d. Relevant provisions of its Citizen's Charter which comply with RA No.
9485, as amended, especially on Section 5 (Reengineering of Systems
and Procedures), Section 7 (Zero-Contact Policy), and Section 9
(Accessing Government Services) including the prescribed processing
times and limitation on the number of signatories.

Section 3. Processes Applicable to Energy-Related Projects. For
processes applicable to energy-related projects, the timelines provided by RA No.
11234 shall be complied with.

Section 4. Review and Reporting. The ARTA shall review and evaluate the
Compliance Reports submitted by the covered agencies, and within six (6) months
from the deadline of submission of the said reports shall submit to the Office of the
President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary, its findings and
recommendations, including the compliance of covered agencies to the requirements
of RA No. 9485, as amended, as well as data on the total number of regulations
repealed, percentage of rules cut or simplified, and estimated amount of regulatory
costs saved by the Government per covered agency as a result of implementing this
Order.

With respect to covered agencies with processes falling within the scope of
RA No. 11234, the ARTA shall review and evaluate their Compliance Reports, and
formulate its findings and recommendations, in coordination with the EVOSS
Steering Committee.

Section 5. Sanctions. Failure to comply with this Order shall result in the
filing of appropriate administrative cases pursuant to the Civil Service Commission
Rules on Administrative Cases in the Civil Service, and other relevant laws, rules
and regulations.

Section 6. Repealing Clause. All other executive issuances, rules and
regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order
are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Separability. Should any part or provision of this Order be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall
continue to be in full force or effect.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 21stjay of February , in the Year of our
Lord, Two Thousand Twenty.

 

By the President:

te
SALVADOR Cc. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary &

 

PRRD 2016 - 014153