MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 19

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SERVICE RECOGNITION INCENTIVE
TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES FOR FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2019

WHEREAS, under Section (17)(iv) of Congress Joint Resolution (JR) No. 4 dated
17 June 2009, the President, upon recommendation of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), is authorized to update the Compensation and Position
Classification System (CPCS) for civilian personnel and Base Pay Schedule for military
and uniformed personnel, as well as the policies on and levels of allowances, benefits
and incentives applicable to all government personnel:

WHEREAS, the DBM has recommended updating the policies on and levels of
incentives applicable to all government personnel through the grant of a one-time
incentive, to recognize and further encourage the unwavering commitment and
dedication of government employees in performing their work, their continued support
and collaborative efforts in the delivery of services to the public, as well as their diligence
in the effective and efficient performance of their respective functions;

WHEREAS, Section (4)(h) of JR No. 4 authorizes the grant of (a) incentives to
reward an employee’s loyalty to government service and contributions to the agency's
continuing viable existence; (b) incentives as rewards for exceeding agency financial and
operational performance targets to motivate employee efforts toward higher productivity;
and (c) other existing benefits to be categorized by the DBM as incentives; and

WHEREAS, government employees deserve to be rewarded to recognize their
collective and unceasing participation in and invaluable contribution to the
Administration’s continuing efforts toward the establishment of streamlined government
processes and more responsive delivery of public services;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of
the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Service Recognition Incentive for Employees in the Executive
Department. This Order authorizes the grant of a one-time Service Recognition Incentive
(SRI) at a uniform amount not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000) for each of the
following personnel in the Executive Department:

a. Civilian personnel in national government agencies (NGAs), including those in

state universities and colleges (SUCs) and government-owned or -controlled
corporations (GOCCs), occupying regular, contractual or casual positions; and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

b.

Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department of
National Defense, and uniformed personnel of the Philippine National Police,
Bureau of Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology under
the Department of the Interior and Local Government, the Bureau of Corrections
under the Department of Justice, the Philippine Coast Guard under the
Department of Transportation, and the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority under the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.

SECTION 2. Conditions on the Grant of the SRI. The grant of the SRI shall be

subject to the following conditions:

The civilian personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions;
The personnel are still in the government service as of 30 November 2019;

The personnel have rendered at least four (4) months of service as of 30
November 2019;

Employees who have rendered less than four (4) months of service as of 30
November 2019 shall be entitled to a pro-rated share of the SRI, as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Length of Service: Percentage of the Incentive |

Less than 1 month 10 % |

 

 

 

and

The employees have not received any additional year-end benefit in FY 2019 over
and above the benefit authorized under Republic Act (RA) No. 6686, as amended
by RA No. 8441.

SECTION 3. Exclusion from the Grant of the SRI. Those engaged without an

employer-employee relationship and whose compensation are not funded from
Personnel Services (PS) appropriations/budgets are excluded from the grant of the SRI,
such as:

a.

Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific activities
or services with expected outputs;

Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework
basis;

Student workers and apprentices; and

Individuals and groups of people whose services are engaged through job orders,
contracts of service or others similarly situated.

SECTION 4. Funding Source of the SRI for Employees in the Executive
Department. Funds needed for the grant of the SRI to employees in the Executive
Department shall be sourced, as follows:

a. For NGAs, including SUCs and military and uniformed personnel, the amount
required shall be charged against the:

i. Miscellaneous Personnel Benefits Fund under the FY 2019 General
Appropriations Act to fund a portion of the SRI in the amount of Seven
Thousand Pesos (#7,000) for each employee; and

ii. Available released PS allotments of the respective agencies for the remaining
Three Thousand Pesos (P3,000) for each employee. In the event that the
available released PS allotments are insufficient to fully cover the remaining
Three Thousand Pesos (P3,000) per employee, a lower but uniform amount
shall be paid to all qualified employees of that agency.

b. For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets (COBs) for FY 2019 only. A GOCC which
does not have sufficient funds to cover the maximum amount of Ten Thousand
Pesos (#10,000) may grant the SRI at a lower but uniform rate for all qualified
personnel in that GOCC.

SECTION 5. SRI for Employees in the Legislative and Judicial Departments
and Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees in the Senate, House of
Representatives, Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman and Constitutional Offices vested
with fiscal autonomy may likewise be granted a one-time SRI by their respective heads
of offices at a uniform rate not exceeding Ten Thousand Pesos (?10,000) each,
chargeable against the available released allotment of their respective agencies, subject
to the conditions set in Section 2 hereof.

SECTION 6. SRI for Employees in Local Government Units (LGUs). The grant
of the one-time SRI to employees in LGUs, including those in the barangays, shall be
determined by their respective sanggunian depending on the LGU’s financial capability,
subject to the PS limitation in LGU budgets under RA No. 7160 or the “Local Government
Code of 1991,” and the conditions set in Section 2 hereof, at a uniform rate not exceeding
Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000), chargeable against their respective FY 2019 local
government funds.

In determining the amount of the SRI, the sanggunian shall exercise prudence and
judicious use of government funds, ensuring that the expenditure is reasonable and will
not, in any way, adversely affect the delivery of services to the public.

SECTION 7. SRI for Employees in Local Water Districts (LWDs). LWDs may
also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined by their Boards
of Directors (BOD), which shall not exceed Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000) each,
chargeable against their respective BOD-approved FY 2019 COBs only, subject to the
conditions set in Section 2 hereof.

SECTION 8. SRI for Employees in Agencies Exempted from the Coverage of
RA No. 6758, as Amended. NGAs and GOCCs exempted from the coverage of RA No.
6758, as amended, may also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be
determined by their governing boards or agency heads, which shall not exceed Ten
Thousand Pesos (P10,000) each, chargeable against the NGAs’ respective available
funds and the GOCCs’ FY 2019 COBs only, subject to the conditions set in Section 2
hereof.

SECTION 9. Payment of the SRI. The payment of the SRI to all qualified
government employees shall not be earlier than 20 December 2019.

SECTION 10. Guidelines on the Grant of the SRI. The DBM shall issue
supplemental guidelines to implement this Order, as may be necessary.

SECTION 11. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order is declared
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid
and subsisting.

SECTION 12. Repealing Clause. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed
or modified accordingly.

SECTION 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 2nd of December _, in the year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Nineteen.

By the President:

ée
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEAy

Executive Secretary

 

   

rm ll ‘iia
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 013330