MALACANAN PALACE
NWLANTLA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 28

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SPECIAL RISK ALLOWANCE TO
FRONTLINE PUBLIC HEALTH WORKERS DURING THE PERIOD OF
ENHANCED COMMUNITY QUARANTINE RELATIVE TO THE COVID-19
OUTBREAK

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 922 (s. 2020) declared a State of Public Health
Emergency in recognition of the COVID-19 public health event as a threat to national
security, and prompted a whole-of-government approach in addressing the COVID-19
outbreak in the country;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020) declared a State of Calamity throughout
the country for a period of six (6) months, imposed an Enhanced Community Quarantine
(ECQ) over the entire Luzon effective 17 March 2020, and enjoined government agencies
and local government units (LGUs) to render full assistance to and cooperation with each
other, and mobilize the necessary resources to undertake critical, urgent and appropriate
disaster response aid and measures in a timely manner, in light of the COVID-19 situation;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 11469 or the “Bayanihan to Heal as One Act,”
declared a State of National Emergency over the entire country in view of the continuing
rise of confirmed cases of COVID-19, the serious threat to the health, safety, security and
lives of our countrymen, and the severe disruption of economic activities;

WHEREAS, Section 4(d) of RA No. 11469 vested the President, as a temporary
emergency measure, the authority to provide COVID-19 Special Risk Allowance (SRA) to
all public health workers, in addition to the hazard pay granted under RA No. 7305 or the
“Magna Carta of Public Health Workers’; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to recognize the heroic and invaluable contributions of
our public health workers throughout the country, who bravely and unselfishly risk their lives
and health by being at the forefront of the national effort to address the public health
emergency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Grant of COVID-19 Special Risk Allowance (SRA). National
government agencies (NGAs), government-owned or —controlled corporations (GOCCs)
and LGUs are authorized to grant a one-time COVID-19 SRA, equivalent to a maximum of
25% of monthly basic salary/pay, to Public Health Workers (PHWs) who have great
exposure to health risks and physical hardships in the line of duty, in light of the COVID-19
pandemic.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

For purposes of this Order, “PHWs” shall refer to medical, allied medical, and other
necessary personnel assigned in hospitals and healthcare facilities and who are directly
catering to or in contact with COVID-19 patients, persons under investigation or persons
under monitoring.

Section 2. Conditions on the Grant of the COVID-19 SRA. The one-time COVID-
19 SRA shall be granted subject to the following conditions:

a. The PHWs provide critical and urgent services to respond to the public health
emergency during the implementation of the ECQ;

b. The PHWs are either: (i) civilian employees occupying regular, contractual, casual or
part-time positions; or (ii) workers engaged through contract of service (COS) or job
order (JO), including Barangay Health Workers (BHWs) regardless of the nature of
engagement, provided that the said COS/JO workers and BHWs are assigned to
hospitals and other healthcare facilities;

c. The PHWs physically report for work at their assigned work stations on the prescribed
official working hours, as authorized by the head of agency/office during the period
of the implementation of ECQ; and

d. The grant of the COVID-19 SRA shall be pro-rated based on the number of days that
PHWs physically report for work during the period of the ECQ in their respective
places of assignment, reckoned not earlier than 17 March 2020, as follows:

    

Percentage of the Incentive

 

No. of Days Physically Reporting for Work

SSeS Aan on 1S to 7 ae 75%
100%

Section 3. Exclusion from the Grant of the COVID-19 SRA. Those engaged
without employer-employee relationship and funded from non-Personnel Services (PS)
appropriations/budgets, except as authorized under Section 2 of this Order, are excluded
from the grant of the SRA, such as, but not limited to, the following:

       

   

a. Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific activities or
services with expected outputs;

b. Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework
basis;

c. Student workers and apprentices; and

d. All individuals and group of individuals whose services are engaged through COS or
JO, including BHWs, who are not assigned in hospitals and healthcare facilities.

Section 4. COVID-19 SRA for PHWs of NGAs and GOCCs. The amount required
for personnel occupying regular, contractual, casual or part-time positions in NGAs shall be
charged against their available released PS allotments, while the amount required for
COS/JO workers shall be charged against their available released Maintenance and Other
Operating Expenses (MOOE) allotments, without need for prior authority from the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM), provided that all authorized mandatory
expenses shall have been paid first.

In case of insufficient PS or MOOE allotments, the agencies concerned shall submit
to the DBM a Special Budget Request duly supported by a list of entitled personnel with the
corresponding amounts required. The DBM shall release funds chargeable against the
available appropriations that may be identified pursuant to the pertinent provisions of RA
No. 11469, without need of further approval from the Office of the President.

For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective approved
corporate operating budgets for FY 2020. A GOCC which does not have sufficient funds to
fully cover the amount authorized herein may grant the same at a lower but uniform rate for
all qualified personnel.

Section 5, COVID-19 SRA for PHWs in the LGUs. The grant of the SRA to PHWs
in the LGUs, including BHWs, shall be determined by their respective sanggunians
depending on the LGU’s financial capability, at rates not exceeding the amounts authorized
herein, subject to: (a) the PS limitations under RA No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code
of 1991,” in the case of employees of the LGU; (b) available MOOE allotments in the case
of COS/JO workers and BHWs; and (c) conditions set in this Order, chargeable against the
FY 2020 funds of the LGU. Should there be insufficient funds to fully cover the COVID-19
SRA, a lower but uniform rate may be granted for all qualified personnel.

Section 6. Guidelines on the Grant of the COVID-19 SRA. As may be necessary,
the DBM shall issue supplemental guidelines for the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 7. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Section 8. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its publication
in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila this 6th day of April inthe Year of Our Lord, Two
Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

o¢

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary ea

   

TTY, CONCEPCION WERY §&, FERROLING-FRAD

¥ d@-G@-% DIRECTOR IV

  

a a