MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 341

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE APPOINTMENT IN THE REGULAR FORCE, PHILIPPINE AIR FORCE, OF RESERVE OFFICER PILOTS WHO ARE GRADUATES OF THE PHILIPPINE AIR FORCE OR UNITED STATES AIR FORCE FLYING SCHOOLS AND NON-PILOT RESERVE OFFICERS ON ACTIVE DUTY WHO POSSESS TECHNICAL QUALIFICATIONS NECESSARY FOR THE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF AIRCRAFT

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 1231, as amended by Republic Act No. 1915, authorizes the President to appoint not to exceed sixty reserve officer pilots into the Regular Force in grades higher than second lieutenant who are graduates of the Philippine Air Force Flying School or the United States Air Force Flying School and non-pilot reserve officers on active duty who possess technical qualifications necessary for the operation and maintenance of aircraft, and to prescribe the rules and regulations therefor; and

WHEREAS, it is for the best interest of the military service that appointments and commissions under Republic Act No. 1231, as amended by Republic Act No. 1915, be made on a fair and equitable basis, with due regard to the demonstrated fitness of reserve officers to hold commissions in the Regular Force as well as to the necessity of affording reasonable security to officers now in the Regular Force;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority vested in me by Republic Act No. 1231, as amended by Republic Act No. 1915, do hereby prescribe the following rules and regulations:

SECTION 1. To be eligible for appointment and commission in the Regular Force pursuant to Republic Act No. 1231, as amended by Republic Act No. 1915, a reserve officer must:

a. Be a pilot who is a graduate of a Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School, or a non-pilot who possesses technical qualifications necessary for the operation and maintenance of aircraft;

b. Be a natural-born citizen of the Philippines, of good moral character, and physically fit for general military service;

c. Have rendered at least two years of active commissioned service prior to June 22, 1957;

d. Have been on active commissioned status since June 22, 1957.

SEC. 2. All officers who shall be appointed in the Regular Force pursuant to Republic Act No. 1231, as amended by Republic Act No. 1915, and this Order, shall be placed in the Philippine Air Force (PAF) promotion list for regular officers as follows:

a. General. —The total period of active commissioned service in the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) shall be the basis for determining the seniority of officers appointed under this Order, such that among all regular officers already in the PAF promotion list and those to be appointed under this Order, the officer with the longer period of active commissioned service shall be senior: Provided, That for purposes of this Order:

(1) The difference between the total active commissioned service in the AFP of any two officers wherein one has longer active commissioned service in the PAF but has lesser total active commissioned service in the AFP shall not be less than the difference between their respective active commissioned service in the PAF, otherwise the officer with the longer active commissioned service in the PAF shall be Senior.

(2) Active commissioned service in the PAF shall be reckoned from the date of assignment for duty in any unit of the PAF.

(3) Any period of active commissioned service prior to appointment as Aviation Cadet and any period of active commissioned service in any guerrilla unit shall not be credited.

(4) Reserve officers to be appointed under this Order shall have at least one more year of total active commissioned service in the AFP than a graduate of the Philippine Military Academy above whom they are inserted in the promotion list.

b. For Pilot Officers. —Pilot officers shall be placed in the PAF regular promotion list in accordance with Section 2. a, of this Order, subject to the following:

(1) Among pilot officers who were student officers in the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School and who graduated therefrom together, the relative seniority existing among themselves during the flying training period shall be maintained.

(2) Pilot officers who were aviation cadets in the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School and who graduated therefrom together shall be inserted as a group, arranged according to their class standing upon graduation, in the PAF promotion list in effect at the time of their appointment, such that, the most senior in the group shall be immediately below the least senior member of their class already in said promotion list: Provided, That such group shall not be placed below any member of their class already in the PAF promotion list who, prior to his appointment in the Regular Force under Republic Act No. 291, had been considered but not finally recommended for such appointment; Provided, further, That any officer of such group who was not immediately commissioned in the Reserve Force upon graduation from the Flying School or who has not been on continuous active commissioned service since graduation from the Flying School shall be inserted in the promotion list immediately above the group of officers appointed pursuant to this Order whose length of active commissioned service is closest to but does not exceed his length of active commissioned service: Provided, further, That officers appointed under the provisions of this paragraph shall-not be inserted above any officer already in the PAF promotion list who graduated ahead of them from the Philippine Air Force Flying School or a United States Air Force Flying School, unless such officer was deferred for promotion by a selection board under the provisions of Republic Act No. 291.

(3) No reserve pilot office shall be appointed under this Order in a grade higher than that of any other regular pilot officer in the existing PAF promotion list who has more active commissioned service than the former.

c. For Non-Pilot Officers. Non-Pilot officers shall be placed in the PAF regular promotion list in accordance with Section 2.a. of this Order, subject to the following:

(1) No non-pilot reserve officer shall be appointed in a grade higher than that of any non-pilot regular officer in the existing PAF promotion list who has more active commissioned service than the former.

(2) No non-pilot reserve officer appointed under this Order be placed above any non-pilot regular officer in the existing PAF promotion list who has more active commissioned service than the former.

SEC. 3. Any reserve officer appointed in the Regular Force, PAF, pursuant to the provisions of this Order shall be appointed in the grade equal to that of the officer above whom he is placed in the PAF regular promotion list.

SEC. 4. Not less than twenty-five per centum of those who shall be commissioned under the provisions of Republic Act No. 1231, as amended by Republic Act No. 1915, and this Order, shall be non-pilots.

SEC. 5. This Order shall take effect immediately and shall continue in operation until the expiration of the two-year period provided for in Republic Act No. 1915.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 341 : Prescribing rules and regulations for the appointment in the regular force, Philippine Air Force, of reserve officer pilots who are graduates of the Philippine Air Force or United States Air Force Flying Schools and Non-Pilot Reserve Officers on active duty who possess technical qualifications necessary for the operation and maintenance of aircraft. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (26), 4793-4795.