MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 429

CREATING A DECORATION TO BE KNOWN AS THE RIZAL PRO PATRIA AWARD

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created a decoration, to be known as the Rizal Pro Patria Award to be awarded by the President of the Philippines to ( a ) individuals—Filipinos or foreigners alike, and to ( b ) societies, institutions, or other organizations that have rendered outstanding work in:

a. stimulating and encouraging works towards the Rizalian concept of love of country and the fulfillment of our duties of citizenship;

b. achieving meritorious individual advancement in the various professions, or promoting, teaching, and disseminating the same through proven competence leading to the general benefit of the individual, the community, and the country at large in the light of Rizal’s teachings and way of life; or

c. promoting and encouraging civic and citizenship responsibility as model citizens—incorruptible patriots with the virtue of becoming insensible to the temptations and the misuse of wealth, influence, rank, or power.

SEC. 2. The Rizal Pro Patria Award, which is intended to perpetuate the memory of Jose Rizal, our national hero, shall be divided into two categories:

a. The Individual Award. — -To be awarded to individuals, Filipino or foreigners, who qualify therefor under section 1 hereof.

b. The Institutional Award. —To be awarded to societies, institutions, or other organizations which qualify therefor under section 1 hereof.

SEC. 3. The decoration of the Rizal Pro Patria Award may be awarded posthumously to any person entitled thereto, in which case the same shall be received by his legal heirs; if there be no legal heir, by his nearest of kin; and if there be no legal heir or nearest of kin, by any person designated by the President of the Philippines to receive the award on behalf of the deceased.

SEC. 4. No individual or society, institution, or organization which has previously been cited and conferred a decoration by the Republic shall be cited again for the Rizal Pro Patria Award for the same achievement.

SEC. 5. The form, make, and design of the decoration for the Rizal Pro Patria Award, the manner of wearing it, and other details shall be prescribed in such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Philippines Heraldry Committee and approved by the President of the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 429 : Creating a decoration to be known as the Rizal Pro Patria Award. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (25), 4569-4570.