MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 315

PRESCRIBING THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE REPARATIONS COMMISSION

For the purpose of carrying out more effectively the provisions of Republic Act No. 1789 creating the Reparations Commission, and so as to have an appropriate and orderly procedure for the transaction of the business and performance of the duties and functions entrusted to it by law, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby prescribe the following rules of procedure for the observance of the Reparations Commission:

1. All acts of the Reparations Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, with reference to important matters including, but not limited to, appointments of per­sonnel, disbursement of funds, approval of applications for reparations goods, approval of contracts, determination of policies, and all other acts that are binding on the Commission as a body shall be in the form of resolutions reduced to writing, serially numbered, dated, signed by the Chairman, attested, and sealed by the Executive Director and Secretary of the Reparations Commission, and kept in a separate record book entitled: RESOLUTIONS OF THE REPARATIONS COMMISSION, to be preserved in bound volumes.

2. All proposed resolutions must be in writing and in correct form, delivered to the Executive Director and Secretary of the Commission by its author who should be either one of the two members of the Commission or its chairman. The executive director and secretary shall calendar the same for discussion of the Commission not less than three days after such delivery to him.

3. All proposed resolutions shall be discussed by the Commission in a formal meeting duly called for the purpose and which shall be held within the premises of the Reparations Commission.

4. A proposed resolution, in order to become an Act of the Commission, must be approved by at least one member of the Commission and its chairman in a formal meeting duly convened: Provided, however, That in case a resolution or measure is favored by two commissioners but objected to by the chairman, the matter shall be forwarded to the President for final decision.

5. No meeting of the Commission shall take place except when duly called by the executive director and the secretary, or anyone acting as his capacity, by authority of the chairman of the Commission or on request of two commissioners. Written notice of such meeting shall be served on all members of the Commission, including the chairman, at least 48 hours before such meeting. The chairman shall always preside all meetings of the Commission.

6. The Commission shall only be empowered to meet as a body to transact business with the presence of a quorum which shall consist of at least one member and the chairman. All actions taken or resolutions passed in the absence of a quorum shall be null and void.

7. The Commission may, by appropriate resolution, authorized the executive director and the secretary or any other official of the Commission to sign in his name and official capacity routinary papers giving information or disposing of ordinary administrative matters. Such action shall, however, be on his own responsibility and shall not be binding on the Commission.

8. No member of the Commission, including the chairman, shall act or speak or decide for the Commission any matter pending before that body for decision or action within its authority. The official action of the Commission shall be expressed in its written resolutions duly authenticated as herein provided for and in no other form.

9. During the .temporary absence of the chairman because of authorized leave, illness or inability to discharge his duties, the President of the Philippines only, and no other, may appoint an acting chairman when deemed by him necessary.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 315 : Prescribing the Rules of Procedure of the Reparations Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (23), 6053-6054.