MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 439

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF COLUMBIO IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Datal-blao, Kalonglid, Lumaga, Sinapulan, Columbio, Colon-Nambes, Mayo, Katil, Sipaka, Malala, Bual Bunawan, Makabuat, Kalaong-Lebe, Bantañgan, Maligaya, Mauno, Tamlos, Dalul, Lumoyon, Alip, Panag, Damawato, Barrio Moslem, Minapan, Telafas, Palao-sa-Buto, all of the municipality of Buluan, province of Cotabato, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Columbio with the seat of government at the barrio of Columbio.

The municipality of Columbio as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at a point on the boundary of the municipalities of Buluah and M’lang on the Damawato River; thence going in a straight line directly east to a point at about 1½ kilometers north of Damawato River on the Kidapawan-Allah Junction Road where it intersects the homestead road; thence following the homestead road east-ward till it reaches the point where the Damawato River curves; thence following the Damawato River to its source; thence going in a straight line following the old Buluan-M’lang boundary to a point on the Cotabato-Davao boundary; thence following the Cotabato-Davao boundary southward to a point where it is intersected by the old Tupi-Buluan boundary; thence following the old Tupi-Buluan boundary westward to a point where it is intersected by the Koronadal-Tupi boundary; thence from this point it goes directly to the summit of Mt. Alip; thence going in a straight line to a point on the Damawato River where the Municipalities of Buluan and M’lang meet, the point of beginning.” (As described in Resolution No. 123, dated March 15, 1961, of the Provincial Board of Cotabato, based on the sketch plan or map prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of said province submitted and on file in this Office; Scale: 1:250,000.)

The municipality of Buluan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof included in the municipality of Columbio as delimited above.

The municipality of Columbio shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential Services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Buluan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Columbio, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 439 : Creating the municipality of Columbio in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (36), 6407-6408.