MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 357

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SISON IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, and upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao, the barrios of Sison, Dakungpatag, Biyabid, Mayag, Tagbayani, and Mabuhay, together with their respective sitios, all of the Municipality of Surigao, province of Surigao, are hereby segregated from the said municipality and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Sison with the seat of government at the barrio of Sison.

The municipality of Sison shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from the point at the peak of Mt. Tendido and marked (A) on the plan, describe an imaginary straight line about 40° NE. traversing the point where Calang Creek intersects with Surigao-Badas road at Km. No. 15, marked (X) on the plan, to the point at the back drop of Mt. Hinaksaan, marked (B) on the plan; thence follow a course about 75° SE, traversing the peak of Mt. Manbilibid, to its point of intersection with the existing boundary line between the mother municipality, Surigao, and the municipality of Taganaan, and marked (C) on the plan; thence follow same existing boundary line to the point where a concrete marker 15 is located, at Km. No. 22 along the Surigao-Badas road and marked (D) on the plan; thence follow same line to the point of common intersection with other boundary lines, and marked (E) on the plan; and thence northward following the existing boundary line which separates this part of the mother municipality with the municipality of Anao-aon to point of beginning.” (This description is taken from the technical description prepared and submitted by the Highway District Engineer for Surigao and embodied in the attached map of the municipality of Surigao showing the proposed municipality of Sison which map is on file with this Office.)

The municipality of Surigao shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Sison.

The municipality of Sison shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof but not earlier than January 1, 1960, and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Surigao, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Sison, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for its essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ENRIQUE C. QUEMA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1959). [Executive Order Nos. : 328-461]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.