MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 370

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SALVADOR IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Lanao del Norte and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Balimbing, Upper Rebe, Mabatao, Madaya, Camp III, Bolacon, Kilala, Tualon, Tamporong, Salog, Kanibongan, Pangao, Badelles, Rarkom, Inodaran, Rarab, Pagalongan, Padianan, Pansur, Mamaanum, Bontong, Maporog, Kabatongan, Pagayawan, Mt. Rangaraya, Mt. Talaysague, and Mt. Sucadan, all of the municipality of Baroy, province of Lanao del Norte, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Salvador with the seat of government at the barrio of Balimbing.

The municipality of Salvador as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“On the North traversing part of the sitio of Licapao, to the summit of Mount Sucadan, Bulakon, and to the summit of Mount Talaysague on the boundary of Tubod, as defined in paragraph 13 of Executive Order No. 13, dated April 21, 1917, of the Department of Mindanao and Sulu;

“On the West traversing the sitio of Mabatao and a straight line running from this sitio to Upper Eebe traversing part of the sitios of Camp Allere and Lindogan;

“On the South by the northern, and eastern boundaries of the municipality of Lala fixed in paragraphs 12 and 13 of Executive Order No. 13, dated April 21, 1917, of the Department of Mindanao and Sulu;

“On the East by the portion of Nunungan boundary line.” (As described in Resolution No. 349, dated November 26, 1959, of the Provincial Board of Lanao del Norte.)

The municipality of Baroy shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Salvador, as delimited above.

The municipality of Salvador shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Baroy, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Salvador, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ENRIQUE C. QUEMA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 370 : Creating the Municipality of Salvador in the Province of Lanao del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (2), 243-244.