MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 254

CREATING THE JUAN LUNA CENTENNIAL COMMISSION

WHEREAS, Juan Luna de San Pedro, the first internationally famous Filipino, was born on October 23, one hundred years ago, in the municipality of Badoc, province of Ilocos Norte;

WHEREAS, the genius of Juan Luna, as a painter was a God-given gift to our country at a time of our history when we had the greatest need for the Philippines to be known in other countries;

WHEREAS, his great works of art which attracted international attention and admiration in Italy, France, Spain, and other European countries served to introduce the Filipino people and our history and culture for the first time to other peoples of the world;

WHEREAS, he was a lover of our land, expressing his patriotism in his art by painting memorable events of our history; and

WHEREAS, he placed freely and unreservedly his talent and skill with the brush in close and effective cooperation with the inspired pens of Rizal, M. del Pilar, Graciano Lopez-Jaena, Pardo de Tavera, and other heroes, to glorify our country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, in appreciation of Juan Luna’s various artistic productions and in recognition of his noble and patriotic services to our country, do hereby create a Juan Luna Centennial Commission, composed of the following:

The Commission shall organize itself as soon as possible. It shall prepare the general program of the Centenary activities. It is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government for such information or assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

The Commission shall render and publish within one year after the conclusion of the celebration a comprehensive report of the activities that will have taken place, for the information of our people.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 254 :  Creating the Juan Luna Centennial Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (13), 4036-4037.