MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 295

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SULOP IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Davao and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrio of Sulop and other barrios and sitios adjacent to it, all of the municipality of Padada, province of Davao, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Sulop with the seat of government at the barrio Sulop A

The boundary which shall separate the municipality of Sulop from its mother municipality of Padada shall be the following:

From the point of the Davao Gulf Where the water of said Gulf meets the land at high tide exactly west of BBM No. 10, Cad. 275, westward to said BBM No. 10, thence in a straight line to BBM No. 18, Cad. 273, thence in a straight east to west line to the point of the intersection of this line with the Cotabato-Davao boundary.

The boundary of the municipality of Sulop in the south shall be the Padada-Malalag boundary as defined in Republic Act No. 1008, as follows:

From east to west, the Balasinon . River from the Gulf of Davao to Km. 327 of the Digos-Malalag-Makar Road and a straight line along latitude 6° 35′ from the said Km. 327 to the boundary line between the provinces of Davao and Cotabato.” (Based upon Republic Act No. 1008 and the sketch plan of the proposed municipality of Sulop submitted to this office with Provincial Board Resolution No. 31, current series.)

The municipality of Padada shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Sulop.

The municipality of Sulop shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Executive Order Nos. : 244-327]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.