MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 360

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF VALENCIA IN THE PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, and upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Bukidnon, the barrios of Valencia, Gunuyoran, Lilingayon, Lurogan, Mailag, Bagontaas, Sugod, San Isidro, Cawayanon, Lugayao, Laigan, Maapag, Talisayan, and Tongatongan, together with their respective sitios, all of the municipality of Malaybalay, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Valencia with the seat of government at the barrio of Valencia.

The Municipality of Valencia as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From a point marked 1 on plan, intersection of Fulangi River and the political boundary of the Municipal District of San Fernando; thence due west, 10.00 kms. to the confluence of Sawaga River and Manupale River marked 2; thence following upstream along the center line of Manupale River, 24.00 kms. to the political boundary of Talakag marked 3; thence following the political boundary of Talakag S 40-00’W, 10.00 kms. to point 4 junction with political boundary of Pangantukan; thence following the political boundary of Pangantukan S 30-00’E, 13.50 kms. to point 5; thence due east, 10-99 kms. to point 6; thence N 77-00’E, 9.60 kms. to point 7; thence S 75-00’E, 10.60 kms. to point 8 junction with the political boundary of San Fernando; thence following the political boundary of San Fernando N 8-00’W, 2.40 kms. to point 9; thence N. 11-00’E, 12.30 kms. to point 1, point of beginning. (This description is based on the technical description furnished by the Office of the District Engineer of Bukidnon.)

The Municipality of Malaybalay shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the Municipality of Valencia as delimited above.

The Municipality of Valencia shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Malaybalay, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the Municipality of Valencia can still maintain creditably its municipal government and provide for all the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ENRIQUE C. QUEMA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1959). [Executive Order Nos. : 328-461]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.