MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 447

WAIVING THE ADDITIONAL PROGRESSIVE TAXES TO BE COLLECTED FROM, AND PAID BY, PROPRIETORS AND OPERATORS OF CERTAIN SUGAR MILLS FOR THE CROP YEAR 1960-1961

WHEREAS, most of the sugar centrals in the Philippines are still undertaking the rehabilitation of their facilities, including the buildings and dwelling houses of their laborers, which were damaged during the last war, and are incurring heavy expenditures for this purpose;

WHEREAS, some of these centrals have been operating at a loss, and others at profits which are inconsiderable; and

WHEREAS, the imposition of the additional progressive taxes on these centrals would be unduly oppressive and, in a few instances, even confiscatory in effect;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby waive the additional progressive taxes to be paid by the proprietors and operators of the following sugar mills for the 1960-1961 crop under section 2 of Commonwealth Act No. 567;

1. Ormoc Sugar Company, Inc., provided that the central shall continue to give its planters transportation allowances as provided for in the revised milling contract between the central and its planters.

2. Bogo-Medellin Milling Co., Inc., provided that improvements being undertaken to increase the capacity of the mill and factory shall be continued and that the increase in the planters’ participation of 1½ per cent given since 1952-1953, thus making the planters’ participation 57½ per cent in addition to the escalator clause giving the planters 60 per cent of all sugar and molasses manufactured from and including the 131st milling day, shall continue to be enforced.

3. Asturias Sugar Central, Inc., provided that the planters’ participation shall continue to be increased to 57 per cent.

4. Hind Sugar Company, provided that 55 per cent of the equivalent of the progressive tax shall be paid to the central planters as additional benefits.

5. Central Azucarera del Norte.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 447 : Waiving the additional progressive taxes to be collected from, and paid by, proprietors and operators of certain sugar mills for the crop year 1960-1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (39), 6932-6933.