MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 395

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF TUNGAWAN AND TITAY IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur two new municipalities to be known as the municipalities of Tungawan and Titay which shall consist of certain portions of the territory of the municipality of Ipil, same province, with boundaries described hereunder:

1. The municipality of Tungawan which shall consist of the barrios and sitios of Tungawan, Tigbawang, Tando, Looc, Tigbucay, Upper Tungawan,, Tigpalay, Cayamcan, Looc Sioral, Taglibong, Tigbongabong, Banca-an, Langon, Lihguisan, Gapas-gapas, Dawet, Mangalibod, Buhangin, and other adjacent barrios and sitios, with the seat of government at the barrio of Tungawan, and with the following boundaries:

Beginning at point 1, at the center of the mouth of Tupilac River; thence, due south following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to point 2, the intersection of the boundary of the province of Zamboanga del Sur and the City of Zamboanga; thence, due west following the said boundary of the province of Zamboanga del Sur and the City of Zamboanga, to point 3, the intersection of the provincial boundaries of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte and the City of Zamboanga; thence, due north following the boundary of Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur till it intersects the 7° 40′ latitude, point 4; thence, due east following the 7° 40′ latitude with an approximate distance of 6,100 meters to point 5;. the intersection of 7° 40′ latitude and the center of Tupilac River; thence, following the course downstream of the Tupilac River to point 1, the point of beginning. (Based on the data shown on the sketch plan or map of the proposed muncipality of Tungawan, prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer, province of Zamboanga del Sur, submitted and on file in this Office; Scale: 1:100,000.)

2. The municipality of Titay shall consist of the barrios and sitios of Lalawan, Bangko, Palomok, Malangadis, and other adjacent barrios and sitios, with the seat of government at the barrio of Titay, and with the following boundaries;

Beginning at point 1, at the center of Sanito bridge, km. 310.66 of the Ipil-Liloy road; thence 853° 00′ W about 26,000 meters to the intersection of the center of Tupilac River and latitude 7° 40′ point 2; thence, westward about 6,100 meters following latitude 7° 40′ until it intersects the provincial boundary of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte, point 3; thence, following the provincial boundary of Zamboanga del Stir and Zamboanga del Norte up to the intersection of the municipal boundary of Ipil and Kabasalan, and the said provincial boundary of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte, point 4; thence, following the municipal boundary of Ipil and Kabasalan until after the barrio of Bacalan, about 8,300 meters, point 5; thence, S 63° 30′ W about 19,600 meters to point 1, the point of beginning. (Based on the data shown on the sketch plan or map of the proposed municipality of Titay, prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer, province of Zamboanga del Sur, submitted and file in this Office: Scale. 1:100,000.)

The municipality of Ipil shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipalities of Tungawan and Titay, as delimited above.

The municipalities of Tungawan and Titay shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of their respective mayors, vice-mayors, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipalities are financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of regular municipalities and that the mother municipality of Ipil, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipalities of Tungawan and Titay, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1960). [Executive Order Nos. : 328-461]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.