MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 350

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF PALIMBANG IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Palimbang, Kraan, Milbuk, Tibulos, Culobi, Kolong-Kolong, Botril, Baliango, Sinangcangan, Kanipaan, Barungis, Wal, Baranayan, Napaapon, Minos, Bulan, Tipulay, South Kulaman, North Kulaman, Akol, Wasag, Medol, Ligao, Ripulon Langali, Malatunol, Maganao, Kidayan, Balinnang, Sandiolo, Kisec, Namat Masla, Namat Paidu, Kipongot, Tuna, Sugko, Sangay, Danawan, Palili, Basiawan, Nara, North Tran, South Tran, Domodol, West Badiangan, East Badiangan, and Malisbong, all of the present municipalities of Lebak and Kiamba, province of Cotabato, are hereby segregated from the said municipalities and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Palimbang with the seat of government at the barrio of Palimbang.

The municipality of Palimbang as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Nara Point in the Celebes Sea, running directly eastward to a point on the boundary line of the municipalities of Isulan and Lebak; thence following the old boundary line of the municipalities of Isulan and Lebak going southward to the point of intersection of the boundary lines of the municipalities of Isulan, Bafiga, and Lebak; thence following the old boundary line going southeastward to the point of intersection of the old boundary lines of Kiamba, Lebak, and Bañga; thence following the boundary line of the Municipalities of Bañga and Kiamba going southeastward to a point of the Malisbong River; thence following the Malisbong River to its mouth in the Celebes Sea; thence following the coastline of the Celebes Sea going northeastward to Nara point, the point of beginning.”

The municipalities of Lebak and Kiamba shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof comprised in the municipality of Palimbang.

The municipality of Palimbang shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Lebak and Kiamba after the segregation therefrom of the barrios herein specified can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory obligations, and provide for their essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Executive Order No. 350 : Creating the Municipality of Palimbang in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (35), 7279-7280.