MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 306

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATION PERFORMANCE EFFICIENCY UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, in order to achieve higher efficiency and competence in the administration of government, there is need for more thorough study of official matters, issues, and problems demanding executive attention, consideration, and decision;

WHEREAS, for the early realization of national development plans and prompt solution of administration problems, it is necessary for the Office of the President to keep itself constantly informed as to the actual status, progress, and/or problems of governmental activity in the execution of the program of administration; and

WHEREAS, in order to insure the speedy and efficient performance of assigned duties, functions, and executive directives by the implementing government offices, agencies, and instrumentalities and/or their personnel, and to insure a more speedy and proper disposition of complaints and requests filed with the Office of the President, there is a need for direct communication and organized liaison with said offices, agencies, and instrumentalities to enable the Office of the President to effectively supervise and coordinate their performance of the duties and tasks duly assigned them;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, P resident of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby ; create the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency as the executive instrumentality in the Office of the President that shall render the necessary services enumerated above to the end that administration of government may thereby attain higher proficiency, keep itself informed of actual conditions of the Republic, and prove more efficaciously responsive to the needs of our people.

1. The Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency shall be directly under, and responsible to, the President of the Philippines.

2. The Committee shall be headed by a Technical Assistant, to be designated by the President, and who shall be known as the Chairman. The Committee shall be composed of personnel who may be assigned or detailed to it from departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government upon the recommendation of the Chairman. The Chairman may call on the technical advisers to the President to assist in the study of, and/or give their expert advice on, matters within the scope of their respective fields.

3. The Committee shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Organize and maintain effective liaison ‘between the Office of the President and the executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations.

b. Establish and operate a continuous and direct communications system between the Office of the President and the head offices of the executive departments, agencies, government-owned or controlled corporations, and/or instrumentalities of government discharging major roles in the program of administration set by the President of the Philippines.

c . Obtain, collect, and process periodically and when specifically required, such data on the status, situation, progress, and/or problems of governmental activity in general and of administration projects in particular as will make possible the evaluation of the performance efficiency of the governmental entities responsible therefor.

d. Conduct a thorough and careful analysis, research, and evaluative studies on specific matters, cases, or issues due for executive or Cabinet action, providing the necessary reference data, political and economic evaluations, legal opinion, and/or remedies, and such relevant official and confidential information as will provide guidance for executive deliberation.

e. Promote and effect the adoption of a coordinated uniform and/or standardized system of statistical research, reporting, and evaluation in governmental agencies for the purpose of facilitating the centralized collection of essential reference data and information. Receive; process, and evaluate requests for official action or intervention of various executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations and/or their personnel, within their duties as prescribed by law.

g. Receive, process, and evaluate complaints regarding the manner in which various executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations and/or their personnel, are performing the duties entrusted to them by law.

h. Refer and/or endorse for action to the government office or agency concerned such complaints or requests as have been processed and evaluated, devising for this purpose a call-up and tracer system to expedite performance and to keep the Office of the President informed on the action accomplished or still due on such complaints and requests.

i. Make and submit, from time to time, a regular report on the overall conduct and performance of government, listing such governmental entities as are found indifferent, negligent, or confronted with problems, with appropriate recommendations for the improvement of the administration of government or of its essential services and operations.

j . Perform such other duties and related functions as the President of the Philippines may assign to it.

4. The Chairman of the Committee is hereby authorized to use any form of communication and transportation or means of conveyance in his official travels or those of his personnel.

5. The Chairman may request the proper government law-enforcement or service agencies to detail such personnel as may be necessary to expedite the investigation, fact-finding, or action on the complaints or requests filed with the Office of the President.

6. All Technical Advisers to the President shall make themselves available for consultation or assistance to the Committee in the performance of its task, either individually or in groups, when so requested by the Chairman.

7. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government, including the government-owned or controlled corporations, are directed to cooperate with, and assist the Presidential Committee on, Administration Performance Efficiency in effecting prompt and successful accomplishment of its assigned duties.

8. The Presidential Complaints and Action Committee created in Executive Order No. 19, dated March 17, 1954, is hereby abolished and all its records, properties, and equipment are transferred to the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency herein created.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 306 :  Creating the Presidential Committee on administration performance efficiency under the Office of the President. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (16), 4683-4684.