MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 430

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF GITAGUM IN THE PROVINCE OF MISAMIS ORIENTAL

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Misamis Oriental and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Gitagum, Cogon, Burnay, Pangayawan, Ulab, Lagutay, Matangad, and Kilangit, all of the municipality of Alubijid, province of Misamis Oriental, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Gitagum with the seat of government at the barrio of Gitagum.

The municipality of Gitagum as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning at a point marked 1 on the plan located at the easterncoast of Iligan Bay; thence, following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have, pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to the mouth of the Gitagum River, marked point 2; thence, following the southeast course of the Gitagum River to point marked 3, a distance of approximately 5,800 meters; thence, S. 15° 00′ E., to point marked 4, at the Lourdes-Laguindingan Road, a distance of 3,800 meters; thence, following the SW. course of Laguindingan-Lourdes Road to point marked 5 at barrio Lourdes, a distance of approximately 1,500 meters; thence, N. 39° 00′ W., to point marked 6 a distance of approximately 2,200 meters; thence, N. 39° 00′ W. to point marked 1, the point of beginning, a distance of approximately 8,225 meters. (This technical description is based on the sketch plan or map of the proposed municipality of Gitagum, prepared by the Office of the District Engineer of Misamis Oriental, on file in the Office. Scale: 1:40,000)

The municipality of Alubijid shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Gitagum, as delimited above.

The municipality of Gitagum shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Alubijid, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Gitagum, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 430 : Creating the municipality of Gitagum in the Province of Misamis Oriental. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (26), 4743-4744.