MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 437

AUTHORIZING PAYMENT OF HAZARDOUS DUTY PAY TO OFFICERS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, certain activities connected with underwater naval operations, bomb disposal, and research and development such as deep-sea diving; arming, disarming, or disposal of fused bombs, mines, torpedoes, body traps, and other lethal devices; preparation or testing of lethal materials or devices such as explosives, incendiaries, poison gases, and radioactive materials; testing of new and dangerous equipment and underwater demolitions, expose military personnel to extraordinary hazards and risks;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority vested in me by section 90 of Commonwealth Act No. 1, as amended, do hereby authorize the payment of additional pay (hazardous duty pay) to officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines while actually performing hazardous duty and only for the inclusive dates in which such hazardous duty has been actually performed under rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of National Defense requiring therein that all requests for hazardous duty pay will contain a description of the hazardous duty performed, the period covered, and the place where such duty was performed, attested to by the appropriate commander of the officer applicant. The hazardous duty pay shall be equivalent to fifty per centum of their respective base pay, subject to the availability of funds: Provided, That officers receiving flying pay shall not be entitled to hazardous duty pay.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 437 : Authorizing payment of hazardous duty pay to officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (31), 5530-5531.