MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 337

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ESPERANZA IN THE PROVINCE OF MASBATE

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, and upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Masbate, the barrios and sitios of Esperanza, Dacaldacal, Baras, Domorog, Nabitasan, Sorosimbahan, Tawad, San Roque, Agoho, Villa, Daganas, Balabag, Masbaranon, Putingbato, Labrador, Tuñga, Libertad, and Rizal, all within the jurisdiction of the municipality of Placer, Masbate, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Esperanza.

The municipality of Placer shall have its present territory-minus that comprised in the municipality of Esperanza.

The municipality of Esperanza shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof after receipt in this office of ( a ) the accurate description of the boundaries of the new municipality properly marked on the ground with concrete standard boundary monuments in accordance with Executive Order No. 114, series of 1937; and ( b ). the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Placer after segregation therefrom of the barrios and sitios to constitute the new political subdivision can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1959). [Executive Order Nos. : 328-461]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.