MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 372

FIXING MONDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1960, AS CENSUS DAY FOR POPULATION AND HOUSING, AND TUESDAY, MAY 3, 1960, AS CENSUS DAY FOR AGRICULTURE

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 591 authorizes the Bureau of the Census and Statistics “to prepare for and undertake all censuses of population, agriculture, industry, and commerce,” and Republic Act No. 2300 sets aside an appropriation for the taking of the 1960 census of population and agriculture;

WHEREAS, February 1, 1960, has been fixed as Census Day for the Census of population by Executive Order No. 365, dated December 4, 1959; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to give ample time to field personnel to prepare themselves for the enumeration, especially because in certain cases the forms have not yet reached their destination on account of the delay caused by typhoons and other justifiable causes;

Now, THEREFORE, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby designate Monday, February 15, 1960, as Census Day for population and housing, and Tuesday, May 3, 1960, as Census Day for Agriculture, on which dates the enumeration of population, housing, and agriculture and the collection of all pertinent social and economic data about the Philippines shall begin and proceed on consecutive dates from daylight to darkness, including Sundays and holidays, until completed.

The population count of the Philippines shall be as of 12:01 a.m. of the Census Day, February 15, 1960.

The necessary supervisors, enumerators, and other subordinate personnel for the Census work shall be appointed by the Director of the Census and Statistics. All heads of departments of the government are hereby enjoined to authorize and direct all bureaus and offices respectively under them and provincial, city, and municipal officials, as well as provincial Constabulary commanders concerned, to make available, for purposes of the census-taking, the services of such of their personnel as may be requisitioned for said purposes.

All residents of the Philippines are enjoined to give any required assistance in executing the provisions of this Executive Order by giving all information requested by Census Enumerators and allowing them to affix on any portion of any dwelling or other property, in a conspicuous place, any authorized mark, sign or notice, letter or number during the Census Day.

This order supersedes Executive Order No. 385, dated December 4, 1959.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 372 : Fixing Monday, February 15, 1960, as Census Day for Population and Housing, and Tuesday, may 3, 1960, as Census Day for Agriculture. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (3), 481-482.