MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 266

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ISULAN IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as the municipality of Isulan to consist of the following barrios and sitios:

From the Municipality of Datu Piang

From the Municipality of Norala

with the seat of government at the barrio of Kalawag.

The municipality of Isulan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Allah Bridge on the Allah River, in the barrio of Allah, Km. 244.6 of the ECA Road, going in a straight line directly westward to a point at the boundary of the Municipalities of Lebak and Datu Piang; thence going southward following the old boundary lines of the Municipality of Lebak and Datu Piang to a point where the boundaries of Lebak, Bañga, and Datu Piang meets; thence going Eastward following the old boundary lines of Datu Piang and Bafiga to a point at Sipaka thence, following downwards the course of the Allah River to a point directly west of Barrio Kulambog; thence going Eastward to barrio Kulambog; thence following the ECA Road northward to Km. 256 of said Road; thence going Northeasthward in a straight line to the junction of Kapingkong River and Sampao Creek; thence following the course of the Kapingkong River to its junction with the Allah River; thence going Southward to the point of beginning at the Allah Bridge.” (This description is based upon the technical description furnished by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of the province of Cotabato.

The municipalities of Datu Piang and Norala shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Isulan, as delimited above.

The municipality of Isulan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipalities of Datu Piang and Norala, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Isulan, can still maintain creditably their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). Executive Order No. 266 :  Creating the Municipality of Isulan in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53 (17), 5502-5503.