MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 402

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MUTIA IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Zamboanga del Norte and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Salvacion, Tinglan Buenasuerte, Dilac, New Foundland, Pamocloran, Totongan, Tubac, New Casul, and New Siquijor, all of the municipality of New Piñan, province of Zamboanga del Norte, are hereby segregated from said municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Mutia with the seat of government at the barrio of Salvacion.

The municipality of Mutia as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From the municipal boundary monument No. 3 of the municipalities of Dapitan and New Piñan thence, in a straight line to the municipal boundary monument No. 4 of said municipalities; thence, in a straight line to Km . No. 324.000 of the New Piñan-Salvacion-Sibulan Road; thence, in a straight line to the intersection of longitude 123° 2′ and Sisoy River thence, following upstream the Disoy River until it intersects the provincial boundary of Misamis Occidental and Zamboanga del Norte; thence, due North, following the said provincial boundary until it intersects latitude 8° 25′; thence, due West, to the municipal boundary monument No. 3, the point of beginning. (As described in Resolution No. 70, dated March 11, 1960, of the Provincial Beard of Zamboanga del Norte based on the sketch plan or map prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of said province.)

The municipality of New Piñan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Mutia, as delimited above.

The municipality of Mutia shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of New Piñan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Mutia, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 402 : Creating the municipality of Mutia in the province of Zamboanga del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (31), 4856-4857.