MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 290

PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REORGANIZATION PLANS NOS. 4-A, 5-A, 7-A, 8-A, and 9-A RELATIVE TO ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Nine hundred and ninety-seven, as amended by Republic Act Numbered One thousand two hundred and forty-one, and upon the recommendation of the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission, the following implementing Details of Reorganization Plans Nos. 4-A, 5-A, 7-A, 3-A, and 9-A which relate to Administrative Services, are hereby promulgated to govern the organization, powers, duties, and functions of the Department of General Services:

ORGANIZATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES

SECTION 1. The organization, functions, and operations of the Department of General Services, hereinafter referred to as the “Department”, shall be in accordance with the provisions of Reorganization Plans Nos. 4-A, 5-A, 7-A, 8-A, and 9-A, hereinafter referred to as the Plans, and these Implementing Details.

SEC 2. The organization of the Department as graphically depicted in the following organization charts, shall consist of the Office of the Secretary, Administrative Division, Fiscal Division, Legal Division, Bureau of Supply Coordination, Bureau of Building and Real Property Management, Bureau of Records Management, Bureau of Printing, and National Media Production Center.

SEC. 3. Quarters for the offices of the Department and its entities shall be selected by the Secretary of the Department.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of the Department of General Services, hereinafter referred to as the “Secretary,” is authorized to make such changes in organization, definition of functions, and distribution of work among entities in the Department as may be necessary to reflect changes in legislation, conditions, needs, or workloads: Provided, That no such changes may be made during fiscal year 1957 without specific approval of the President: And provided, further, That any such changes must be in conformity with the general pattern of organization set forth in the Plans and these Implementing Details.

FUNCTIONAL STATEMENTS OP THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES

Functions of the Office of the Secretary

SEC. 5. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Secretary and the Undersecretary of the Department of General Services shall consist of those provided in pertinent provisions of the Revised Administrative Code and other pertinent laws, and those provided in the Plans and in these Implementing Details.

a. The Secretary shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) advise the President on the formulation and execution of policies concerning the performance of common administrative services m the various entities of the government; (2) administer, coordinate, and direct the assignment, regulation, and performance of the functions related to maintenance, custody, and utilization of buildings and real property; procurement, issuance, and utilization of supplies, materials, and equipment; management of government records and documents;-and printing and media production services; (3) promulgate rules and regulations necessary to carry out policy objectives and functions vested in him by law; (4) delegate authority for the performance of any function or set of functions to officers and employees under his direction; and (5) direct and provide for the over-all operation of the Department.

b. The Undersecretary shall have the following functions, among; others;

(1) serve as deputy to the Secretary in all matters; (2) administer the Department’s day-to-day activities, coordinate its programs and projects, and be responsible for the efficient and economical operations of the Department; (3) advise and assist the Secretary in the formulation, determination, and implementation of the Department policies; and (4) act as the Secretary in his absence, or if the Office is vacant.

Functions of the Administrative Division

SEC. 6. The Administrative Division shall be responsible for providing the Department with services relating to property and records management, requisitioning supplies and equipment, personnel management; improvement of organization and methods; statistical analysis; and building office services. This Division shall have a Correspondence and Records Section, a Property and Supply Section, a Statistical Section, a Personnel Section, an Organization and Methods Section and a General Services Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follow:

a. The Correspondence and Records Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) receive and distribute incoming and outgoing correspondence; (2) file and. maintain necessary records and documents of the Department; and (3) provide policy guidance and operating advice on the creation, maintenance, transfer, and retirement of records in accordance with standards set by the Bureau of Records Management.

b. The Property and Supply Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) be responsible for receiving, storing, safekeeping and distributing supplies, materials, and equipment of the Department; (2) conduct inventories of departmental properties, supplies, and equipment; (3) maintain property records of the Department; (4) report the loss of properties, supplies, and equipment and initiate recovery actions; (5) process requisitions for supplies, materials, and equipment; and (6) provide policy guidance and operating advice on the storage of supplies, materials, and equipment.

c. The Statistical Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) compile and analyze statistics and data on the Department’s operations to serve as a basis for management decisions; (2) publish statistics and data: on the effectiveness of the Department’s operation for public relations purposes; (3) provide policy guidance and operating advice on the collection and analysis of statistical data; and (4) carry out such research and surveys as may be necessary to develop policies and practices for the various entities of the Department.

d. The Personnel Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) establish and manage, subject to existing civil service and other personnel laws, rules, and regulations a personnel program which includes preparation of position descriptions and qualification standards for purposes of selective recruitment, appointment, and promotion; (2) act on all matters concerning attendance, leaves of absence, appointments, promotions, transfers, and efficiency records; (3) plan, formulate, develop, and conduct training programs of the Department in conjunction with other government entities concerned with training; (4) conduct investigations or review papers on administrative charges against employees of the Department as directed; (5) provide policy guidance and operating advice on personnel matters; and (6) provide medical services pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 1054.

e. The Organization and Methods Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) conduct studies and make recommendations on organizational structure, accountability patterns, and staffing patterns; (2) provide technical advice on work processes, standardization of forms, and work simplification; (3) establish standards and criteria on operational procedures, methods and techniques and on management controls; (4) assist in the implementation of approved management improvement programs; and (5) maintain liaison with, and receive advice and assistance from entities concerned with organization and methods improvement.

f. The General Services Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) provide and coordinate security guarding services for the Department, which include the prevention of theft, fire, damage, accident, unlawful entry, and similar hazards on buildings and other properties, and the routinary watching and guarding of the premises; (2) provide and coordinate janitorial and general utility services for the Department which include cleaning the offices, toilets and closets, buildings and grounds; keeping office equipment and furniture clean and orderly; collecting and disposing of waste; and related activities; (3) provide and coordinate messenger services; and (4) manage the transportation facilities of the Department.

Functions of the Fiscal Division

SEC. 7. The Fiscal Division shall be responsible for the functions of the Department relating to budgeting and handling of cash. This Division shall have a budgeting Section and a Collecting and Disbursing Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Budgeting Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) prepare, review, consolidate, and submit budget estimates arid budget justifications of the Department; (2) review and control expenditures of budgeted funds for the Department; (3) advise management and prepare management control reports on the status of appropriations and allotments, income, and work accomplished; and

(4) coordinate financial planning with the program planning activities of the Department.

b. The Collecting and Disbursing Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) prepare bills and statements of accounts receivable and solicit payments; (2)receive, collect, and deposit cash; (3)prepare and process vouchers and warrants for payment of the Department’s obligations; (4) prepare payrolls for all entities of the Department; (5) pay approved vouchers and salaries and wages; (6) sell textbooks and public documents; and (7) prepare reports on cash collection, deposits, and disbursements.

Functions of the Legal Division

SEC. 8. The Legal Division shall provide legal services and advice to the Secretary and the entities of the Department.

a. This Division shall have the following duties, responsibilities, and functions, among others:

(1) interpret statutes, laws, rules, and regulations affecting the operation of the Department and interpret provisions of contracts covering work performed for the Department by private entities; (2) assist in the promulgation of rules and regulations governing the activities of the Department; (3) prepare comments on proposed legislation referred to the Department by the President or by the Congress: study and analyze legislative proposals originating from the various entities of the Department; prepare bills for introduction to Congress; and maintain liaison with Congress regarding legislation affecting the Department; and (4) assist the Solicitor General in representing the Department in court and conduct necessary research related thereto.

Functions of the Bureau of Supply Coordination

SEC. 9. The Bureau of Supply Coordination, hereinafter referred to under this title as the “Bureau,” shall be primarily responsible for the administration of the supply system of the government. The Bureau shall coordinate, perform, or assign to other entities the performance of the supply activities relating to purchasing, storage, standardization, delivery, and property utilization and disposition. The Bureau shall promulgate rules, regulations, and standards; formulate and initiate plans and programs; and develop and define operating procedures concerning all aspects of the supply management operation of the government.

SEC. 10. There shall be an Administrative Assistant in the Office of the Director of the Bureau who shall ar­range for and coordinate administrative services provided by the Department. The Administrative Assistant shall be responsible for the preparation and processing of the Bureau’s budget proposals, personnel request, and forms and supply requisitions; the maintenance of files of necessary personnel documents, correspondence, and current operating records; and the direction and coordination of clerical, janitorial, messengerial, and guarding services.

SEC. 11. The Bureau shall have a Supply Division, a Specifications and Inspection Division, and a Property Utilization Division.

SEC. 12. The Supply Division shall plan, develop, and execute programs of the Bureau relating to the procurement, stocking, and issuance of supplies and equipment and the contracting for non-personnal services. This Division shall have a Procurement Section, a Stores Section, and a Service Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. T he Procurement Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) procure, by bidding and negotiation, supplies, materials, and equipment, including non-personal services, either from local or foreign sources; (2) compose invitations to bid; maintain lists of prospective bidders; award and administer contracts, including alteration and adjustment of established contracts; and prepare justifications for contracts awarded at other than the lowest price arid for purchasing outside of existing contracts; (3) assist in determining the acceptability of merchandise in cases of controversy, including consideration of adequacy of price reductions; (4) assist requisitioning offices in determining items to be ordered to fill intended use; (5) study market trends and develop new sources of supply; and (6) develop policies, procedures, and forms; and provide technical advice and assistance for the conduct of procurement programs’ in the various government entities.

b. The Stores Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) receive, store, examine, issue, pack, and ship or deliver supplies, materials, and equipment, including standard govern­ment forms, textbooks, and public documents; (2) operate and maintain the Bureau’s warehouses and develop standards and criteria for warehouse space, operational layouts, and facilities; (3) study agencies’ inquires and demands, and determine and maintain adequate stock-levels; (4) develop reports on long-supply items, inventories, stock activity, back-order position, and average cost of materials; and (5) provide technical advice and assistance for the conduct of stores programs in the various government entities.

c. The Service Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) register incoming requisitions and route them to the Section concerned; (2)issue purchase orders for those items obtainable under existing contracts or those not requiring specialized commodity buying experience; (3) prepare, deliver, and maintain files of contracts and invitations to bid, and provide other clerical assistance as required; (4) open, consider and prepare abstracts of bids; (5) follow-up and expedite purchase actions and deliveries; and (6) compile and analyze data on market trends and purchase

SEC. 13. The Specifications and Inspection Division shall plan, develop, coordinate, and execute the programs of the Bureau relating to standards, cataloging, testing, and inspection.

a. This Division shall have the following duties and responsibilities, among others:

(1) develop and revise specifications and standards for common-use supplies, equipment and materials; (2) develop policies, .regulations, instructions, and manuals on sampling and quality control techniques; (3) conduct continuous surveys to determine and analyze technological developments in supplies, equipment, and materials; (4) establish and maintain a central register of all government specifications for common-use items and list of qualified products for such items; (5) develop, publish, and distribute stock catalogs and official copies of specifications and standards; (6) establish and maintain a central library of manufacturers’ catalogs; (7) develop and maintain master card files identifying items by class of commodity, stock numbers, and stock specifications: and (8) maintain liaison with all civil agencies and the Armed Forces of the Philippines for integrating stock numbers and cataloging of common-use items.

SEC. 14. The Property Utilization Division shall plan, develop, coordinate and execute all programs of the Bureau related to the utilization and disposal of supplies, equipment and materials of the government. The Property Utilization Division shall have a Disposal Section and a Utilization Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Disposal Section shall have the following func­tions, among others:

(1) sell or otherwise dispose of supplies, equipment, and materials which are obsolete, forfeited, abandoned, or surplus to the needs of the government; or recommend assignment of these functions to other government entities; (2) prepare, issue, and publish invitations to bid on disposable items; (3) receive, open, consider, and award bids for surplus property; and (4) appraise and establish the value of surplus supplies, equipment, and materials, and develop standards and criteria for determining their usability.

b . The Utilization Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) require regular inventories of supplies and equipment in the different agencies of the government; conduct reviews and spot-checks of these inventories; and determine and establish inventory levels for property carried in stock by government entities; (2) devise methods for the systematic and coordinated transfer of supplies, equipment, and materials from one government agency to another, including the preparation and processing of documents required for such transactions; (3) conduct studies of property utilization practices in the various government entities and formulate and implement policies and procedures, including maintenance guides, to secure greater service and utility from supplies, equipment, and materials.

Functions of the Bureau of Building and Real Management

SEC. 15. The Bureau of Building and Real Property Management, hereinafter referred to under this title as the “Bureau,” shall perform, coordinate, or assign to other entities the performance of programs related to maintenance, repair, and custody of national buildings and the administration of real property of the National Government. The Bureau shall assign space in .the national buildings, approve rental of private quarters and real property for government use, and shall serve in planning, consultative and advisory capacity on matters relating to the construction and location of new government buildings and on matters relating to building and office services.

SEC. 16. The Secretary is authorized to review building repair and maintenance programs currently undertaken by other departments and entities of the government and transfer the appropriation, equipment, property, records, and such personnel as may be necessary from these entities to the Bureau of Building and Real Property Management.

SEC. 17. There shall be an Administrative Assistant in the Office of the Director of the Bureau who shall arrange for and coordinate administrative services provided by the Department. The Administrative Assistant shall be responsible for the preparation of the Bureau’s budget proposals, personnel requests, and forms and supply requisitions; the maintenance of files of current operating and property records; and the direction and coordination of clerical, janitorial, messengerial, and guarding services.

SEC. 18. The Bureau shall have a Planning and Programming Division, a Building Maintenance Division, and Real Property Management Division.

SEC. 19. The Planning and Programming Division shall operate primarily as a planning, scheduling, policy-making, consultative and advisory unit in the construction, location, and maintenance of buildings.

a. This Division shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) plan, schedule, and direct studies, surveys, and research to determine:

( a ) space requirements of the government; ( b ) needs for construction, maintenance, repair, and alteration of buildings and grounds; and ( c ) location of new buildings.

(2) develop criteria and standards and promulgate government-wide policies, rules, and regulations on the maintenance and repair of buildings and grounds; (3) prepare detailed plans, sketches, work schedules, cost estimates, and specifications for building repair and alteration programs undertaken by the bureau; (4) in conjunction with the Planning Division of the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, develop long-range policies and programs and prepare sketches and cost estimates for the location and construction of national buildings; (5) develop recommendations on transferring the seat of the National Government to Quezon City; (6) recommend legislation and appropriations needed to facilitate the work of the Bureau and review proposed legislation, zoning laws and building ordinances affecting government buildings and real property; (7) compile and prepare reports, progress charts, statistics, and data showing the status of the Bureau’s programs and their physical and economic effect; (8) develop recommendations on the economic feasibility of self-insurance program for national government buildings; and (9) develop recommendations on the establishment of regional offices of the Bureau.

SEC. 20. The Building Maintenance Division shall execute programs of the Bureau relating to maintenance and repair of national buildings.

a. This Division shall have the following functions among others:

(1) regulate and supervise the maintenance and repair of national buildings, including all components thereof; (2) inspect materials and workmanship on repair and alterations work done by contract; (3) inspect buildings and grounds to determine needed repairs and assist the Planning and Programming Division in making surveys of this nature; (4) recommend to the Planning and Programming Division standards and criteria for the maintenance and repair of national buildings; and (5) review the building maintenance and repair program of other departments and make recommendations to the Bureau Directors concerning such programs.

SEC. 21. The Real Property Management Division shall be responsible for the custody, control, operation, and utilization of buildings and commercial, industrial, and urban properties of the national government and shall promulgate policies, rules, and regulations governing their use. This Division shall have a Property Management Section and a Building Services Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Property Management Section shall have the following: functions, among others:

(1) inventory, inspect, appraise, and determine the value of commercial, industrial, and urban properties owned by the government; (2) recommend the sale, rental, lease, or transfer of commercial, industrial, and urban properties owned by the government ; (3) inspect, appraise, and determine the value of real property and structures on sites to be acquired for location of new government buildings; (4) initiate, prepare, and process the necessary documents to acquire sites for new government buildings and to transfer, rent, lease or sell, commercial, industrial and urban properties owned by the government; and (5) set standard’s for, authorize, and approve terms of rental and leasing agreements to secure private-owned buildings and lands for government use.

b. The Building Services Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) investigate and make recommendations on:

( a ) space requirements of the various government entities; and ( b) utilization of buildings, office, and shop space owned or rented by the government;

(2) assign quarters and space in government buildings; (3) develop criteria, standards, and government-wide policies and advise departments and other government entities on:

( a ) the number of janitors required to maintain adequate standards of cleanliness and sanitary conditions; ( b ) the number of guards and watchmen needed to insure adequate security; ( c )the number of messengers and telephones needed to provide adequate communications; ( d ) the number of gardeners, groundkeepers, and laborers needed to maintain adequate standards of real property cleanliness and beauty; and ( e ) the proper utilization of building office and shop space; and

(4) study and make recommendations on the necessity and feasibility of establishing a central messenger service between offices in the Manila Area.

Functions of the Bureau of Records Management

SEC. 22. The Bureau of Records Management, hereinafter referred to under this title as the “Bureau,” plan, develop, and coordinate government-wide programs, policies, rules, and regulations governing the use, storage, and disposition of current operating records of permanent or historical value.

SEC. 23. There shall be an Administrative Assistant in the Office of the Director of the bureau who shall arrange for and coordinatead ministrative services provided by the Department. The Administrative Assistant shall prepare and process personnel papers and forms and supply requisitions; maintain files of current operating records and necessary personnel documents; direct and coordinate clerical, messengerial, janitorial, and guarding services; and assist in collecting, compiling, and preparing materials and data needed for budget proposals of the bureau.

SEC. 24. The bureau shall have a Current Records Division, an Archives Division, and a Records Storage Division: Provided, That the Records Storage Division shall be inoperative until its Operation, is deemed feasible by the Secretary.

Sec. 25. The Current Records Division shall serve primarily as a planning, regulating, policy-making, and advisory unit on matters concerning the use, storage, and disposition of operating records of government entities.

a. This Division shall have the following duties, responsibilities, and functions, among others:

(1) conduct research and studies; develop criteria, standards, and controls; and promulgate policies, rules, and regulations on the creation, storage, security, preservation, maintenance, transfer, disposition, disposal, and retirement of records of the various government entities; (2) inspect and appraise the records of government entities; determine those records to be retired or destroyed; recommend whether a particular body of material is included within the scope of the Bureau’s work; and requisition those determined transferable to the Department or to the records storage centers; (3) direct and determine the method of disposal or destruction of records; (4) report any loss of records in the custody of the Division and of such other entities of which it might acquire information, and initiate action to recover records lost or unlawfully removed from official custody; (5) require reports and statistics from government entities on their records management activities and analyze these data to determine the effectiveness of the Bureau’s programs; (6) develop and initiate training programs in records management for entities concerned with records management of the various government entities; (7) conduct studies and make recommendations on the necessity and feasibility of activating the Records Storage Division; and; (8) provide technical advice and assistance to all entities and instrumentalities of the government in matters concerning records management.

SEC. 26. The Archives Division shall store, service, and rehabilitate documents and records of permanent value and of historical interest. The Division shall have a Reference Service Section, a Spanish Documents Section, and a General Documents Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Reference Service Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) operate a reading room for the general public; (2) answer inquiries and correspondence relating to documents and records of the Division; (3). issue photostatic or certified true copies of documents and records in their files; (4) recommend fees to be charged for copies of documents and records; and (5) loan or assign historical materials or copies thereof to national cultural entities for the purpose of exhibition or study.

b . The Spanish Documents Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) acquire, rehabilitate, service, index, catalog, and store documents and records pertaining to the period of the Spanish Government of the Philippines; and (2) recommend policies and programs related to the acquisition, storage, and use of these documents and records.

c. The General Documents Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) receive, classify, index, catalog, and service all archives, documents and records not classified as Spanish documents, such as notarial registers and registration of cattle brands, mortgages and trust deeds; and (3) recommend policies and programs related to the acquisition, storage, and use of these documents and records.

SEC. 27. The Records Storage Division shall establish and operate records storage centers to house documents and papers which are to be preserved for a period of time but which need not be retained by the govrnment entities concerned.

a. This Division shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) establish records storage centers to receive, classify, index, and service records and documents deemed unnecessary for current operating purposes of the entities concerned; (2) establish operating rules, regulations, and procedures governing the activities of records storage centers; (3) make recommendations on policies, rules, and regulations concerning the transfer or loan of documents in the custody of records storage centers; and (4) report any loss of records in the custody of records storage centers and initiate action to recover them.

Funtions of the Bureau of Printing

SEC. 28. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Bureau of Printing, hereinafter referred to under this title as the “Bureau,” are not affected by the Plans, except that the Administration Division is abolished to accomplish the goal of centralizing administrative services in the Departments.

a. The functions of the Administrative Division are redistributed as follows:

(1) the functions of preparing payrolls, disbursing and collecting cash, billing and collecting accounts due, and selling “textbooks and public documents are transferred to the Fiscal Division of the Department; (2) the functions of maintaining permanent personnel records and operating the medical unit are transferred to the Administrative Division of the Department; (3) the functions of stocking, printing, and binding raw materials and machinery spare parts; receiving subscriptions to the Official Gazette and answering related correspondence and inquiries; and delivering, shipping, and mailing completed work, including distribution of the Official Gazette, are transferred to the Layout Division of the bureau; (4) the function of performing woodworking and carpentry work is transferred to the Power Plant Division of the Bureau; and (5) the functions of stocking, storing, issuing, and delivering standard government forms, textbooks, .and public documents are transferred to the Bureau of Supply Coordination.

SEC. 29. There shall be an Administrative Assistant in the Office of the Director of the bureau who shall arrange for and coordinate administrative services provided by the Department. The Administrative Assistant shall be responsible for the preparation and processing, of the Bureau’s budget proposals, personnel requests, and forms and supply requisitions; the maintenance of files of necessary personnel documents, correspondence, and current operating records; and the direction and coordination of clerical, janitorial, messengerial, and guarding services.

Functions of the National Media Production Center

SEC. 30. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the National Media Production Center are not affected by the Plans, except that responsibility for providing administrative services is transferred to the staff Divisions of the Department.

SEC. 31. There shall be an Administrative Assistant in the Office of the Director of the National Media Production Center who shall arrange for and coordinate administrative services provided by the Department. The Administrative Assistant shall prepare and process personnel papers and forms and supply requisitions; maintain files of current operating records and necessary personnel documents; direct and coordinate clerical, messengerial, janitorial, and guarding services; and assist in collecting, compiling, and preparing materials and data needed for budget proposals of the National Media Production Center.

SEC. 32. From the total appropriations authorized for the period from July first, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, consisting of the following:

the following sums, subject to adjustment by the Commissioner of the Budget based on the unexpended balance of appropriations available as of the effective date of these Implementing Details, are reallocated for the operation of the Department during the period from July first, nineteen hundred and fifty-six to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, except where otherwise provided:

(1) Office of the Secretary

PROGRAM I: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND STAFF SERVICES

(2) Bureau of Supply Coordination

PROGRAM I: SUPPLY ADMINISTRATION

For supply administration, including procurement, warehousing, delivery, specifications, standards, property utilization and disposal and general administration, ₱292.620.00: Provided, That ₱4.200.00 of this amount shall be available as government contribution for insurance and retirement coverage for employees transferred from the Surplus Property Unit of the Board of Liquidators.

(3) Bureau of Building and Real Property Management

PROGRAM I: BUILDING AND REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT

(4) BUREAU OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT

PROGRAM I: MANAGEMENT OF RECORDS AND ARCHIVES

(5) BUREAU OF PRINTING

PROGRAM I: PRINTING SERVICES OR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS INSTRUMENTALITIES

For printing services for the National Government and its instrumentalities, provincial and municipal governments, chartered cities and government-owned or controlled corporations, and general administration, ₱4,871,750.00: Provided, That of the amount appropriated ₱67.500.00 shall be reimbursed to the Budget Commission for accounting services and ₱19.130.00 to the General Auditing Office for auditing services: Provided, further, That of the amount appropriated, ₱211.700.00 shall be for the modernization and improvement of the Bureau of Printing, acquisition of machineries, plants, and facilities: And provided, finally, That the Secretary of the Department may use any unexpended balance of this fund for additional expenses to meet any increase in printing workload.

(6) National Media Production Center

PROGRAM I: NATIONAL MEDIA PRODUCTION SERVICES

The total current operating expenditures of ₱5,919,360.00 authorized for the Department in these Implementing Details shall be paid out of the following funds:

The total current operating expenditures of ₱5,919,360.00 authorized for the Department shall be allotted for the following objects, subject to adjustments by the Commissioner of the Budget based on the balance of funds available as of the effective date of these Implementing Details:

The “General Provisions” of Republic Act Numbered Sixteen hundred, to which reference is hereby made, shall remain in full force and effect and is made a part of this section on “Reallocation of Appropriations,” except that (a) Section 16, thereof, “Official entitled to transportation allowance,” is modified to include the Director of the Bureau of Supply Coordination, the Director of the Bureau of Building and Real Property Management, and the Director of the Bureau of Records Management as among the officials granted a commutable transportation allowance of one hundred pesos each per month and to exclude the Purchasing Agent of the Bureau of Supply whose position is abolished; and (6) Section 17, “Bureaus and offices entitled to use, operate, and maintain government motor vehicles and launches,” is modified to include the Department of General Services, for regulating and performing for government entities the functions pertaining to procurement and supply, maintenance arid custody of real property, disposal of surplus property, promotion of sound records management, printing, and media production services, and to exclude the Bureau of Printing whose motor vehicle requirements shall be supplied by the Department of General Services.

STAFFING PATTERN

SEC. 33. The following Staffing Pattern by project activity is provided for the Department for the period from the effective date of these Implementing Details to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, subject to the provisions of Reorganization Plans Nos. 1-A, 2-A, and 3-A, except that authority is hereby granted to the Secretary, subject to approval of the Commissioner of the Budget, to make necessary salary adjustments resulting from final selection of personnel to fit the positions in the Staffing Pattern, in order that no incumbent receives a reduction in salary, and further to make necessary salary adjustments resulting from new appointments, promotions, or salary increases: Provided, That no such adjustment may result in a salary rate which exceeds the minimum of the applicable salary range as provided in Reorganization No. 2-A: Provided, further, That new appointments, promotions, and salary increases al present pending which would exceed the maximum rate of the appropriate salary range are cancelled until further notice: And provided, finally, That nothing in the said Staffing Pattern shall be construed as depriving the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission, during its existence and the Commissioner of the Budget thereafter, of its power to make changes therein, to correct mistakes, discriminations, or other injustices that may, in its opinion, have been committed in the preparation thereof:

(1) Office of the Secretary

PROGRAM I: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND STAFF SERVICES

PROJECT 1: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION

Correspondence and Records Section

Property and Supply Section

Statistical Section

Personnel Section

Organization and Methods Section

General Services Section

FISCAL DIVISION

Budget Section

Collecting and Disbursing Section

Project 2: Legal Services

LEGAL DIVISION

(2) Bureau of Supply Coordination

PROGRAM I: SUPPLY ADMINISTRATION

Project 1: General Administration

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

Project 2: Procurement and Warehousing

SUPPLY DIVISION

Procurement Section

Stores Section

Service Section

Project 3: Specifications and Standards

SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTION DIVISION

Project 4: Property Utilization and Disposal

PROPERTY UTILIZATION DIVISION

Property Utilization Section

Disposal Section

(3) Bureau of Building and Real Property Management

PROGRAM I: BUILDING AND REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT

PROJECT 1: Planning and General Administration

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

PLANNING AND PROGRAMMING DIVISION

Project 2: Management of Real Property

REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT DIVISION

Property Management Section

Supervising Property Appraiser

Building Services Section

Project 3: Maintenance and Repair of Buildings

BUILDING MAINTENANCE DIVISION

(4) Bureau of Records Management

PROGRAM I: MANAGEMENT OF RECORDS AND ARCHIVES

Project 1: Records Management, Archival Operations, Consultative Services, and General Administration

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

CURRENT RECORDS DIVISION

ARCHIVES DIVISION

Reference Section

Spanish Documents Section

General Documents Section

Project 2: Operation of Records Storage Centers (no personnel)

(5) Bureau of Printing

PROGRAM I: PRINTING SERVICES FOR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS INSTRUMENTALITIES

Project 1: General Administration

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

Project 2: Printing Production

LAYOUT DIVISION

COMPOSING DIVISION

Proof Section

Press Division

BINDING DIVISION

PHOTO-ENGRAVING DIVISION

FOUNDRY DIVISION

POWER PLANT DIVISION

(6) National Media Production Center

PROGRAM I. NATIONAL MEDIA PRODUCTION SERVICES

Project 1: Production and Dissemination of Information

TEMPORARY AND EMERGENCY HELP

PERSONNEL OF THE DEPARTMENT

SEC. 34. The personnel structure of the Department for the period from the effective date of these Implementing Details to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, shall conform to the Staffing Pattern provided in these Implementing Details.

SEC. 35. Except where the law provides otherwise, all appointments to positions authorized in the Staffing Pattern shall be subject to the requirements of the civil service and other personnel laws, rules and regulations: Provided, That all personnel in the present staff who meet such requirements shall be employed before consideration is given to the employment of other persons, subject to the approval of the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission and the President.

DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

SEC 36. Any delegation of authority required or authorized by these Implementing Details shall be in writing; shall indicate to which officer or class of officers or employees the delegation is made; shall define the extent to which each delegatee will be held responsible for results; and shall vest each delegatee with sufficient authority to enable him to discharge his assigned responsibility. Such delegations, where specifically provided by these Implementing Details, shall be within the limits of the provisions of these Implementing Details: Provided, That nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent other delegations.

TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

SEC 37. The General Auditing Office shall complete, at the earliest possible time, which in no event shall exceed one hundred and twenty days from the date of the Executive Order making these Implementing Details effective, a complete audit, fiscal inventory, and on-the-spot appraisal of all properties of the Surplus Property Unit of the Board of Liquidators which is transferred to the Department of General Services.

SEC. 38. The transfer of the functions, appropriations, equipment, property, memoranda, circulars, orders, files, records, and such personnel as may be necessary of the Surplus Property Unit, shall take effect ten days after the date on which the General Auditing Office completes and certifies its audit, inventory, and apraisal of the properties to be transferred to the Bureau of Supply Coordination in the Department of General Services.

SEC. 89. After the transfer of the functions, appropriations, equipment, property, memoranda, circulars, orders, files, records, and such personnel as may be necessary in the preceding section is effected, the General Auditing Office shall make an adjusting inventory reflecting transactions which occurred during the transition period, and make a detailed audit of the accounts and records of the Surplus Property Unit as of the date of the actual transfer thereof.

SEC. 40. The Secretary of General Services, upon the completion of the aforementioned transfer, is authorized to charge all costs for continuing the functions of the Surplus Property Unit during the remainder of the fiscal year 1956-1957 against proceeds derived from such continuance of such functions: Provided, That these costs shall not exceed previous amounts appropriated for the fiscal year or average monthly costs for the six months immediately prior to the effective date of the transfers and: Provided, further, That any deficit for operational and administrative costs can be charged against the Board of Liquidators, the same to be satisfied from previous net income of the Surplus Property Unit: And provided, furthermore, That all proceeds derived from the sale of surplus property which are in excess of operational and administrative costs shall be remitted to the Board of Liquidators during the remainder of the fiscal year 1956-1957.

SEC. 41. After the close of the fiscal year 1956-1957 and thereafter, all administrative and operational costs of selling surplus property shall be provided for in the General Appropriation Act and all net income thereby realized shall revert to the General Fund.

PARTIAL INVALIDITY

SEC. 42. If any provision of these Implementing Details should be held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby.

TIMING OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS

SEC 43. The Secretary shall direct the orderly scheduling of transfers, changes, and other transitional actions required by the Plans and by these Implementing Details within sixty days from the effective date of the Implementing Details. In the interim, each entity affected shall continue to perform its existing functions until such time as the Secretary orders change or cessation and each officer and employee shall continue to perform his duties and to exercise his authority until such time as the Secretary orders otherwise.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 290 : Providing for the implementing details for Reorganization Plans Nos. 4-a, 5-a, 7-a, 8-a, and 9-a relative to administrative services. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (6), 1734-1763.