MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 388

CREATING A NATIONAL SURVEYING AND MAPPING BOARD

In order to systematize and coordinate future horizontal and vertical control surveys, classify data, and prescribe and recommend standards for different classes of survey work, and in order to mobilize the resources, coordinate and integrate the activities of the different agencies of the Government engaged in, or concerned with, surveying and the preparation, production, reproduction, utilization, and distribution to using Government agencies and the general public topographic and other categories of maps, photo prints thereof, and mosaics, in connection with their economic development programs and activities, and to prescribe rules and regulations that will govern the issuance of licenses to private corporations and entities desiring to perform the above activities on a commercial basis to the end that maximum security control will be assured, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. There is hereby created a National Surveying and Mapping Board composed of the following:

The Chairman shall convene the Board and organize it for the early implementation of this Order as soon as possible.

2. The Board shall have the following duties and functions:

( a ) To perform such duties as it may deem necessary for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Order; and

( b ) To lay down basic policies and to direct, coordinate, and supervise, through a Project Director, the operations of the different agencies directly engaged in any of the projects that it may decide to undertake.

3. The Board may formulate and adopt its own rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its business, and issue such rules and regulations as it may find necessary for the guidance of all personnel to be engaged in any of its projects.

4. The Board, through its Chairman, shall submit to the President such reports regarding its activities and accomplishments as it may deem necessary to keep the President properly apprised of the progress of any of its projects.

5. The Board of Surveys created by Executive Order No. 11, dated July 31, 1946, is hereby abolished.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 388 : Creating a National Surveying and Mapping Board. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (13), 2777-2778.