MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 291

PROVIDING FOR THE IMPLEMENTING DETAILS FOR REORGANIZATION PLAN NO. 54-A RELATIVE TO INTELLIGENCE COORDINATION

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Nine hundred and ninety-seven, as amended by. Republic Act Numbered One thousand two hundred and forty-one, and upon the recommendation of the Government Survey and Reorganization Commission, the following Implementing Details of Reorganization Plan No. 54-A which relate the Intelligence Coordination are hereby promulgated to. govern the organization, powers, duties, and functions of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

COORDINATING AGENCY

SECTION 1. The organization, functions, and operation of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency, hereinafter referred to as the “Agency,” shall be in accordance with the provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 54-A, hereinafter referred to as the “Plan,” and these Implementing Details.

SEC. 2. The organization of the Agency, as graphically depicted in the following organization chart, shall consist of the Office of the Director, Administrative Division, Special Projects Division, Evaluation Division, and Liaison Division.

SEC. 3. The Director is authorized to make such, changes in organization, definition of functions, and distribution of work among entities in the Agency as may be necessary to reflect change in legislation, conditions, needs, or workloads Provided, That no such changes may be made during fiscal year 1957 without specific approval of the President: And provided, further, That any such changes must be in conformity with the general pattern of organization set forth in the Plan and these Implementing Details.

FUNCTIONAL STATEMENTS OF THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COORDINATING AGENCY

Functions of the Agency

SEC. 4. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Agency shall consist of those specified in section 3 of the Plan.

Functions of the Office of the Director

SEC. 5. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Director shall include those specified in sections 2, 7, and 8 of the Plan and the following, among others:

a. attend meetings of the National Security Council, advise the Council on intelligence matters, and transmit evaluated intelligence reports to the Council;

b. submit evaluated intelligence reports to the President;

c. plan, direct, and coordinate the operations and internal administration of the Agency, delegating authority as necessary and seeing that long-range policies fixed by the National Security Council are followed;

d. issue directives to departments and other entities of the government;

(1) coordinating the intelligence activities;

(2) delineating the intelligence responsibilities of each entity and defining the intelligence functions, powers, and jurisdiction of each entity;

(3) coordinating and controlling the classification, distribution, and publication of intelligence and security information in their possession; and

(4) requiring follow-up, pursuit, verification, confirmation, or exploitation of intelligence already gathered or acquired;

e. call officers and employees of departments and other entities of the government to meetings concerning intelligence matters and missions, including meetings of the Intelligence Consultative Committee and such other committees as he deems necessary;

f. assign intelligence missions to departments or other entities of the government for performance by their intelligence units, or to the Special Projects Division of the Agency if no other entity has the requisite resources and authority;

g. provide for protection of intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosures; and

h. designate from the staff of the Agency his authorized representative or representatives to receive security information possessed by the departments and other entities of the government.

SEC. 6. The functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Deputy Director of the Agency shall include the following among others:

a. assist the Director in the performance of his functions, particularly with regard to the internal administration of the Agency;

b. assume the functions, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Director in the absence of the Director and upon proper designation; and

c . undertake liaison or intelligence work of the highest level, as directed by the Director.

SEC. 7. The staff of the Office of the Director shall be under the immediate supervision of the Deputy Director and shall have the following functions, among others:

a. plan and schedule both long-term and short-term programs, projects, and missions of the Agency;

b. prepare budget estimates and justifications for the Agency;

c. exercise control over the budgeted expenditures for the Agency;

d. conduct loyalty checks on employees of the Agency and on applicants for employment in other government entities at the request of the head of the employing agency or at the request of the National Security Council;

e. study and recommend means of improving and simplifying organization, methods, procedures, communications, and reporting within the Agency ; and

f . provide legal advice to the Director and to the staff of the Agency.

Functions of the Administrative Division

SEC. 8. The Administrative Division, under the immediate supervision of the Administrative Officer, shall be responsible for functions of the Agency relating to financial and personnel management and services, procurement of supplies and equipment, property management, janitorial and messengerial services, transportation, internal security, technical services, and other auxiliary services.

SEC. 9. The Administrative Division shall have a Finance Section, Personnel Section, and General Services Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Finance Section shall have the following functions, among, others:

(1) process all expense vouchers;

(2) process requisitions, make corresponding purchases, and prepare vouchers covering their payment;

(3) prepare payrolls; and

(4) pay approved vouchers and payrolls.

b. The Personnel Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) establish and manage a personnel program, including preparation of position descriptions and qualification standards for purposes of selective recruitment, appointment, and promotion;

(2) plan and direct a training school for prospective intelligence officers;

(3) plan and coordinate an in service training program and administer a program for specialized training of selected intelligence officers and technicians at schools, colleges, or universities in the Philippines or elsewhere;

(4) investigate administrative charges, as directed; and

(5) process and record all matters concerning attendance, leaves of absences, promotions, transfers, separations, and other personnel matters.

c. The General Services Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) keep custody of, manage, and record distribution and use of property, equipment, and supplies;

(2) make travel arrangements arid provide transportation, messengerial; and courier services;

(3) provide janitorial and security guarding services; and

(4) perform or provide communication services and reproduction services.

Functions of the Special Projects Division

SEC. 10. The Special Projects Division shall perform sensitive intelligence missions, covert or overt, domestic or foreign, of long-range importance or of special significance, as assigned by the Director, and upon the findings of the Director that intelligence units of other entities of the government do not have the requisite resources and authority.

Functions of the Evaluation Division

SEC. 11. The Evaluation Division shall be responsible for analysis, correlation, and evaluation of intelligence information received, secured, or developed by the Agency, including reports from the Special Projects Division; translation or cryptographic work as necessary; preparation in final form of timely reports, estimates, or summaries for. the President, the National Security Council, or other designated entities of the government; control of classification, distribution, and dissemination of intelligence and security information; and custody of the intelligence files and records of the Agency.

SEC. 12. The Chief of the Evaluation Division shall have the following functions, among others:

a. plan, direct, and coordinate the work of the sections in the Division;

b. supervise translation and cryptography;

c. supervise final correlation of information from both foreign and domestic sources on a given subject or problem; and

d. transmit evaluated intelligence reports to the Director.

SEC. 13. The Evaluation Division shall have a Foreign Reports Section, Domestic Reports Section, and Information and Records Section, with corresponding duties and responsibilities as follows:

a. The Foreign Reports Section shall analyze, correlate, and evaluate intelligence information from, foreign sources, and prepare reports, estimates, an dsummaries based on such information.

b. The Domestic Reports Section shall analyze, correlate, and evaluate intelligence information from domestic sources, and prepare reports, estimates, and summaries based on such information.

c. The Information and Records Section shall have the following functions, among others:

(1) handle inquiries from the press or the public;

(2) control release, if any, of information concerning intelligence officers, activities, or units of the Agency or of the departments or other entities of the government;

(3) classify, determine recipients of, and supervise distribution of evaluated or unevaluated intelligence or security information in the possession of the Agency or of the departments or other entities of the government, as directed; and

(4) maintain and protect files and records of intelligence information in the possession of the Agency.

Functions of the Liaison Division

SEC. 14. The Liaison Division shall be responsible for relations of the Agency with the departments and other entities of the government, and for relations with other regular contributing sources of intelligence information. The Liaison Division shall have the following functions, among others:

a. keep in close touch with all regular contributing sources of intelligence information.;

b. study and recommend to the Director delineations of responsibility for intelligence activities among various entities of the government, and related definitions of intelligence functions, powers, and jurisdiction;

c. report to the Director instances of duplication, overlapping, confusion, or disregard of security intelligence activities of other entities;

d. serve as the normal channel for directives and assignments from the Director to other entities, and follow-up on such directives or assignments; and

e. serve as the normal channel for collecting, receiving, or securing intelligence information from other entities and other contributing sources.

BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS

SEC. 15. Beginning with the fiscal year 1958, the Agency is exempted from provisions of law, rules, or regulations requiring publication or disclosure of names, titles, salary, or number of personnel, or of budget requests or appropriations for personal services or other objects. Budget requests for the Agency shall be included in the Budget but shall not be identified as such.

SEC. 16. Pursuant to section 9 of the Plan, the Director may request the President to release contingent funds and to transfer available funds from any department or other entity of the government for confidential purposes of the Agency.

SEC. 17. From the total appropriations of ₱449,415 from the (General Fund authorized under Item B-IV-7 of Republic Act Numbered Sixteen hundred for the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency for the period from July first, nineteen hundred and fifty-six to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, the following sums, subject to adjustment by the Commissioner of the Budget based on the unexpended balance of the appropriations available as of the effective date of these Implementing Details, are reallocated for the operation of the Agency. during the same period:

A. Current Operating Expenditures

(1) NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COORDINATING AGENCY

PROGRAM I: INTELLIGENCE COORDINATION

For coordination of intelligence activities: Provided, That the amount of P64,550 shall be available for discretionary expenses of the Director and for hire of undercover men and purchase of information by the Director, subject to the approval of the President ₱449,415.00

(1) Coordination of Intelligence Activities (General Fund) ₱449,415.00

Total for current operating expenditures of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency ₱449,415.00

B. General Provisions

The “General Provisions” of Republic Act Numbered Sixteen hundred, to which reference is hereby made, shall remain in full force and effect and is made a part of this section on “Reallocation of Appropriations,” insofar as they relate to the appropriations for the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency under the Office of the President.

STAFFING PATTERN

SEC. 18. The following Staffing Pattern by project activity is provided for the Agency for the period from the effective date of these Implementing Details to. June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, except that authority is hereby granted to the Director, subject to approval of the Commissioner of the Budget, to make necessary salary adjustments resulting from final selection of personnel to fit the positions in the Staffing Pattern, in order that no incumbent receives a reduction in salary, and further to make necessary salary adjustments resulting from new appointments, promotions, or salary increases:

(1) NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COORDINATING AGENCY

PROGRAM I: INTELLIGENCE COORDINATION

Project 1: Coordination of Intelligence Activities

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION

1

Finance Section

Personal Section

General Services Section

SPECIAL PROJECTS DIVISION

EVALUATION DIVISION

Foreign Reports Section

Domestic Reports Section

Information and Records Section

LIAISON DIVISION

PERSONNEL OF THE DEPARTMENT

SEC. 19. The personnel structure of the Agency for the period from the effective date of these Implementing Details to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, shall conform to the Staffing Pattern provided in these Implementing Details.

SEC. 20. Except where the law provides otherwise, all appointments to positions authorized in the Staffing Pattern shall be subject to the requirements of the civil service and other personnel laws, rules, and regulations: Provided, That all personnel in the present staff who meet such requirements shall be employed by the Agency before consideration is given to the employment of other persons.

DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

SEC. 21. Any delegation of authority required or authorized by these Implementing Details shall be in writing; shall indicate to which officer or class of officers or employees the delegation is made; shall define the extent to which each delegate will be held responsible for results; and. shall vest each delegate with sufficient authority to enable him to discharge his assigned responsibility. Such delegations, where specifically provided by these Implementing Details, shall be within the limits of the provisions of these Implementing Details: Provided, That nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent other delegations.

PARTIAL INVALIDITY

SEC 22. If any provision of these Implementing Details should be held, invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby.

TIMING OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS

SEC. 23. The Director shall direct the orderly scheduling of transfers, changes, and other transitional actions required by the Plan and by these Implementing Details within sixty days from the effective date of the Implementing Details. In the interim, each entity affected shall continue to perform its existing functions until such time as the Director orders a change or cessation and each officer and employee shall continue to perform his duties and to exercise his authority until such time as the Director orders otherwise.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Executive Order Nos. : 244-327]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.