MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 294

CREATING THE POSITION OF SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT ON SCIENCE COORDINATION

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby create the position of Special Assistant to the President on Science Coordination.

The Special Assistant to the President on Science Coordination shall perform the following functions and duties:

1. To integrate and coordinate the activities of science agencies, including those being undertaken by the other departments of the government, in order to bring about their maximum utilization in the development of the national economy;

2. To act as liaison between the executive and legislative branches of the government on matters pertaining to science and technology;

3. To revise and, whenever appropriate, recommend the approval of the schedules of activities, programs, and project proposals to intensify and promote the development and application of scientific- and technological processes;

4. To initiate and facilitate arrangements for aid and exchange of information from domestic and foreign sources;

5. To offer to, and accept from, public and private sectors project proposals of scientific arid technological subjects, including basic research, and studies in the engineering and social sciences, and humanities, and to extend financial, technical, and other assistance;

6. To initiate and formulate measures designed to promote scientific effort;

7. To submit to the President of the Philippines periodic reports of the status of the national science effort; and

8. To perform such other functions as may be directed or delegated by the President of the Philippines or authorized by law.

The Special Assistant to the President on Science Coordination is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance, information, or coordination measures as it may need in the performance of his functions.

This Order shall take effect as of February 3, 1958.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Executive Order Nos. : 244-327]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.