MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 419

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SOCORRO IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao del Norte and pursuant to the provinsions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Norte a municipality to be known as Socorro, to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Dapa and Numancia, both of the same province:

From the Municipality of Dapa

From the Municipality of Numancia

The seat of government of the municipality of Socorro shall be at the barrio of Socorro.

The territory of the municipality of Socorro shall comprise the whole Island of Bucas Grande where all the barrios and sitios mentioned in the foregoing are situated, including the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to Section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code.

The municipalities of Numancio and Dapa shall have their present territories minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Socorro.

The municipality of Socorro shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor an a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipalities of Dapa and Numancia, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Socorro, can still maintain credibility their respective municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1961). [Executive Order Nos. : 328 – 461]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.