MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 259

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN ENRIQUE IN THE PROVINCE OF ILOILO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Abaca, Asisig, Bantayam, Cabugao Nuevo, Cabugao Viejo, Camiri, Catan-agan, Compo, Cubay, Dacal, Dumilis, Garita, Gines Nuevo, Imbang Pequeño, Imbisad-an, Iprog, Lip-ac, Madarag, Mapili, Paga, Palge, Quinolpan, Romagayray, San Antonio, San Enrique, and Tambunac, all of the Municipality of Passi, province of Iloilo, are hereby segregated from said municipality and constituted into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of San Enrique with the seat of government at the barrio of San Enrique.

The municipality of Passi shall have the same territory minus that comprised in the municipality of San Enrique.

The municipality of San Enrique shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Passi, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios comprised in the municipality of San Enrique, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1957). [Executive Order Nos. : 244-327]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.