MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 314

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CANDONI IN THE PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Negros Occidental and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrio Candoni in the municipality of Cauayan, province of Negros Occidental, is hereby segregated from said municipality and constituted into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Candoni.

The municipality of Candoni as herein constituted shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from the point of Northeastern corner of the political boundary of the municipality of Sipalay which is a common. point on the boundary line between the municipalities of Sipalay and Cauayan running in a straight Northeasterly direction to the point of intersection of North Latitude 9° 52′ with that of the boundary line common to the municipalities of Cauayan and Ilog; thence running in a Southwesterly direction following the common boundary line between the municipalities of Cauayan and Ilog to the common point on the boundaries common and between the municipalities of Asia, Cauayan, and Ilog, which is the intersection of North Latitude 9° 40′ with that of the common boundary line between the municipalities of Cauayan and Ilog; thence in a straight east-to-west line along North Latitude 9° 40′ which is the common boundary line between the municipalities of Cauayan and Asia to the point of its intersection with that of East Longtitude 122° 35′ which is the common point on the boundary lines between the municipalities of Asia, Sipalay, and Cauayan; thence in a straight south-to-north line along East Longitude 122° 35′ which is the common boundary line between the municipalities of Sipalay and Cauayan to the point of beginning.” (As described by the Chief, Survey Party No. 14—A, Bureau of Lands, based on Resolutions Nos. 40 and 989, both series of 1958, of the Municipal Council of Cauayan and the Provincial Board of Negros Occidental, respectively.)

The municipality of Cauayan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Candoni, as delimited above.

The municipality of Candoni shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Cauayan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Candoni, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 314 :  Creating the municipality of Candoni in the province of Negros Occidental. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (21), 5677.