MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 289

CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOOD PRODUCTION TO FOSTER AND EFFECT COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION OF ACTIVITIES OF ALL BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND GOVERNMENT AGENCIES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FOOD PRODUCTION CAMPAIGN

In order to mobilize the resources of all agencies of government, foster and effect coordination and integration of their activities, and encourage the participation of the people in the food production campaign, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. There is hereby created a National Committee on Food Production which shall be composed of the directors, heads, or chiefs of the following:

Bureau of Agricultural Extension Bureau of Animal Industry Bureau of Plant Industry Bureau of Lands Bureau of Forestry Bureau of Soils Bureau of Public Schools Bureau of Private Schools Bureau of Health Irrigation Service Unit (Department of Public Works and Communications) Bureau of Public Highways Bureau of Public Works National Waterworks and Sewerage Authority Provincial and. Municipal Finance Division (Department of Finance) Social Welfare. Administration Agricultural Credit and Cooperatives Financing Administration Agricultural Tenancy Commission Cooperatives Administration Office Philippine Coconut Administration National Rice and Corn Corporation Presidential Assistant on Community Development National Marketing Corporation

The Committee may, by a majority vote of all its members, include from time to time as additional embers such representatives of other offices or government agencies as it may determine. It shall also include as members three private citizens actively engaged in promoting food production who shall be chosen by a majority of all the members.

2. The Committee shall have the following duties and functions:

a. To implement the intensified food production campaign and foster and effect coordination and integration of the activities of all agencies and offices concerned with food production in order to achieve maximum results, avoid duplication, and foster active participation;

b. To carry out a Grants-in-Aid program, to stimulate participation of barrio citizens in food production and promote teamwork among government agencies;

c. To recommend to the President for such awards as the President may approve individuals who have distinguished themselves in the promotion of teamwork for food production or in any activity tending to promote the success thereof; and

d. To submit to the President .such report and appropriate recommendations for improvement of governmental services to rural areas and measures as may insure the success of the food production campaign.

3. The Committee shall have a Management Group to be composed of a chairman and three members who shall be elected by a majority of the members of the Committee. This group is hereby authorized to issue for and in behalf of the President such directives, circulars, and memoranda as the Group may find necessary to carry out the functions of the Committee. It is also authorized to recommend to department heads, bureau chiefs, and chiefs of offices any action or policy which it may deem necessary to carry out effectively the functions of the Committee, particularly towards coordinating efforts directed towards increased food production, furnishing the President with a copy of such recommendation and a report on action taken.

4. The members of the Committee are enjoined to attend the meetings in person, and when they possibly cannot do so, they may send a competent and responsible representative who shall be fully empowered to act for and on behalf of the member concerned.

5. The Committee shall meet at the call of the chairman of the Management Group and for the purpose of discharging its functions it may create such sub-committees as may be necessary and adopt such rules and regulations as may be required to carry out this Order.

6. This Order hereby revokes any other Executive Order, administrative rule, or regulation on food production which may be inconsistent herewith.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Executive Order No. 289 :  Creating a National Committee on food production to foster and effect coordination and integration of activities of all bureaus, offices, and government agencies in the implementation of the Food Production Campaign. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54 (5), 1297-1298.