MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 436

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LAWIGAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ILOILO

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios and sitios of Lawigan, Sinogbohan, Cataan, Igcundao, Langwanan, San Luis, San Gregorio, Igbangcal, Mabini, Andres Bonifacio, Igcoris, Igbaje, Balabago, Amboyuan, Dacdacanan, Igcabotong, San Mateo, Talagutac, Nagquirisan, Gumawan, and Igdumingding, all of the municipality of San Joaquin, province of Iloilo, are hereby segregated from said Municipality and organized into an independent municipality in said province, to be known as the municipality of Lawigan with the seat of government at the barrio of Lawigan.

The boundary that shall separate the municipality of Lawigan from its mother municipality of San Joaquin shall begin from the mouth of the Tiolas River; thence, following the course of said river upstream until the Quianan bridge at barrio Pitogo; and thence along the Iloilo-Antique inter-provincial road up to the provincial boundary at bario Dawis. (This description is based on the sketch plan or map showing the boundaries of the Municipality of San Joaquin and the proposed municipality of Lawigan, prepared and submitted to this Office by the District Engineer of Iloilo, Scale: 1:8000.)

The municipality of San Joaquin shall have the same territory minus the portions thereof comprised in the municipality of Lawigan.

The municipality of Lawigan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of San Joaquin, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Lawigan, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Executive Order No. 436 : Creating the municipality of Lawigan in the Province of Iloilo. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 57 (31), 5529-5530.