MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 385

CREATING A PRODUCTIVITY COMMISSION AND DEFINING THE POWERS AND DUTIES THEREOF

For the purpose of coordinating the activities of all agencies performing functions involving or relating to productivity, directly or indirectly, with the objective of promoting and increasing productivity in all sectors of the economy, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Productivity Commission.

1. The Commission shall be composed of the following:

The Chairman of the National Economic Council The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources The Secretary of Commerce and Industry A representative of Labor to be designated by the President of the Philippines The President of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines The President of the Philippine Chamber of Industries The President of the Chamber of Agriculture and Natural Resources of the Philippines

2. The Chairman of the National Economic Council shall be the Chairman of the Commission for the first year of its organization. Thereafter, the Commission shall elect its Chairman in accordance with such rules and procedures as it may adopt.

3. The Chairman and the members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.

4. The Commission shall adopt such rules and procedures as it may deem necessary and expedient in the exercise of its powers and the performance of its functions and duties.

5. The Director of the Industrial Development Center shall serve as Executive Director of the Commission and shall make available to the Commission, in the exercise of its powers and the performance of its functions and duties, the staff and facilities of the Center.

6. The Commission shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:

(a) To determine what sectors of the economy should be made areas of action for the application of the concept of increased productivity and to submit recommendations therefor to the President of the Philippines;

( b ) To act as liaison between Philippine entities—governmental and non-governmental, including government-owned or controlled corporations—and the Asian Productivity Organization in the matter of requests for technical information and research on specific projects;

(c) To provide the Asian Productivity Organization with such data, statistics, and other information on the Philippines as it may request;

(d) To coordinate the activities of all agencies dealing with, or involved in the promotion and application of the concept of increased productivity, review their operations and make proper recommendations to the President of the, Philippines for maximizing efforts toward the attainment of their common objective; and

(e) To promote the acceptance of the concept of increased productivity as the basis of economic progress and to develop a national consciousness pursuant thereto.

7. The Commission is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, or upon any officer or employee thereof, for such information or assistance as it may need in the exercise of its powers and the performance of its functions and duties.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Executive Order No. 385 : Creating a productivity commission and defining the powers and duties thereof. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56 (12), 2601-2602.