MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR No. 8

MANILA, June 21, 1962

PROVINCIAL CONFERENCES IN CONNECTION WITH THE INFORMATION DRIVE ON THE PRESIDENT’S FIVE-YEAR INTEGRATED SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROGRAM.

The success of any nation-wide program of socio-economic development depends upon its appreciation by all those affected both in and outside the government, their sympathetic understanding of its objectives and the means for their attainment, and their willing participation and cooperation in the systematic implementation thereof. To this end, the President, upon the advice of the Council of Administrative Management, is conducting an information drive on his Five-Year Integrated Socio-Economic Program among all national and local government personnel.

Accordingly, the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency, with the technical assistance of the National Economic Council and the Budget Commission, will hold a series of regional conferences for provincial governors and members of provincial boards, city mayors and members of city councils, provincial or city treasurers, engineers, auditors, health officers and fiscals, municipal mayors, and the head and key official of appropriate regional offices of national government agencies, from July 5 to September 6, 1962, in accordance with the attached schedule and program. Conference sites will be announced later.

The provincial and city executives are expected to direct the officials concerned under them to attend these conferences. They shall further be directly responsible for carrying out an information drive on the President’s program within their respective offices, and reports thereon shall be submitted to the PCAPE.

Further details may be secured from Atty. Feliciano Belmonte, Jr., Chief, Government Performance Branch, PCAPE, Malacañang, Manila, telephone Nos. 3-39-88 or 3-96-91 local 442 or 719.

In view to the importance of these seminars in relation to the achievement of the goals of the Administration, all officials concerned are hereby requested to attend them. Their attendance will be on official time and they will be entitled to reimbursement of actual reasonable travel expenses from their offices to the place of the conference.

By authority of the President:

AMELITO R. MUTUC Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office