MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR No. 100

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEVENTH NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PUBLIC PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION.

Personnel Officers Association of the Philippines, Inc. (PCAP), with the technical assistance of the Civil Service Commission, will hold its Seventh National Conference on Public Personnel Administration on March 15-17, 1965, at the Rizal Provincial Capitol, Pasig, Rizal, on the theme: “The Quest for Quality Manpower in a Developing Economy.”

Without discounting the importance of other factors like finances and equipment in carrying out the functions of government, manpower remains the greatest force that can spell the difference between success and failure in any public undertaking. The search for better personnel to carry out the various public services is a continuing program of government, and to devise a better way and to develop the current working force is a problem that it continues to face. This conference will look into this problem and, through an exchange of views, it hopes and expects to be able

to arrive at an effective method of selection and development of manpower.

All heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, chartered cities, provincial and municipal governments,

including government owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to send their officials and employees who are members of the POAP to attend the conference. In offices where there are no POAP members, they may send their personnel officers, or administrative officers, or training officers, or other officials responsible for personnel work. Their attendance shall be on official time and their expenses for transportation, subsistence, lodging, and conference fees in connection therewith shall be chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

Delegates shall submit to their respective agency heads a report of their attendance and participation in the conference.

By authority of the President:

JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, January 19, 1965

Source : Supreme Court Library