MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 90

REQUIRING WITH STRICT COMPLIANCE THE PROVISIONS OF EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 67.

Executive Order No. 67 “Creating the Office of Presidential Assistant on Housing”, which took effect on  February 5, 1964, provides as follows:

“In order to achieve greater efficiency and better coordination in the implementation of the nationwide housing program now being undertaken by different agencies of the Government concerned with housing and to provide a single and effective machinery therefor I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create in the Office of the President the Office of the Presidential Assistance on Housing.

“1. The Office shall be directly under and responsible to the President of the Philippines and shall be headed by an Official to be designated or appointed by the President, who shall be known as the Presidential Assistant of Housing. The latter shall act for in behalf of the President in all matters pertaining to housing.

“2. The Office shall have the following specific functions and responsibilities:

( a ) It shall study, formulate and implement the nationwide housing program of the President in chartered cities, municipalities, municipal districts and barrios.

( b ) It shall analyze, coordinate and integrate the plans, projects, programs and studies of the various government offices, agencies and instrumentalities engaged in housing development particularly the government-owned and controlled corporations, such as the People’s Homesite and Housing Corporation, the Government Service Insurance System, the Social Security System, the Home Financing Corporation and the Development Bank of the Philippines, which are called upon to coordinate to the fullest extent with the Presidential Assistant on Housing and to make available to the latter such personnel, materials and other resources as are necessary to ensure the successful implementation of the President’s National Housing Program.

( c ) It shall formulate uniform housing standards to govern mass housing construction financed through government loans.

( d ) It shall recommend to the President such legislation as are necessary to implement effectively the nationwide housing program.

( e ) It shall receive, handle and disburse any and all funds that may be allocated either by Presidential order or by act of Congress for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this executive order.

( f ) It shall perform such other functions as the President may assign to it.

“3. The Presidential Assistant on Housing is hereby authorized to execute for and behalf of the Republic of the Philippines deeds of convyance or lease contracts in carrying out the functions of his office.

“4. The Presidential Assistant on Housing is also authorized to issue such directives, rules and regulations as he may deem necessary to carry out the purpose of this executive order. He is empowered to organize a staff personnel to assist him in the discharge of his duties and functions. He may also secure the services on detail basis of officers and employees of any department, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government whose assistance may be needed by him in accomplishing the purposes of his office.”

In order to effect the aim of the aforequoted provisions of Executive Order No. 67, all heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to submit to the Presidential Assistant on Housing for consideration all plans, projects, programs, studies, and applications for government loans concerned with mass housing.

By authority of the President:

SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Secretary of Justice concurrently Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, November 11, 1964

Source : Presidential Museum and Library