MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 42

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF A NATIONAL PLAN TO COMBAT ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS , antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has been identified by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Organization on Animal Health, as well as other policy-makers, scientists, professionals, and civil society groups, as a global threat to humankind and animal health because it reduces the effectiveness of antimicrobial medicines;

WHEREAS , AMR has serious health and economic consequences, such as increased mortality, prolonged illness, increased cost of health care, and adverse impact on trade and foreign affairs;

WHEREAS , there is a need to ensure efficient government response to control AMR through the formulation, adoption, and implementation of a comprehensive national plan that would integrate, coordinate, and develop sustainable and collaborative systems and mechanisms to combat AMR in the Philippines;

WHEREAS , the creation of an inter-agency committee to formulate and implement the plan can rationalize, harmonize, streamline, integrate, and unify the efforts of government agencies to address the AMR problem; and

WHEREAS , the Philippines has committed to the WHO Six-Point Health Policy Agenda as a response to the efforts to control and prevent AMR.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation and Composition. The Inter-Agency Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) is hereby created, to be composed of representatives from the following:

DOH shall provide secretariat support to the Committee.

The Committee may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, and request the local government units and private sector for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require.

The duly authorized representatives of the member-agencies of the Committee shall have a rank not lower than Assistant Secretary.

SECTION 2. Functions. The Committee shall have the following functions:

a) Formulate, develop, implement, and oversee the national plan for the prevention and control of AMR;

b) Collaborate and coordinate with other agencies of the Executive branch and private and non-government sectors as may be necessary;

c) Promulgate guidelines, rules and regulations, as well as possible penalties and sanctions for violations in accordance with existing laws, as may be necessary, related, incidental, or consistent with the purpose, intent, and objective of this Order;

d) Submit to the Office of the President regular status reports on the implementation of the national plan; and

e) Perform such other functions and activities as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order, or as the President may direct.

SECTION 3. Development of National Plan. A comprehensive and sustainable national plan to combat AMR in the country shall be developed which will include, but not be limited to the following:

a) Establishment of short and long term programs to address the different aspects of response to AMR, including advocacy, management of AMR and the regulation of antimicrobial use;

b) Strengthening the surveillance system and laboratory detection capacity for AMR and its use in humans and animals;

c) Ensuring accessibility, affordability, availability, and quality of antimicrobial drugs for humans, as well as their rational use in humans, food producing animals, and aquaculture;

d) Guaranteeing that antimicrobial agents are prescribed, dispensed, promoted, advertised and used according to the licensed indication;

e) Development of relevant and utilizable essential medicines list for human and veterinary use;

f) Institutionalization of infection prevention and control in healthcare and veterinary facilities and the community through training and education; and

g) Conduct of research towards the development of new antimicrobials and innovative technologies to improve diagnosis and treatment.

SECTION 4. Funding. The member-agencies of the Committee are authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order, subject to the budgetary, accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Subsequent funding requirements shall be incorporated in the annual budget proposals of the respective member-agencies through the General Appropriations Act (GAA). Additional funds and possible fund sources as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order shall be identified and provided for by the DBM.

SECTION 5. Separability Clause. Should any provision of this Order be declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause. All orders, proclamations, rules, regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this10th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Fourteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2014). Administrative Order No. 42: Creating an inter-agency committee for the formulation and implementation of a national plan to combat antimicrobial resistance in the Philippines. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.