MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 9

DIRECTING THE NATIONAL HOUSING AUTHORITY TO FORMULATE, IMPLEMENT AND MANAGE A HOUSING PROGRAM FOR THE MILITARY AND POLICE PERSONNEL

WHEREAS, it is the policy of this administration to improve the welfare of government employees, including military and police personnel, by providing them and their families with decent and affordable shelter;

WHEREAS, despite earnest efforts, there remains a large number of military and police personnel, whose need for housing provision must be urgently addressed;

WHEREAS, in recognition of the sacrifices of military and police personnel who put their lives at risk to uphold the laws of the land and maintain peace and order in the country, this administration recognizes the need to support them and their families by making available decent and affordable housing;

WHEREAS, there is a need to revitalize the formulation, implementation and management of the housing program for military and police personnel; and

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 90 dated December 17, 1986, the National Housing Authority (NHA) as the government agency tasked with housing production is responsible for the implementation of socialized housing under the National Shelter Program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Project Title. The “AFP/PNP Housing Project,” which shall address the housing needs of the low-salaried members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and the Philippine National Police (PNP), is hereby established. The project involves the provision of permanent housing sites for applicants who shall qualify under the beneficiaries selection criteria formulated for the program.

SECTION 2. Lead Agency for the Implementation of a Revitalized Government Employees and AFP/PNP Housing Program. The NHA shall be the lead agency for the implementation of the revitalized Government Employee and AFP/PNP Housing Program. The NHA shall principally carry out all the housing projects and activities under the Program and shall report directly to the President on the progress and completion of the program.

The NHA is hereby authorized to adopt its Community Initiative Approach Program (CIAP) and any other applicable financing and procurement programs to ensure the timely implementation of the projects and their completion under the program in accordance with applicable laws and government rules and regulation.

SECTION 3. Support of Government Agencies. All departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to provide the support and assistance required by NHA in the implementation of the Program.

The Department of Budget and Management shall extend priority attention to the funding requirements necessary to perform all tasks and functions in accordance with the defined program of activities.

The Home Development Mutual Fund shall extend priority financial assistance to the beneficiaries by providing concessionary rates and express processing through the establishment of a special homebuyer loan window.

The Department of Agrarian Reform and the Local Government Units are directed to provide a special facility to expedite conversion of land to residential and issuance of permits for development of the housing project.

SECTION 4. Funding for the Project. The funding for the project shall be sourced from budgetary support to the National Housing Authority and other funds made available for the purpose by the national government.

It shall be utilized for the (i) cost of development of the housing sites to produce affordable house and lot packages, with selling prices of the units that takes into consideration the target beneficiaries’ financial capabilities, (ii) cost of the requited social and recreational facilities to serve needs of the communities, (iii) water and power connections costs, and (iv) administrative and other necessary costs to implement the program.

SECTION 5. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 6. Repeating Clause. All orders, issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity Clause. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of April, in the year of our Lord Two Thousand Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2011). Administrative Order No. 9: Directing the National Housing Authority to formulate, implement and manage a housing program for the military and police personnel. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.