MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 47

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE ON ARSENIC RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT

WHEREAS, Article II, Section 15 of the Constitution provides that the State shall protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness among them;

WHEREAS, cognizant of the various health risks resulting from arsenic contamination of groundwater, the State has undertaken precautionary measures to avert serious deterioration of public health;

WHEREAS, there is further need to ensure the full coordination and implementation of all government agencies in order to bring to fore measures to address arsenic exposure both at the national and local levels;

WHEREAS, by virtue of Executive Order No. 62 (s. 2011), the Department of Public Works and Highways was designated as lead agency to address all issues and concern of the water sector.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of Task Force. An Inter-Agency Task Force on Arsenic Risk Management is hereby constituted to be composed of representatives of the following agencies:

The Task Force may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), local government units (LGUs), non-government organizations (NGOs) and the private sector for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require.

SECTION 2. Functions. The Task Force shall perform the following functions:

a. Conduct risk mapping, assessment and planning that will provide information, tools and support to communities vulnerable to arsenic health risks;

b. Formulate an Action Plan that shall primarily include access to safe water, assistance to affected and at-risk individuals, and preventive and remedial measures, among others, towards minimizing arsenic-related mortality and morbidity;

c. Engage the technical assistance of local and foreign institutions;

d. Implement, through the concerned member agencies, and oversee the effective and timely implementation of this Order; and

e. Submit reports to the President on a regular basis.

SECTION 3. Funding. The member agencies of the Task Force are authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order, subject to applicable laws, rules and regulations. Subsequent funding requirements shall be incorporated in the annual budget proposals of the respective member agencies through the General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 4. Separability. If any provision of this Order be declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 5. Repeal. All orders, proclamations, rules, regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 26th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Fifteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2015). Administrative Order No. 47: Creating an inter-agency task force on arsenic risk reduction and management. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.