MALACAÑANG

RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 147

PROCLAIMING THE EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE CITY OF BACOLOD AND DECLARING IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT THEREIN THE PROVISIONS OF ACT NO. 4164

WHEREAS, a fire of great magnitude recently destroyed a considerable portion of the City of Bacolod and the catastrophe has caused not only death and destruction but also lawless violence, looting, and sufferings among the populace due to scarcity of articles of prime necessities of life; and

WHEREAS, such a state of things demands that effective measures be taken immediately to cope with the resulting emergency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers conferred upon me by Act No. 4164 of the former Philippine Legislature, entitled “An Act to prevent the excessive increase in the prices of certain prime necessities of life on the occasion of a public calamity, penalizing the violation thereof, and for other purposes,” do hereby proclaim that a public calamity Resulting from destruction by fire exists in the City of Bacolod and declare in full force and effect therein the Provisions of said Act No. 4164, which prohibits and penalizes the hoarding of palay, rice, corn, building or construction materials, and the other prime necessities of life specified in the list accompanying this proclamation and folding them out for sale or selling them at prices higher by twenty-five per cent or more over and above the average current local price of such commodities one month previous co occurrence of the disaster above mentioned.

The public order in the City of Bacolod so requiring, I hereby order the Provincial Commander of the Philippine Constabulary of Negros Occidental, or his duly authorized representatives, to seize any stock of palay, rice, corn, building or construction materials, and articles of prime necessities of life specified in the list accompanying this proclamation when they are concealed or hoarded for purposes of speculation or profiteering by any owner or dealer thereof in excess of his reasonable needs for business or for subsistence.

The articles so seized shall be delivered to the representatives of the Price Stabilization Corporation (PRISCO) in the City of Bacolod, to be sold and disposed of to the public in accordance with law and the proceeds of the sale at legal price shall be reimbursed to the respective owners thereof.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President: MARIANO YENKO, JR. Assistant Executive Secretary

Reference: List of other prime necessities of life included in the proclamation of the existence of a state of public calamity in the City of Bacolod issued on April 16, 1955.

Source: University Library, Far Eastern University