Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

S. No. 477

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6759]

AN ACT DECLARING AUGUST ONE OF EACH YEAR AS WHITE CANE SAFETY DAY IN THE PHILIPPINES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title .—This Act shall be known as the “White Cane Act.”

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy .—It is declared to be the policy of the State to promote and protect the physical, moral, and social well-being of all handicapped persons, such as the blind, and to undertake studies on specific causes of the high percentage of blind people in the Philippines.

SEC. 3. White Cane Safety Day .—August one of each year is hereby declared as White Cane Safety Day for the purposes of instilling public awareness of the plight of the blind, promoting recognition and acceptance of the “white cane” as a symbol of the need of the blind for specific assistance and as a reminder of the individual’s duty to care for and accord due respect to his unfortunate brethren.

SEC. 4. Observation; Education and Information .—The White Cane Safety Day shall be appropriately observed. Towards this end, the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Department of Health and the Philippine Information Agency shall conduct a continuing education and information campaign to achieve the purposes as stated in Section Three of this Act.

SEC. 5. Government Agencies; Rules and Regulations .— The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall, in consultation with the Department of Health and the Department of Social Welfare and Development, issue rules and regulations to effectively implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 6. Effectivity .—This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

This Act which originated in the Senate was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on August 29, 1989 and August 17, 1989, respectively.

Approved, September 18, 1989.

Source: Supreme Court Library