Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 187

PRESCRIBING OFFICE UNIFORM IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

The following guidelines on office uniform in the Office of the President (Proper) are hereby prescribed:

1. Workers in the Office of the President (Proper) shall wear the uniform herein specified during office hours on Mondays and Fridays and on other days that may from time to time be designated:

a. For Women — a two-piece suit as shown in the attached sketch (Figure 1).

By prior arrangement made with the MESLA, the appropriate materials for the purpose, reasonably priced, are being made available thereat.

b. For Men —

i. Barong Tagalog (Figure 2) for Assistant Presidential Staff Directors and up.

ii. T-Shirt (Figure 4) for blue-collar workers (mechanics, carpenters, janitors, etc.)

iii. Polo Barong (Figure 3) for workers not included in i. and ii. Blue-collar workers shall, on occasions required by the Office, wear Polo Barong.

Arrange with the Personnel Office for the appropriate materials and tailoring service, both reasonably priced, for these attires.

Except when the occasion demands, Assistant Presidential Staff Directors and up may wear during any working day any equally appropriate attire, such as Barong Tagalog of other designs, coat and tie, or dress shirt and tie.

2. Wearing of the prescribed uniform shall start one (1) month from the date the clothing allowance is made available to the worker.

3. Doctors, nurses and attendants at the Malacañang Clinic may wear their respective traditional attire in lieu of the uniform herein prescribed, except on occasions required by the Office.

4. Women in mourning or on the family way may wear the customary or appropriate attire in lieu of the required uniform.

5. A worker may, for a valid reason and upon the recommendation of the head of his/her office or unit, be exempt from wearing the prescribed uniform by the Executive Secretary or the Deputy Executive Secretary.

Strict observance of these guidelines is enjoined.

(Sgd.) MAGDANGAL B. ELMA Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, August 9, 1988

Source : CDAsia