MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 371

DIRECTING THE PUBLIC ESTATES AUTHORITY TO DEVELOP THE ALABANG STOCK FARM IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MUNTINLUPA, METROPOLITAN MANILA

WHEREAS, through a Memorandum of Agreement, dated September 20, 1990, executed by and between the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and the Public Estates Authority (PEA), PEA was constituted as the Authority-In-Fact of the DENR relative to the development of Alabang Stock Farm (ASF), a real property owned by the National Government in the Municipality of Muntinlupa, Metropolitan Manila;

WHEREAS, in the planning and development of idle government-owned lands, one of the primary objectives should be the provision of suitable housing sites for the urban poor particularly those who need to be relocated from danger zones and situated in areas developed for infrastructure purposes;

WHEREAS, to achieve the highest and best use of the land, the Municipality of Muntinlupa has prepared a conceptual/indicative plan for the ASF;

WHEREAS, since the ASF is currently utilized by several agencies, there is a need to take into consideration their relocation requirements;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Public Estates Authority (PEA) is hereby directed to undertake the following:

a. To develop the Alabang Stock Farm (ASF) in accordance with the framework plan of the Municipality of Muntinlupa;

b. To include social housing as a major component in the development of ASF either directly by allocating land or indirectly by requiring that a suitable site complete with housing facilities be developed by developer-awardees, in consultation and coordination with the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC); and

c. In the preparation and execution of the development plan of ASF, specifically on the non-housing aspect, to consult and coordinate with the Municipality of Muntinlupa and other interested entities, such as non-government organizations (NGOs), community associations and institutions.

SEC. 2. The relocation of government offices currently using the ASF including their respective facilities and the construction of necessary infrastructure shall be the responsibility of the PEA. For this purpose, the PEA, upon finding sufficient and acceptable relocation sites, shall take into consideration the requirements of the concerned users or occupants. The transfer and relocation shall not, as much as practicable, involve any expense on the part of the government agencies concerned.

SEC. 3. All government offices presently located in the ASF, including the Municipality of Muntinlupa, are hereby directed to immediately turn-over their respective occupied portions in the ASF to PEA as soon as arrangements for their relocation shall have been finalized, and to extend full cooperation and support to PEA in the implementation of the development project.

SEC. 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBIS Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia