Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 403

ESTABLISHING A MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PROPER

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Executive Secretary under Executive Order No. 483 dated 30 September 1991, and in view of the urgent need for an integrated, effective and efficient management information system for the Office of the President, as reorganized, the following are hereby directed:

SECTION 1. An Information Technology Committee for the Office of the President Proper is hereby created composed of the following:

SEC. 2. The Committee shall have the following functions:

A. Undertake a comprehensive audit of all computer equipment, systems, and personnel in the Office of the President;

B. Assess the information technology requirements of all the offices in the Office of the President;

C. Cause the design and recommend the comprehensive computerized management information and decision support system for the Office of the President;

D. Establish a centralized Management Information System (MIS) – Electronic Data Processing (EDP) Center in Malacanang;

E. Submit to the Executive Secretary for approval the internal organizational structure, staffing pattern and personnel movements in the Office of the President in support of the information system as approved.

SEC. 3. The Committee is hereby authorized to create a Secretariat composed of personnel from the Presidential Management Staff, the National Computer Center, the Executive Office, and the Administrative and the Records Offices of the Office of the President.

Sec. 4. The Committee may seek the assistance of the Information Technology Center of the Commission on Audit in the performance of its functions.

SEC. 5. The National Computer Center shall participate in the overall planning, design and implementation of the information and decision support system and in the comprehensive training and technical staffing requirements of the same.

SEC. 6. All officers and units in the Office of the President are hereby directed to provide the necessary information and support to this Committee towards the centralization of the MIS-EDP system.

SEC. 7. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By Authority of the President (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Manila, October 17, 1991

Source: CDAsia