MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 318

IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS ON THE PRESIDENTIAL AWARD FOR HEROISM IN TIMES OF DISASTER

Pursuant to the provisions of Executive Order No. 421, S. 1990 instituting the Presidential Award for Heroism in Times of Disaster, the following rules and regulations for the Presidential Award are hereby adopted:

SECTION 1. Authority . — The President of the Republic of the Philippines may confer the Presidential Award for Heroism in Times of Disaster to any individual or organization who performed spontaneous, dedicated and exemplary acts of heroism under extreme risk to life in times of disaster.

SECTION 2. Presentation . — The Award shall be presented in appropriate ceremony by the President of the Republic of the Philippines or by a Member of the Cabinet authorized by the President of the Philippines.

SECTION 3. Posthumous and Subsequent Awards. — Citation, or Citation and Medal may be awarded posthumously to individuals. The Award may be received on behalf of the deceased by the legal heirs or by his nearest of kin, or by any person designated by the President.

No more than one citation or medal for the same deeds shall be awarded to any individual or organization.

SECTION 4. Recording and Documentation. — Nomination papers and other supporting documents shall be submitted to the Office of the President. The Protocol Office of the Office of the President and the National Historical Institute shall be furnished with annual list of awardees together with the copies of the individual nomination papers and the citation of awardees.

Samples of the citation and medal approved for the Presidential Award for Heroism in Times of Disaster shall be furnished the National Historical Institute for its official file and reference.

SECTION 5. Procedures for the Selection of the Nominees for the Presidential Award. — The following procedures shall be observed.

a. Individuals and Organizations Qualified for Nomination.

Any person, group of persons or organizations who have performed spontaneous, dedicated and exemplary acts of heroism under extreme risk to life in times of disaster.

b. Acceptance of Nomination

1. A Member of the Cabinet may recommend any individual or organization for conferment of the award.

2. Nomination papers and other supporting documents should be submitted to the Office of the President.

3. The President shall constitute a Screening Committee to evaluate and assess the qualifications, deeds and accomplishments of the nominees.

4. Specific information on the effects or results of the deeds of the nominees shall be considered as an important factor in the selection of the awardees for the Presidential Award.

5. The Executive Secretary shall submit the qualified nominations for approval of the President.

SECTION 6. Occasions for Wearing of Medal. — The medal may be worn on the following occasions:

a. National Heroes Day

b. Independence Day

c. Any ceremonial functions of a formal nature as authorized by the Protocol Office, Office of the President of the Philippines.

SECTION 7. Citation . — Citation shall be based on the acts of heroism performed by the awardee.

SECTION 8. Description of the Medal Design. —

Metal: Gold plated (gilded bronze)

Obverse: A sampaguita wreath triangular in form about 2.5 cm. in diameter, with the union (triangle) of equality and justice of the Republic. Above the star (medal) is a heavy loop of the same metal.

Ribbon: Red, white and blue, 2 cm. wide x 3 cm.

Bar: With inscription “Presidential Award for Heroism in Times of Disaster”

SECTION 9. Effectivity. — These implementing rules and regulations on the Presidential Award for Heroism in Times of Disaster shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia