MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 394

DESIGNATING THE LEAD GOVERNMENT AGENCIES THAT SHALL OVERSEE REVERTED BASELANDS, THEIR FACILITIES AND DISPLACED WORKERS.

1. Department of Agrarian Reform and Department of Environment and Natural Resources

2. Department of National Defense (Armed Forces of the Philippines/Philippine Air Force)

The Department of Trade and Industry shall assist the Department of National Defense in overseeing all industrial areas /and non-military areas of Clark Air Base (CAB) proper. After turnover of these

3. Department of National Defense (Armed Forces of the Philippines/Philippine Air Force)

4. Department of Trade & Industry

5. Department of National Defense (Armed Forces of the Philippines/Philippine Navy)

6. Department of Labor & Employment (National Manpower & Youth Council)

SEC. 2. The designated government agencies including their attached agencies are asked to perform the following functions, to wit:

a. To preserve, secure, maintain and develop the reverted baselands and Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. In line with the approval of the Legislative Executive Bases Council’s (LEBC) Study as a directional plan, the following are hereby designated as the lead government agencies in overseeing reverted baselands, their facilities and displaced workers as indicated hereunder:

Agricultural and forested areas around Subic reverted in 1979

Runways, taxiway, hangar, apron, the areas designated by the LEBC plan for the Philippine Air Force (PAF), and all industrial and non-military areas at the Clark Air Base (CAB) proper

industrial areas and non-military areas of CAB proper to the DND, the latter shall, as an internal arrangement, transfer its oversight functions over these areas to DTI.

Air Force Facilities at at Wallace Air Station

All industrial areas at Wallace Air Station San Miguel Naval Station

Training of displaced workers

their facilities until another agency of the government is designated to oversee the same, and accordingly, to appropriate the necessary funds for this purpose, consistent with existing laws, pertinent auditing and accounting rules and regulations;

b. To conduct consultations and negotiate with the private sector with respect to short term leases of real or personal properties within the reverted areas around Subic and its facilities, in accordance with applicable laws; and,

c. To submit a periodic report of its activities pursuant to this Memorandum Order to the Office of the President.

SEC 3. In pursuit of the abovementioned tasks, the designated agencies are:

a. Empowered to hire additional personnel to meet the necessary man power complement and to engage the services of appropriate consultancy firms or consultants as an exemption to the provisions of Section 2 (a) of Administrative Order No, 224, S. of 1991, to ensure the proper implementation of the abovementioned tasks;

b. Exempted from the provisions of Administrative Order No. 173, S. of 1990, allowing them to utilize its cash to fulfill the necessary funding requirements for the preservation, maintenance, and development of the reverted baselands and their facilities and,

c. Granted authority to enter into short-term management agreements for immediate and highly critical projects.

SEC. 4. Any commitment entered into by the designated agencies which extends beyond two (2) years shall be conditional and will require ratification by the government agency that will be mandated to oversee all reverted baselands and their facilities. Expenses which are reimbursable shall be itemized and approved by the Office of the President.

SEC. 5. The designated agencies are hereby ordered to work in close coordination with the Special Operations Team in the Office of the President, Department of National

Defense, Department of Justice, Department of Public Works and Highways, Department of Foreign Affairs, Department of Internal and Local Government, and the Preside Commission on Urban Poor.

SEC. 6. This Memorandum Order take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th of September, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia