Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 254

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD TO ISSUE DISPENSATION PERMIT

WHEREAS, there exists an acute shortage in licensed merchant marine officers for vessels engaged in domestic trade, due to manpower deployment abroad;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to immediately address the problem without compromising the integrity of the marine profession and the necessity of a licensure examination;

WHEREAS, the 1978 International Convention On Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCWS) which the Philippine Government has acceded to, authorizes, under certain conditions, the issuance of a dispensation permitting a specified seafarer to serve in a specified ship for a specified period not exceeding six months in a capacity for which he does not hold the appropriate certificate.

IN VIEW THEREOF, and in consideration of the national interest and public welfare, the Philippine Coast Guard is hereby directed, in implementation of Article VIII of the 1978 STCWS International Convention, to issue upgrading dispensation permit to licensed Filipino Merchant Marine Officers actually employed on board Philippine registered vessels engaged in the coastwise domestic trade.

The Philippine Coast Guard shall, in coordination with the Maritime Industry Authority, prepare the guidelines and procedures for the issuance of dispensation permit, consistent with the pertinent provisions of the 1978 STCWS International Convention, and subject, but not limited, to the following requirements/conditions;

1. The applicant is a holder of a valid license issued by the Professional Regulation Commission and has a minimum of one (1) year practice of his license;

2. The permit shall be for one rank higher only and shall be valid for a period stated in the permit which in no case shall exceed six (6) months;

3. A certification under oath duly signed by the President or General Manager of the company concerned attesting to the competency of the marine officer to discharge the functions of the next higher position; and

4. No dispensation shall be granted to master or chief engineer positions, except in emergency situations or circumstances of force majeure.

In the implementation of this Order, utmost vigilance shall be observed so as not to endanger lives and property and measures shall be taken to preserve the necessity of a licensure examination.

The Commandant, Philippine Coast Guard, shall submit thru the Secretary of National Defense, a periodic report on the implementation hereof and on the level of shortage of merchant marine officers.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, September 15, 1989

Source: CDAsia