MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 128

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL LEGISLATIVE LIAISON OFFICE

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to promote Presidential legislative initiative pursuant to Article VI, Section 26(2), of the Constitution;

WHEREAS, it is the desire of the President to pursue this policy, and maintain close liaison with the Congress of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish an office that will provide the conduit and the mechanism in the fulfillment of this policy;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 3 authorizes the creation of offices and agencies under the Office of the President for purposes of strengthening its support systems and rationalization of the allocation of its task, responsibilities and various functions.

NOW, THEREFORE I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office . – There is hereby established the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office under the Office of the President to be headed by a Presidential Legislative Liaison Officer who shall have the rank of an Undersecretary, with all the rights and privileges appurtenant thereto.

The Presidential Legislative Liaison Officer shall be assisted by an Executive Assistant for Research and Operations.

SECTION 2. Functions . – The Presidential Legislative Liaison Office shall perform the following functions:

1. Promote Presidential initiatives and act as a conduit between the Office of the President and the individual members of Congress, non-governmental organizations, and other cooperative interest groups supportive of the President;

2. Act as Presidential link to other interested groups supportive of the President in order to build support behind the President’s programs;

3. Manage the President’s day-to-day relations with the Senators and Representatives;

4. Act as Presidential adviser on legislative affairs;

5. Monitor to the President the progress of Administration bills; and

6. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the President.

SECTION 3. Organization . – The Presidential Legislative Liaison Office shall carry out its functions through the following:

a. The Presidential Legislative Liaison Officer b. The Executive Assistant for Research and Operations c. A Senior Liaison Officer, Senate d. A Senior Liaison Officer, House of Representatives e. A Legislation Officer f. A Relations Officer g. An Administration Officer

SECTION 4. Staffing Pattern . – The Presidential Legislative Liaison Officer, in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management, is hereby authorized to provide the staffing pattern of the offices corresponding to the officers mentioned in Section 3 hereof, which are hereby created under this Memorandum Order.

SECTION 5. Budget . – The Presidential Legislative Liaison Officer is likewise directed to cause the preparation of an operating budget in collaboration with the Department of Budget and Management. The transitional funding requirements of the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office shall be charged from the Compensation and Organizational Adjustment Fund authorized under Executive Order No. 87 and in the CY 1988 General Appropriations Act.

For succeeding budget years, the appropriations for the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office shall be prepared in accordance with the regular government budget procedures.

SECTION 6. Effectivity . – This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia