Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 176

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND NATIONAL CONSULTATIVE WORK-CONFERENCE SPONSORED BY THE COLOMBO PLAN FELLOWS ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES (CPFAP).

The Colombo Plan Fellows Association of the Philippines (CPFAP), the alumni association of beneficiaries of the Colombo Plan scholarship, fellowship and study-training grants in the Philippines extended by foreign countries, in coordination with the Colombo Plan Bureau of Sri Lanka, will hold a three-day consultative work-conference on May 29–31, 1988, at the Philippine Normal College Library Auditorium, Taft Avenue, Manila, on the theme of “Working Together for Peace and Prosperity”.

This second consultative work-conference aims to provide, among other things, opportunity for members to reexamine and appreciate their roles as career professionals and to firm-up positive action in support of the administration’s major programs of government, particularly in its thrust on national unity, peace and progress. Moreover, the work-conference aims to actively enlist the participation of the members in assessing, prioritizing and launching the Association’s programs/projects.

Government officials and employees, who have been recipients of overseas fellowships, scholarship and study or training grants under the Colombo Plan Program, particularly the officers and members of the Colombo Plan Fellows Association of the Philippines, are authorized to attend this consultative work-conference on official business with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a convention fee of P300.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices. It is understood that the participants residing or stationed within the Metropolitan Manila area shall be entitled only to convention fee and reasonable expenses for transportation.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report of their attendance within thirty days after the work-conference. Likewise, during the same period, the organizers shall submit to this office a report and evaluation of the conference copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management and the Civil Service Commission, including the list of participants and observers indicating their respective offices. The report shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a certified public accountant not connected with the organizers.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, May 27, 1988

Source: CDAsia