Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 349

DIRECTING THE PARTICIPATION OF CERTAIN DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES, AGENCIES, AND OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTRUMENTALITIES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A CRASH PROGRAM FOR THE RELOCATION OF SQUATTER FAMILIES IN THE FINANCIAL DISTRICT AT THE MANILA BAY RECLAMATION AREA

To accelerate the transfer of squatter families occupying portions of the Financial Center district at the Manila Bay Reclamation Area to the Paliparan Site and Services in Dasmariñas, Cavite, for resettlement and other purposes, the following are hereby directed:

Department of Social Welfare and Development to –

1. Extend food assistance to the affected families at the time of movement and within a reasonable period thereafter to ensure basic nutrition for the families during their period of adjustment.

2. Institutionalize on-site social services in the resettlement site.

Department of Public Works and Highways to –

1. Undertake the immediate rehabilitation of roads leading to the resettlement site to ensure the efficient development of the site and the smooth transfer of the families.

2. Prioritize the maintenance of these roads thereafter to secure the access of goods and services to the site and facilitate the mobility of the residents to and from their places of work.

Department of Education, Culture and Sports to –

1. Undertake the immediate construction of adequate number of school buildings/rooms in the resettlement site.

2. Facilitate the easy transfer of students to the new school.

3. Undertake the manning, operation and maintenance of the schools.

Department of Health to –

1. Undertake the immediate construction and operation of health centers.

Department of Trade and Industry to –

1. Plan and facilitate the establishment of light industrial and commercial facilities within the site or accessible to it.

Department of Transportation and Communications to –

1. Ensure the immediate provision of adequate transportation facilities to and from the site.

2. Plan the long term installation of appropriate and adequate transportation facilities to and from the site.

National Manpower and Youth Council to –

1. Plan and implement manpower skills training and related services in the resettlement site.

Provincial Government of Cavite to –

1. Assist/oversee the creation of a provisional Barangay Council/s that will represent the local government in the relocated community.

Municipal Government of Dasmariñas, Cavite to –

1. Extend the necessary assistance, welcome and support to the relocatees, specially during the time of movement to enhance the relocatees’ feeling of well being and relieve their apprehensions.

2. Coordinate closely and extend the necessary support to the concerned agencies in the development of the site and in the planning and establishment of the necessary services and facilities.

3. Accept/adopt the new community and all its facilities and instrumentalities therein, such as roads, drainage, buildings and personnel maintaining the same.

National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation to –

1. Ensure the buyer financing and take-out of individual plots by the relocatees.

National Capital Region Defense Command to –

1. Ensure the peaceful and orderly dismantling of houses and the relocation of the affected families.

Dasmariñas Local Water District to –

1. Accept the turnover, management and maintenance of the water system in the resettlement site.

The funding requirements to carry out the above shall be charged against the respective budget of each concerned department, office and instrumentality.

The DBM is hereby directed to prioritize the allocation of sufficient funds as may be required by each department, office and instrumentality.

A report on the status of implementation of this order shall be submitted to this Office on a quarterly basis.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Manila, March 7, 1991

Source: CDAsia