MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 116

EXEMPTING HOLDERS OF SPECIAL RESIDENT RETIREE VISAS FROM THE REQUIREMENTS OF EMIGRATION CLEARANCE AND RE-ENTRY PERMIT AND PAYMENT OF THE CORRESPONDING FEES THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, pursuant to Executive Order No. 1037, dated July 4, 1985, the development and promotion of the Philippines as a retirement haven as a means of accelerating the social and economic development of the country, strengthening its foreign exchange position at the same time providing further best quality of life to the targeted retirees in a most attractive package, has been declared to be a national policy of the government;

WHEREAS, under the said Executive Order No. 1037, the Philippine Retirement Park System (now Philippine Retirement Authority) was created to implement the above declared policy;

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 1470, dated July 4, 1985, implementing Executive Order No. 1037, authorized the Commission on Immigration and Deportation of the Ministry (now Department) of Justice and the Ministry (now Department) of Foreign Affairs to issue a non-immigrant multiple entry visa called Special Resident Retiree Visa to overseas Filipinos and foreign nationals who will participate in the program of the Philippine Retirement Authority;

WHEREAS, said Special Resident Retiree Visa partakes of a special or exceptional visa which should entitle the holder thereof to certain privileges not accorded to an ordinary visa issued under the Immigration Act of 1940, as amended, as may be clearly inferred from Section 18 of Executive Order No. 1037 decreeing that “all laws, executive orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.”

IN VIEW THEREOF, it is hereby ordered that:

SECTION 1. Overseas Filipinos and foreign nationals participating in the retirement program of the Philippine Retirement Authority pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 1470 and Executive Order No. 1037, both dated July 4, 1985, whose visas were converted by the Commission on Immigration and Deportation and the Department of Foreign Affairs into Special Resident Retiree Visas with multiple entry privileges are hereby exempted from the requirements of emigration clearance and re-entry permit and from payment of the corresponding fees therefor.

SECTION 2. For purposes of entitlement to the above-mentioned privileges that attach to a Special Resident Retiree Visa, it is sufficient that the passports or any other travel documents of a special resident retirees are duly stamped with “Special Resident Retiree Visas.”

SECTION 3. All orders, issuances, rules or regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Memorandum Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

Manila, October 5, 1987

(Sgd.)CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia