Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 398

PROVIDING FOR A POLICY AND GUIDELINES ON THE DELIVERY OF GOODS AND SERVICES IN THE COUNTRYSIDE

WHEREAS , under the Constitution, the State values the dignity of every human person and guarantees full respect for human rights, and government is mandated to serve and protect the people;

WHEREAS , the policy of the government for the speedy and smooth delivery of basic commodities, goods and services to the masses, particularly to isolated and depressed barangays and communities, should be the commitment of all government agencies;

WHEREAS , reports received by the Office of the President reveal isolated instances whereby elements of certain agencies and instrumentalities of the government, for one reason or another, impede or control the flow of basic commodities, goods and services to barangays and communities;

WHEREAS , the Armed Forces of the Philippines, recognizing the need to win the support of the people through the timely delivery of basic goods and services even under conditions of conflict, has issued guidelines to all major services and area commanders to facilitate delivery of goods and services to the countryside; and

WHEREAS , all government agencies concerned with reducing the social costs of the conflict in the countryside, ought to issue similar guidelines to its personnel;

It is hereby directed that:

Section 1. Consistent with the needs of public safety, the full and free flow of goods and services to the barangays particularly in the countryside shall be allowed and facilitated by all government agencies concerned such as the Department of Interior and Local Government, Department of Social Welfare and Development, Department of Health, Department of National Defense, Armed Forces of the Philippines, and the Philippine National Police.

Section 2. The said agencies shall provide the Office of the President (Attn.: Cabinet Cluster E) with the appropriate department order and other issuances relative to this Memorandum and accompanying act of implementing guidelines as they are promulgated.

Section 3. To ensure compliance with this policy and its implementing guidelines, the Peace and Order Council in the area concerned shall monitor and act on violations thereof. Such violations shall be reported simultaneously to the next POC level, to the Office of the President (Attn.: Cabinet Cluster E), Secretary of National Defense, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (Attn.: Deputy Chief of Staff for Civil-Military Operations, J7), Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, Chief of the Philippine National Police (Attn.: Directorial Staff for Police Relations), and the Commission on Human Rights for information and appropriate action as may be warranted.

Section 4. The guidelines and issuances issued by the agencies concerned shall be reviewed by the Office of the President (Attn.: Cabinet Cluster E) to conform with this Memorandum Order and the provisions which are inconsistent herewith are deemed superseded.

Section 5 . This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Manila, September 26, 1991

Source: CDAsia