Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 144

CREATING A MANAGEMENT IMPROVEMENT COMMITTEE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

In view of the felt need to review and improve the existing operational functions and organizational structure of the various operating and service units in the Office of the President to conform with current policies and program thrusts of the present Administration, there is hereby created a Management Improvement Committee (MIC) in this Office, composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Review Memorandum Order No. 1, series of 1958, as amended. “Governing the Organization and Functions of the Executive Office and General Matters of Procedures therein,” and study its possible revision consistent with present programs and policies of this Office.

2. Conduct management audit of present functions and organizational structures of the various operating and service units in this Office, and study such changes as may be necessary to achieve simplicity, economy, effectiveness and efficiency.

3. Evaluate, on a continuing basis, the performance of each and every operating or service unit in this Office in the light of its assigned tasks and responsibilities, identify problems that may arise from time to time, and find out the best solutions thereto.

4. Study the further improvement of the present operational systems and procedures in this Office with the view to installing a more streamlined design.

5. Recommend to the Executive Secretary the adoption of such developmental programs and policies in this Office as may be deemed necessary from time to time.

6. Perform such other related functions as may be assigned to it by the Executive Secretary.

The Committee is authorized to create necessary sub-committees and technical staffs to assist in and facilitate the performance of its functions. It is likewise authorized to call upon any government official or agency for assistance whenever the need arises.

The Committee shall submit its reports and recommendations to the Executive Secretary from time to time.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, December 29, 1987

Source: CDAsia