MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 32

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESS SECRETARY IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, the Filipino People have a right to be informed of the activities, policies and directions of their government;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to keep the Filipino People informed of the affairs and functions of the President of the Philippines, in recognition of this basic right;

WHEREAS, it is the desire of the President to pursue this policy and, through it, maintain close liaison with the various sectors of the public at large;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish an office that will provide the conduit and the mechanism in the fulfillment of this program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Office of Press Secretary. – (OPS) There is hereby established the Office of the Press Secretary (OPS) to be headed by a Press Secretary who shall have the rank of a cabinet member, with all the rights and privileges appurtenant thereto.

SECTION 2. Functions . – The Press Secretary shall perform the following functions:

a) To act as the official spokesman of the President.

b) To keep track of the plans, programs and activities of the President.

c) To maintain liaison and close coordination with government ministries and agencies involved in preparing and planning the activities of the President.

d) To coordinate with the various media, both local and foreign, in disseminating information regarding the affairs of the President.

e) To provide coverage and documentation particularly presidential activities.

SECTION 3. Access to Media – The Press Secretary shall have effective and priority access to government media agencies not under his direct control for the purpose of disseminating news and gathering information for the President. A detailed plan shall be provided in-an appropriate implementing memorandum.

SECTION 4. Organization – The Press Secretary shall designate his Assistant/Assistants and prepare an organizational structure embodying the staffing requirements of his office.

SECTION 5. Budget – The OPS is likewise directed to cause the preparation of an operating budget in collaboration with the Office of Budget and Management on the details necessary to put into effect the implementation as prescribed by this Memorandum Order in accordance with the existing laws, rules and regulations. For succeeding budget years, appropriations for the OPS shall be prepared in accordance with the regular government budget procedures.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause – All laws, executive orders, proclamations, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity – This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia