MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 163

CREATING A NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE FOR THE PURPOSE OF FACILITATING THE RESOLUTION OF IMMEDIATE DEVELOPMENTAL, REGULATORY, AND OTHER ISSUES FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS.

WHEREAS, the importance of an efficient telecommunications network as a foundation for economic recovery and growth is well recognized;

WHEREAS, there is a critical need to accelerate the development of telecommunications infrastructure and facilities in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, DOTC Circular No. 87-188 has been issued pursuant to the provisions of the 1987 Constitution which recognizes the vital role of communications in nation building, ensuring that the country is provided with universal essential services at reasonable rates, to encourage the participation of private enterprise in a regulated, fair and competitive environment, and to accelerate the development and expansion of an efficient and adequate telecommunications infrastructure as a catalyst for socio-economic upliftment and political stability under a system of free enterprise;

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide an organized forum for interaction among the principal telecommunications authorities and other major interested parties, wherein basic issues can be discussed and the proper consultation undertaken;

WHEREAS, in order to facilitate the attainment of these objectives, set definite policies by addressing vital issues, it is necessary to form a body composed of the highest authorities of their respective agencies/entities that will expedite and help the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) in the resolution of these issues with dispatch;

IN VIEW THEREOF, it is hereby ordered, that:

SECTION 1. A National Telecommunications Development Committee (NTDC) shall be created to be composed of the following: (a) The Secretary of the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) as Chairman; (b) the Secretary of the Department of Finance; (c) the Director-General of the National Economic and Development Authority; (d) the Undersecretary for Communications of the DOTC; (e) the Commissioner of the National Telecommunications Commission (NTC); (f) a representative from the Philippine Electronics and Telecommunications Federation (PETEF); (g) a representative from the Telecommunications Users Group (TUG); (h) a representative of the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company (PLDT), as members. Said Committee shall regularly consult with the Chairman of the Committee on Public Services of the Senate and the Chairman of the Committee on Transportation and Communications of the House of Representatives, for the purpose of ensuring coordination and support should legislative action be necessary.

SECTION 2. The NTDC shall be tasked with: (a) facilitating, through consultation and interaction with the relevant authorities and the affected parties from the private sector, in order to address issues such as degree of competition, role of the various carriers, timebound objectives for telephone density and other critical issues; (b) acting as a central forum wherein the various parties-operators, users, and government can meet directly to discuss vital problems to be able to arrive at compromise solutions emanating from disparate interests; (c) facilitating the formulation of proper mechanisms in order to accelerate the development of the sector; (d) providing the proper venue for consultations on the development of a comprehensive regulatory framework and the institution of the necessary regulatory reforms; (e) expediting the formulation of short-term measures to quickly improve service availability and quality; (f) performing such other functions that may be necessary to carry out the above.

SECTION 3. The Secretary of the DOTC shall create a DOTC Task Force to be composed of technical experts that will provide the necessary support required, and shall have the authority to call on any department/agency for cooperation whenever necessary.

SECTION 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

Source: CDAsia