MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 237

FURTHER LIBERALIZING THE EXISTING PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES FOR THE ACQUISITION AND USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES IN GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, it is recognized that Information Technology is a powerful and positive force in the social, political, and economic progress of countries worldwide;

WHEREAS, the government has resolved to employ Information Technology to help propel the country towards continued national development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. All government agencies and other entities with projected Information Technology resource requirements are required to submit their Information Systems Development Plans to the Department of Budget and Management for approval, upon the recommendation of the National Computer Center, to serve as basis for rationalizing the allocation of government funds for this purpose.

Section 2. The acquisition of microcomputers and associated software and peripherals by a government agency or other entity shall not require prior individual clearance from the National Computer Center provided that this is in line with its Information Systems Development Plan which has been approved earlier by the Department of Budget and Management. The acquisition of minicomputer systems and mainframe computer systems shall, however, continue to require prior individual clearance from the National Computer Center.

Section 3. A government agency or other entity that is without an approved Information Systems Development Plan but intends to use savings out of its budgetary appropriations for current operating expenditures, other than those for salaries and wages, for the purpose of acquiring Information Technology equipment and software shall submit an Information Systems Development Plan not later than the end of the third quarter during the same fiscal year in which the savings will be used.

Section 4. The renewal of contracts for leased or rented Information Technology equipment, software and services, including maintenance service agreements shall no longer require approval from the National Computer Center provided that there are no significant changes in the terms of the contract. A copy of the renewal of the contract must, however, be submitted to the National Computer Center.

Section 5. At least one qualified Information Technology professional from other government agencies not attached to the procuring agency and not from the National Computer Center, and/or from professional organizations concerned with Information Technology shall sit as a voting member of the Prequalification, Bids, and Awards Committee involved in the procurement of Information Technology equipment and services.

Section 6. The National Computer Center shall, within thirty (30) days of the signing of this Memorandum Order, establish the appropriate implementing guidelines for the acquisition of Information Technology resources in the government.

Section 7. This Memorandum Order takes effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia