MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 282

PROVIDING MEASURES FOR THE CONSERVATION OF WATER SUPPLY IN METROPOLITAN MANILA

WHEREAS, in view of the water crisis now obtaining in Metropolitan Manila, there is a need to adopt measures that will alleviate the said problem;

WHEREAS, the assistance and cooperation of all Mayors and Barangay Chairmen of Metropolitan Manila, as well as the police authorities, is needed for the effective implementation of such measures;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1.The Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) is hereby directed (a) to speed up and intensify the repair of all leaks in its distribution systems, and (b) to make arrangements with the police authorities for assistance in enforcing the herein directives.

2.The Mayors of Metropolitan Manila shall prohibit the use of water drawn from the MWSS water system for watering of all lawns and gardens, both public and private, campuses, parks and/or memorial parks and median islands from five o’clock (5:00 A.M.) in the morning to nine o’clock (9:00 P.M.) in the evening everyday within their respective territorial jurisdictions.

The prohibitions in Batas Pambansa Blg. 876, “An Act To Include All Authorized Water, Gas, Electric, And Telephone Utilities Within The Coverage Of Presidential Decree No. 401, As Amended” are iterated. All concerned are enjoined to enforce strictly the provisions in the said issuance.

3.The heads of all government offices and entities shall cause the immediate checking of the respective plumbing fixtures and cause their immediate repair and/or replacement if found defective and/or close the same immediately.

4.The Barangay Chairmen of Metropolitan Manila are also mandated to report any violations as to drawing, pumping, and use of water from MWSS water lines committed within their respective barangays to the proper authority.

5.The MWSS shall issue the rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Memorandum Order.

6.This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia