MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 139

EXEMPTING MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES, THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE, AND OTHER GOVERNMENT SECURITY FORCES, WHILE IN THE PERFORMANCE OF THEIR OFFICIAL DUTIES, FROM THE PROHIBITION AGAINST BEARING OF FIREARMS AND WEARING OF UNIFORMS OUTSIDE OF THEIR CAMPS, GARRISONS OR BARRACKS, DURING THE ELECTION PERIOD.

WHEREAS, the Commission on Elections, by Resolution No. 1933, dated November 9, 1987, adopted rules on prohibition regarding, among other things, wearing of uniforms and bearing arms;

WHEREAS, said Resolution states in part:

“Section 1. Prohibited period . – Effective December 1, 1987 up to January 18, 1988, it shall be unlawful:” x x x

“(3) Wearing uniforms and bearing arms .

“e. For any member of security of police organization of government agencies, x x x to wear his uniform or use his insignia, decorations, or regalia, or to bear arms outside the immediate vicinity of his place of work. x x x

“f. Effective December 1, 1987 up to February 17, 1988, for any member of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, special forces, home defense forces, barangay self-defense units and all other para-military units that are now existing or which may hereafter be organized to wear his uniform or to bear arms outside the camp, garrison or barracks to which he is assigned or detailed or outside his home, in case of members of para-military units, unless (a) the President of the Philippines shall give previous authority for them to wear their uniforms or bear arms outside their respective units, and the Commission notified previously in writing of said authority given ; x x x

“All military or para-military personnel so authorized by the President or the Commission under the preceding sub-paragraphs shall bear their true names, ranks and serial numbers, if any, which shall be stitched in block letters on a white background on the left breast of their uniforms in letters and numbers of a clearly legible design at least two (2) centimeters tall, which shall at all times remain visible and uncovered.”

WHEREAS, in the performance of their official duties upon orders of competent authority elements of the AFP/INP especially those who are assigned in embattled areas of the country and who are assigned in counter-insurgency operations/actual combat should be in complete uniform to avoid mis-encounter with military units operating in the same area and should also bear their issued firearms so as to carry out their mission effectively;

AND, WHEREAS, if the elements of the AFP/INP are not allowed to carry/bear their firearms outside their camps, garrisons or barracks during the prohibited period, the enemies of the State and all other criminal elements will take advantage of the situation to the detriment of the citizenry and the security of the State.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

The members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Integrated National Police, and other Government Security Forces, covered by Resolution No. 1933 of the Commission on Elections dated November 9, 1987, particularly Section 1, paragraph 3 (e) and (f) thereof, are hereby exempted from the prohibition to wear their uniforms or bear arms outside the camp, garrison or barracks to which they are assigned or detailed, while in the performance of their official duties upon orders of competent authority.

The persons so exempted shall, in accordance with Resolution No. 1933 of the Commission on Elections, bear their true names, ranks and serial numbers, if any, which shall be stitched in block letters on a white background on the left of the breast of their uniforms, in letters and numbers of a clearly legible design at least two (2) centimeters tall which shall at all times remain visible and uncovered.

The Commission on Elections shall forthwith be notified in writing of this authority.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December, 1987.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia