Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 106

CREATING THE “BIGAY PUSO” COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the “Bigay Puso Pasko” Committee created under Memorandum Order No. 44 dated October 17, 1986, was successful in conducting a Christmas fund drive and in soliciting and accepting voluntary donations in cash or in kind which were given or distributed as gifts to deserving and indigent families in the 1986 Christmas;

WHEREAS, although gift-giving is traditionally done at Christmas, it is deemed desirable that giving and sharing with others especially the indigents, is an activity which should be undertaken not only at Christmas but the whole year round; and

WHEREAS, for this purpose, there is a need to create a new committee which will solicit and accept voluntary donations and distribute them to the poor and the needy every year not only during Christmas but also throughout the year.

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby directed that:

1. There is hereby created a “Bigay Puso” Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, which shall be headed by Mrs. Cynthia Dominguez as Chairman, with the following members:

2. The Committee shall have a Secretariat to assist it in the performance of its functions, duties and responsibilities. The Secretariat shall be headed by Mrs. Susana Vargas, and shall have such necessary personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it.

3. The Committee shall conduct a continuing fund drive, and for this purpose, may solicit and accept voluntary donations in cash or in kind both from the government and private sectors. All donations given to this noble cause shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement and all other taxes, and shall be deductible for income tax purposes.

The Committee shall formulate a program for the efficient distribution of gifts to deserving and indigent families in the forthcoming 1987 Christmas and every Christmas thereafter, and to continuously undertake similar year-round activities as may be deemed proper or necessary. The Committee may also call on heads of departments, bureaus, and offices, government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments for such assistance as it may need in the attainment of its objectives.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, August 20, 1987

Source: CDAsia