Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 416

ESTABLISHING A REVIEW SYSTEM IN THE LEGAL OFFICE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

With the end in view of hastening the disposition of cases/matters pending before the Legal Office, Office of the President, the following are hereby directed:

SECTION 1. A review System in the Legal Office, Office of the President, is hereby established. For this purpose, the Legal Office shall be organized into five (5) Working Groups, each Group to be headed by the following:

Group I

–

Director Vicente A. Galang

Group II

–

Director Auxencio S. Lucero

Group III

–

Asst. Director Nestor S.C. Caabay

Group IV

–

Asst. Director Victor S. Andrada

Group IV

–

Asst. Director Aproniano A. Caedo

SECTION 2. The Heads of the Working Groups shall assist the Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs, Mario Antonio, in the review of the draft decisions, judgments, resolutions and/or orders prepared by the Legal Action Officers.

SECTION 3. Prior to the submission of the draft decision, judgment, resolution and/or order for the review of the Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs, a Head of a Working Group shall first review the same. Thereafter, his review shall be submitted to another Head of a Working Group for a second review in order to ensure a thorough examination of the facts of the case and the laws and jurisprudence therein applied. No decision, judgment, resolution and/or shall be forwarded to the Assistant Executive Secretary for his review unless the same has been reviewed by the Heads of two(2) different Working Groups.

SECTION 4. After the second review aforementioned, the draft decision, judgment, resolution and/or order shall be submitted to the Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs for his final review, who may, in his discretion, do so without necessarily going over the entire records of the case/matter.

SECTION 5. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, 22 January 1992

Source: Malacañang Records Office