Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 347

TRANSFERRING THE PERSONNEL, SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND OTHER RESOURCES OF THE MALACANANG PUBLIC ASSISTANCE CENTER AND THE OFFICE OF THE CABINET SECRETARIAT TO THE PRESIDENTIAL MANAGEMENT STAFF IN THE POLICY AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS GROUP, OFFICE OF THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Executive Order No. 446 dated January 26, 1991, provides that:

“There shall be a policy and public affairs group headed by a Deputy Executive Secretary, under the Office of the Executive Secretary. This group shall be composed of the Presidential Management Staff, which shall absorb the Cabinet Secretariat, the Presidential Complaints and Action Office, and the Sectoral Liaison Offices. The group shall be responsible for providing common staff support to the President, the Executive Secretary and the Presidential Assistants/Advisers System in such areas as management of the development process, administrative reforms, sectoral liaison, public assistance, strategic research and public policy formulation.”

WHEREAS, Section 6 of Executive Order No. 442 dated January 3, 1991, provides that:

“The present personnel, supplies, equipment appropriation, and other resources of the Malacanang Public Assistance Center are hereby transferred to the Action Office. Funds necessary for additional personnel, supplies and equipment shall be charged against existing appropriations of the Office of the President.”

In view thereof and subject to the pertinent budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations, it is hereby directed that:

1) All allotments already received including those which may hereafter be received by the Office of the President (Proper), Account Code 0010 intended for the Cabinet Secretariat, Malacañang Public Assistance Center and Presidential Action Office shall be transferred by way of Sub-Allotment Advice/s to the Presidential Management Staff (Policy and Public Affairs Group) under Account Code 0033; and the corresponding cash therefor remitted to the Presidential Management Staff (Policy and Public Affairs Group) by the issuance of check/s drawn against Account Code 0010 to the credit of Account Code 0033 with the latter acknowledging receipt thereof by issuing the corresponding official receipt/s therefor.

2) The Personnel Office of the Office of the President (Proper) shall furnish the Presidential Management Staff (Policy and Public Affairs Group) with the Plantilla of Personnel of both the Offices of the Cabinet Secretariat and the Malacanang Public Assistance Center, under the CY 1990 Budget meantime that the General Appropriations Act for CY 1991 has not as yet been approved by the proper authorities concerned.

3) All equipment purchased out of the funds of the Office of the Cabinet Secretariat as well as those of the Malacanang Public Assistance Center, including vehicles, shall also be transferred to the Presidential Management Staff thru their respective Property Officers which transfer shall be effected by way of Invoice/Receipt which shall be properly accomplished.

In all cases, the transfer herein directed shall be duly intervened to or witnessed by the representative(s) of the Resident COA State Auditor/s concerned. Copies of the invoice(s)/receipt(s) referred to in the next preceding paragraph shall be furnished the Offices of the Executive Secretary, Deputy Executive Secretaries and the Presidential Assistant I (OP Finance).

4) Thereafter, all Allotment Advices and Notices of Cash Allocations intended for the Malacañang Public Assistance Center, Office of the Cabinet Secretariat and Presidential Action Center shall be credited by the Department of Budget and Management to the Presidential Management Staff (Policy and Public Affairs Group) under Account Code 0033 and no longer to Account Code 0010.

5) All concerned shall see to the proper and expeditious implementation of this Memorandum Order.

his Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Manila, March 6, 1991

Source: CDAsia