Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER 260

TRANSFERRING THE PROPERTIES, RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS OF THE TASK FORCE ANTI-GAMBLING TO CERTAIN UNITS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

In view of the fact that most of the functions of the Task Force Anti-Gambling (TFAG) are being performed by existing law-enforcement agencies and to enable these agencies to pursue a unified campaign against illegal forms of organized gambling, the transer of all TFAG’s properties, records, and accounts is hereby authorized as follows, subject to the pertinent accounting and auditing rules and regulations:

1. All supplies, equipment, office furnitures and other properties of the TFAG shall be transferred to the Property Unit, Finance Office, OP.

2. All records of the TFAG shall be transferred to the Malacañang Records Office.

3. The book of accounts shall be transferred to the Accounting Office, OP.

4. The unexpended balances of the TFAG appropriations for CY 1989, if any, shall be turned over to the National Treasury.

5. All pending cases shall be transmitted to the Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary who shall make appropriate recommendations for their disposition.

Any valid claim for compensation and other benefits that may be due the officers and employees of the Task Force Anti-Gambling under existing law is hereby authorized to be paid subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

The head of the TFAG shall coordinate with the Chiefs of the above-mentioned OP Offices and the turn-over shall be effected in the presence of a COA representative. Thereafter, copies of the invoices/receipts shall be furnished the Offices of the Executive Secretary, Deputy Executive Secretary and the Presidential Finance Assistant.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, 6 October 1989

Source: House of Representatives Library