Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 346

DESIGNATING THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM (DOT) AS THE LEAD AGENCY IN OVERSEEING THE JOHN HAY AIR BASE AND ITS FACILITIES

In line with the President’s approval of the Legislative Executive Bases Council’s (LEBC) directional plan and in view of the pending reversion of the Camp John Hay Air Base and its facilities to the Philippine government by April 1991, the Department of Tourism (DOT) is hereby designated as the lead agency in overseeing the said Base and its facilities. As such, the DOT is tasked to perform the following functions, to wit:

1. To preserve, secure, maintain and develop the Camp John Hay Air Base and its facilities until another instrumentality of the government is designated to oversee the same. The DOT and its attached agencies are hereby authorized to appropriate the necessary funds for this purpose, consistent with pertinent auditing and accounting rules and regulations. To ensure the proper implementation of the abovementioned task, the DOT is hereby empowered to engage the services of appropriate consultancy firms or consultants;

2. To conduct consultations and negotiate with the private sector with respect to the lease or transfer of real or personal properties within the Camp John Hay Air Base and its facilities, in accordance with applicable laws; and,

3. To submit a periodic report of its activities pursuant to this Memorandum Order to the Office of the President.

In pursuit of the abovementioned tasks, the DOT is hereby ordered to work in close coordination with the Special Operations Team (SOT) in the Office of the President, Department of National Defense (DND), Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG), Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and the Presidential Commission on Urban Poor (PCUP).

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS

Manila, March 1, 1991

Source: CDAsia