MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 311

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON THE REHABILITATION OF AREAS AFFECTED BY THE JULY 16, 1990 EARTHQUAKE

WHEREAS, there is need to rationalize and speed up rehabilitation efforts in the light of massive damage and destruction caused by the recent earthquake;

WHEREAS, it is now imperative to go beyond and build on rescue, search and relief operations to put in place a concrete machinery and program which shall guide rehabilitation efforts of government and coordinate these with the private sector, and whenever necessary, the international community;

WHEREAS, it is urgently necessary to incorporate the rehabilitation program into the current medium-term development plan so that necessary realignments can be made;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential Task Force on the Rehabilitation of Earthquake-Affected Areas.

SECTION 1. The Presidential Task Force on the Rehabilitation of Earthquake-Affected Areas shall be headed by the Presidential Coordinating Assistant for Human Resources and Public Welfare. He will be supported by Action officers who will oversee the rehabilitation efforts in the following areas:

(1) roads and bridges;

(2) vital infrastructure services, e.g., airports, water and sewerage systems, communication and power;

(3) livelihood and emergency employment;

(4) social services, e.g. hospitals, public health, school buildings, provision of temporary shelters for displaced families and community organization; and

(5) peace and order.

SECTION 2. The following agencies will be involved in each priority areas:

(1) Roads and Bridges: DPWH (lead), AFP (Engineering Brigade)

(2) Vital Infrastructure Services: DOTC (lead), LWUA, NEA, NPC

(3) Livelihood and Emergency Employment: DA (lead), DTI, TLRC, DOLE, DAR, DENR, DOST

(4) Social Services: DOH (lead), DECS, DSWD, NHA, HUDCC, NEDA

(5) Peace and Order: DND (lead), DLG, DOJ, Local Police

The designated lead agency in each priority area shall assign an Action Officer with the level of Undersecretary who shall report to the Task Force Chairman.

All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities including government owned and controlled corporations shall be directed to extend such assistance and cooperation as the Task Force may need in the discharge of its functions.

SECTION 3. An Advisory Committee to the Task Force composed of the Chairmen of the five (5) Cabinet Clusters and the Presidential Coordinating Assistants shall be established.

SECTION 4. The Task Force shall be tasked with: (a) Coordinating all rehabilitation activities of the national government; (b) Prioritizing rehabilitation projects whenever necessary; (c) Monitoring the progress of government relief and rehabilitation efforts; (d) Communicating within government and to the public the latest updates received; (e) Liaising with all parties for necessary assistance/coordination; and (f) Submitting regular status reports on relief and rehabilitation projects to the President.

SECTION 5. The Task Force Chairman is hereby authorized to grant, on behalf of the Office of the President, the prior authority required under Executive Order No. 380 for department Secretaries and Governing Boards of government owned or controlled corporations to enter into negotiated contracts which exceed the ceilings set forth in said Executive Order.

SECTION 6. The Task Force shall coordinate with the concerned local chief executives in the following: (a) identification and prioritization of rehabilitation projects; (b) implementation of projects in coordination with line agencies; and (c) monitoring of projects.

The concerned CORDs shall assist in the monitoring of rehabilitation projects. They shall maintain linkages between the Regional Development Councils and the Task Force to ensure consistency of national rehabilitation plans with regional priorities.

SECTION 7. The Task Force shall maintain regular and continuing links with other Disaster Relief Coordinating Teams established in major earthquake-affected areas, i.e., La Union-Pangasinan, Baguio-CAR, and Nueva Ecija-Nueva Vizcaya.

SECTION 8. An Operations Center shall be established to provide technical and administrative support to the Task Force.

SECTION 9. The Office of the President and concerned departments shall provide the necessary funds and equipment for the operations of the Task Force.

SECTION 10. The Task Force shall complete its work within a period of six (6) months to one (1) year from the effectivity of this Memorandum Order. At the end of this period, it shall submit to the President a final status report on the rehabilitation program including its recommendations which shall be carried out by the entire government machinery at all levels.

SECTION 11. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia