MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 191

APPROVING AND DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE METRO MANILA TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENT PLAN (TRIP) AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular No. 48 created the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Management to develop an integrated traffic improvement program for Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, the aforementioned Task Force has formulated the Metro Manila Traffic Improvement Plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The Metro Manila Traffic Improvement Plan (TRIP), which is attached hereto as “Annex A”, is hereby approved. The Metro Manila Commission (MMC), in coordination with concerned government agencies, is hereby tasked as the lead agency to take the necessary measures to implement the Plan as formulated by the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Management.

Section 2. The entire Metro Manila is hereby declared to be a TRIP area.

Section 3. The Presidential Task Force on Traffic Management is hereby converted into the Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee (IACC) on the Metro Manila TRIP. The composition of the IACC shall be the same, but with the MMC as Chairman. It shall report directly to the Executive Secretary.

The Technical Committees on Enforcement, Education and Engineering under the Task Force shall be retained as Sub-Committees of the IACC. In addition, a Sub-Committee on Mass Transit is hereby created.

The members of the Sub-Committees shall be drawn from the existing technical committees under the Task Force. The IACC shall determine the membership and functions of each sub-committee.

The IACC shall meet as often as necessary, but not less than twice every quarter.

Section 4. The IACC shall have the following functions:

a. Determine the status of on-going activities under the Plan;

b. Formulate action programs for the activities under the Plan;

c. Coordinate and monitor implementation of the Plan;

d. Submit quarterly reports to the Executive Secretary on the progress of plan implementation;

e. Evaluate the impact of the Plan;

f. Input traffic improvement concerns in the annual review of the Regional Development Plan for NCR.

g. Source the financial and technical requirements of the Plan from appropriate entities; and

h. Request the assistance of any government agency and instrumentality in implementing the Plan.

Section 5. All concerned government agencies or instrumentalities identified in the TRIP are hereby directed to fully discharge their respective functions and responsibilities. The participation of the private sector is also enjoined to implement fully the Plan.

Section 6. A Metropolitan Traffic Police Command is hereby created as a separate unit under the Metropolitan Police Force (MPF). The traffic personnel of the four (4) police districts of Metro Manila shall be under the administrative and operational control and supervision of the Command. The MPF shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Section.

Section 7. The Executive Secretary shall issue the necessary implementing orders to carry out the provisions of this Memorandum Order.

Section 8. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1 st day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia