MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 417

PROVIDING MEASURES FOR THE CONSERVATION OF WATER SUPPLY IN THE METROPOLITAN MANILA AREA.

WHEREAS, in view of the water crisis now obtaining in Metropolitan Manila, there is an urgent need to adopt conservation measures that will address the problem;

WHEREAS, the assistance and cooperation of both the public and private sectors are necessary in the effective implementation of the conservation measures;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) is hereby directed:

(a) To speed up and intensify the implementation of the repair of all leakages and replacement of defective fixtures in its distribution systems;

(b) To implement the immediate removal of all illegal connections and/or fixtures; and

(c) To prevent the unauthorized use of fire hydrants.

SEC 2. The Mayors of Metropolitan Manila are hereby enjoined to restrict the use, at any time of the day, of water drawn from the MWSS waterworks system for watering of all lawns and gardens, both public and private, campuses, parks and/or memorial parks and median islands. For this purpose, they may propose the necessary ordinances before their respective legislative bodies for the strict enforcement of this restriction and the appropriate penalties or fines for violations thereof.

SEC 3. The Heads of all government agencies including government-owned or controlled corporations and local government units as well as private corporations and entities are hereby enjoined to cause the immediate inspection of their respective plumbing system and cause their immediate repair and/or replacement of defective fixtures and/or immediate closure of the same.

SEC 4. The Barangay Chairmen in the Metropolitan Manila area are hereby directed to report any unlawful or unauthorized drawing, pumping and use of water from MWSS water lines committed within their respective barangays to the MWSS or the police authorities.

SEC 5. The Philippine National Police is hereby mandated to lend full support and assistance to the MWSS in the implementation of the conservation measures herein promulgated.

SEC 6. All residents of Metropolitan Manila drawing water from the MWSS waterworks system are urged to conserve water during the period of crisis and report any leakages to the MWSS.

SEC 7. The prohibitions in Presidential Decree No. 401, entitled “Penalizing the Unauthorized Installation of Water, Electrical or Telephone Connections, The Use of Tampered Water or Electrical Meters, and other Acts” as further amended by Batas Pambansa Blg. 876, entitled “An Act To Include All Authorized Water, Gas, Electric, And Telephone Utilities Within the Coverage of Presidential Decree No. 401,” are hereby reiterated.

SEC 8. The MWSS shall issue rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Memorandum Order.

SEC 9. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia