MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 194

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONWIDE FLOOD CONTROL AND DRAINAGE PROGRAM OF THE GOVERNMENT.

To effectively implement the Nationwide Flood Control and Drainage Program of the Government, all concerned agencies are hereby directed to undertake, in coordinated manner, the following measures for flood control and protection:

1. The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) shall expedite the construction of flood control and drainage facilities in accordance with the targets in the annual infrastructure programs and the Medium Term Development Plan.

2. The DPWH and the concerned Local Government Units (LGUs) shall intensify and sustain the maintenance and cleaning of existing flood control and drainage facilities.

3. The DPWH, the Philippine Information Agency, the Metropolitan Manila Commission (MMC), and the concerned LGUs shall carry out intensive information dissemination and community action programs to stop the dumping of garbage into waterways and drainage structures.

4. The MMC, the LGUs, and the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC), in coordination with the Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor and the DPWH, shall take steps to clear the rights-of-way of esteros and other public waterways in Metro Manila of illegal occupants and structures, while at the same time providing for the relocation of squatters therefrom in accordance with existing policies and programs.

5. The DPWH and the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA) shall install and operate flood forecasting and warning systems in the major river basins, including flood level indicators in critical areas and thoroughfares.

6. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the National Power Corporation, the National Irrigation Administration and the concerned LGUs shall undertake watershed management and reforestation to minimize erosion and enhance the retention of water.

7. The HUDCC and the concerned LGUs, in coordination with the DPWH, shall undertake flood plain management, zoning and land use regulations to minimize undue encroachment upon the plains and river basins, and shall see to it that adequate provisions for drainage are provided for in subdivision and housing development projects.

8. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

Manila, October 18, 1988

Source: CDAsia