Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 62

AUTHORIZING THE CONTINUED EXEMPTION FROM CLASSIFICATION BY THE OFFICE OF COMPENSATION AND POSITION CLASSIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS TO POSITIONS PAID FROM CERTAIN LUMP-SUM APPROPRIATIONS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER).

The Office of the President was initially provided with a lump-sum appropriation specifically for the payment of salaries of the President’s Advisory and Technical Staff. This fund continued to be appropriated every fiscal year. Then to cope with the ever-increasing volume of the multifarious activities of this Office, consistent with population growth and the complexity of governmental functions, various additional lump-sum funds have been allocated to the Office of the President for payment of salaries not only of said immediate staff of the President but also of consultants, confidential, national security and other necessary personnel employed in OP. The said funds are presently identified as follows:

Appointments under these funds have been issued upon instructions from the President or the Executive Secretary and his deputy for Administration, to appointees possessing the desired training, skills and qualifications, as well as those of their trust and confidence. Accordingly, these appointments have been considered as belonging to the Office Staff of the President of the Philippines, hence, they are embraced in the unclassified or non-career service, and the appointing authority has been given the absolute discretion to determine the position designations including the corresponding salary rates suitable to the respective appointees.

For these reasons, positions paid from the above-listed lump-sum appropriations were not covered by the WAPCO Pay Plan and, therefore, exempted from classification by the then Wage and Position Classification Office, now the Office of Compensation and Position Classification (OCPC).

To enable, therefore, the incumbent President, Executive Secretary, or Deputy Executive Secretary for Administration, to exercise the same discretion in the issuance of appointments under the said lump-sum appropriations, all said appointments shall continue to be exempted from position classification and salary determination by the OCPC, and the same processing procedure thereof shall be followed until further advice from this Office.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Manila, January 15, 1987

Source: CDAsia