MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 165

CREATING THE FRANCISCO (BALAGTAS) BALTAZAR BICENTENNIAL COMMISSION.

WHEREAS, the year 1988 marks the bicentenary of the birth of Francisco (Balagtas) Baltazar, Prince of Filipino poets and one of the great patriots of our country;

WHEREAS, by means of his Florante at Laura and other literary works, he was ahead of many of our noble heroes in blazing the path of Philippine nationalism;

WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper to commemorate the occasion with appropriate activities and ceremonies; and

WHEREAS, to insure the successful celebration of this event, there is need to create a commission to take charge of the planning and execution of the commemorative activities.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Francisco (Balagtas) Baltazar Bicentennial Commission to formulate plans and devise ways and means for the successful execution of appropriate activities and/or ceremonies for the commemoration of the Bicentennial of the birth of Francisco (Balagtas) Baltazar. The Commission shall be composed of the following:

The Commission shall have the following duties and functions:

1. Prepare the general program of the bicentenary and submit it to the President of the Philippines for approval;

2. Promote and direct commemorative celebrations throughout the Philippines;

3. Collect and publish the literary works and other writings of Francisco (Balagtas) Baltazar;

4. Arrange for the issuance of commemorative stamps and medals for the bicentenary;

5. Hold contest in arts that shall appropriately and properly honor Francisco (Balagtas) Baltazar;

6. Administer all funds donated to it by the public and the Government for the purposes of the bicentenary; and

7. Take all other measures necessary for the successful execution of all the programs and activities adopted in celebration of the bicentenary, including the conduct of fund drives.

The Commission shall from time to time report its accomplishment to the President who shall cause such report to be published for the information of the public.

The Chairman is hereby empowered to request any agency of the Government to assist in the discharge of the commission’s functions and duties and to designate such personnel as he may require for the purpose.

The Writers Union of the Philippines (Unyon ng mga Manunulat sa Pilipinas or UMPIL) is hereby designated as the Secretariat of the Commission.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia