Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 405

DELINEATING THE FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT EXECUTIVE SECRETARY FOR LEGISLATION

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Executive Secretary under Executive Order No. 483 dated 30 September 1991 and in order to make the Office of the Assistant Executive Secretary for Legislation fully responsive to the specific requirements of the Office of the President, as reorganized, the following are hereby directed:

SECTION 1. The Office of the Assistant Executive Secretary for Legislation shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Review and submit its recommendations on any proposed bill submitted by any Department, office or agency to the Office of the President for certification as to the necessity of its immediate enactment pursuant to subsection (2), Section 26, Article VI of the Constitution;

b. Review and submit its recommendations on any proposed bill submitted or referred to the Office of the President for endorsement or transmittal to Congress as an administration bill;

c. Keep a registry of all bills certified or transmitted in accordance with the two (2) preceding provisions;

d. Review and submit its recommendations on any bill passed by Congress forwarded to the President for approval; Provided, That, in this case, the Office of the Assistant Executive Secretary shall submit to the Executive Secretary its recommendations at least ten (10) days before the bill shall lapse into law;

e. Draft the veto message of the President for transmittal to the House where the bill or the provisions of the bill vetoed originated;

f. Keep a registry of and prepare briefs on all bills passed by Congress and signed into laws by the President;

g. Keep a registry of all vetoed bills and of laws with vetoed provisions/items;

h. Compile all laws and incorporate therein all latest amendments or revisions;

i. Prepare the statement on the position of the Executive Branch on any pending bill whenever assigned to do so;

j. Coordinate closely with the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office in ensuring that certifications, transmittals, position statements and recommendations from the Office of the President reach Congress and the individual members thereof;

k. Inform the Presidential Legislative Liaison Office of all –

(1) Bills certified for immediate enactment pending with Congress;

(2) Administration bills pending with Congress;

(3) Vetoed bills and laws with vetoed provisions/items; and

(4) Bills signed into laws by the President; and

l. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the President, the Executive Secretary or the Deputy Executive Secretaries.

SEC. 2. All provisions of previous issuances and memoranda or parts thereof which are in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Memorandum Order are hereby modified and/or revoked accordingly.

SEC. 3. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia