MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 58

CREATING A TASK FORCE TO IMPLEMENT THE BO. OBRERO UPGRADING PROJECT, ILOILO CITY AND TO FACILITATE THE SALE OF HOMELOTS TO PROJECT BENEFICIARIES TO RESOLVE THE LAND TENURE PROBLEM

WHEREAS, pursuant to Proclamation No. 251 dated May 4, 1951, two (2) parcels of the Public domain situated in the City of Iloilo with an aggregate area of 331,375 square meters were withdrawn from the sale or resettlement and reserved for Workingmen’s Village (Barrio Obrero) purposes;

WHEREAS, the above-mentioned proclamation has been further amended by Proclamation Nos. 448, series of 1953, 330, series of 1968, 233, series of 1967;

WHEREAS, the present occupants of Barrio Obrero have resided there for more than 20 years without security as to their land tenure;

WHEREAS, the residents of Bo. Obrero have presently submitted a petition to the Office of the President requesting for the reservation of their area for residential purposes and for its development under Slum Improvement and Resettlement (SIR) Program of the Government;

WHEREAS, the petition has been favorably endorsed by the City Government of Iloilo and the National Housing Authority;

WHEREAS, the Barrio Obrero project area was initially identified as a potential site for upgrading under the Regional Cities Development Project (RCDP) but due to funding constraints was categorized as a second priority;

WHEREAS, due to the desire of the Government to assist the residents in Bo. Obrero, there is a need to accelerate the implementation of the Bo. Obrero upgrading project, to improve the facilities and utilities therein and resolve the Land Tenure problem;

WHEREAS, during the consultative meeting in Iloilo City, the General Manager of the National Housing Authority (NHA) was directed by the President to create a Task Force to facilitate the resolution of Land Tenure problem and the development of Bo. Obrero.

NOW, THEREFORE, a Bo. Obrero Task Force (OBT) is hereby created which shall be composed of representatives from the following:

The following are the objectives of the Task Force:

1. To pursue the accelerated development of Bo. Obrero;

2. To determine the source of funds needed to support housing materials and construction loans to bona fide beneficiaries and other corollary and special projects to be undertaken pursuant to the objectives of the Task Force;

3. To cause immediate resolution of issues involving rights to land in Bo. Obrero leading to the award to beneficiaries of land titles over their allocated homelots;

4. To cause the design and implementation of an expanded livelihood program;

5. To submit periodic reports to the President on the implementations of the objectives of this Task Force.

The Task Force is hereby empowered to formulate the necessary procedure in the implementation of the above-mentioned objectives.

In consultation with the National Housing Authority, the Ministry of Budget and Management shall identify the source and make available the funds that the above-cited development program for Bo. Obrero shall require. In this regard, the Office of the Budget and Management shall ensure that project components to be undertaken by each responsible government agency are included for funding allocation in the yearly budget.

The Task Force and its staff shall continue to exercise its powers and operate until its designated task are completed.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By Authority of the President: (SGD.) JOKER P. ARROYO Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, December 15, 1986

Source: CDAsia