Ones uf the jfresident
of at Ul ilippines
alacatang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO, _12

FURTHER RECONSTITUTION OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT GROUP

Memorandum Order No. 10, dated 08 November 2022, reconstituting the Office of

the President Performance Management Group (PMG), created through Memorandum
Order No. 7, dated 08 November 2016, to oversee and manage the implementation of the
Performance-Based Incentive System and Strategic Performance Management Systems in
the Office of the President (OP) Proper, is hereby further reconstituted as follows:

Designation Designee
Chairperson : Executive Secretary

Vice- : Senior Deputy Executive Secretary
Chairperson
Members : Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration

9.

10.

: Deputy Executive Secretary for General Administration
: Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs
: Deputy Executive Secretary for Internal Audit

: Chairperson, Office of the President Career Executive Service Officers’ Association, Inc.

: President, Office of the President Employees’ Network
The reconstituted OP-PMG shall perform the following functions and responsibilities:

Regularly review the OP Organizational Performance Indicators Framework (OPIF);
Ensure that office performance targets and measures, as well as the budgets, are
aligned with the OP-OPIF and related issuances on performance management;

Issue guidelines to office heads regarding their annual performance indicators and
targets;

. Approve office performance commitments and ratings;
. Actas final arbiter for performance management issues in OP;

Recommend potential top performers and provide inputs to the Program on Awards
and Incentives for Service Excellence Committee for the grant of awards and
incentives;

Set policies and ensure the implementation of the 4-stage SPMS Cycle for the 1*
and 2” levels;

Set policies and ensure the implementation of the appropriate PMS for 3™ level
career and non-career officials;

Ensure and monitor the implementation of the Quality Management System in the
OP; and

Undertake all other performance-related initiatives in the OP.

The Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration —

Technical Service Office and the Human Resource Management Office shall jointly provide
administrative, technical, and secretarial support services to the PMG. The PMG may
likewise create technical working group/s as may be necessary.

All other issuances regarding the composition of the OP-PMG are hereby revoked,

amended, or modified accordingly.

Manila,

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

14 February 2023

en COPY

ny peli Oy nd or
/ try. (ON ZENY E, FERROLING-EMAD
a Jyap,, DIRECTOR 1V