Office of the President
of the Philippines
Malacaiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 09

RECONSTITUTION OF THE INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND
COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

By virtue of Memorandum Order No. 182, s. 2005, as amended by
Memorandum Order No. 295, s. 2009, Memorandum Order No. 10, s. 2010,
Memorandum Order No. 19, s. 2011, Memorandum Order No. 71, s. 2014,
Memorandum Order No. 89, s. 2016, and Memorandum Order No. 04, s. 2022, the
Internal Affairs and Complaints Committee (IACC) was created to receive, act on,
and investigate all administrative disciplinary complaints against public officers and
employees in the Office of the President who are non-presidential appointees.

In the exigency of service and to ensure the expedient resolution of all
pending IACC cases, there is a need to reconstitute the membership of the IACC
and amend, for that purpose, Sections 2, 5, and 6 of Memorandum Order No. 182,
s. 2005, to read as follows:

Section 2. Composition; Quorum. — The IACC shall be
composed of five (5) members as follows:

1. The Deputy Executive Secretary for Internal Audit, who
shall be the Chairperson and Presiding Officer;

2. The Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs (DESLA);

3. The Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and
Administration;

4. The Deputy Executive Secretary for General Administration;
and

5. The Assistant Executive Secretary of the General
Government Administration Office.

In the absence of the Deputy Executive Secretaries and upon
their directive or in case of vacancy or incapacity, their respective
Assistant Executive Secretaries shall act as alternate member.

A quorum, consisting of a majority of the members of the IACC,
shall be required for the transaction of the business, and the
resolution of the majority of the quorum duly assembled shall be a
valid act. However, in rendering or issuing its findings and
recommendation, order or resolution, the majority of the IACC
membership all present in a meeting called for the purpose, is
required.

XXX XXX XXX

Section 5. Designation of Investigator/s. — \n the conduct of
its investigation, the CIU Head (DESLA) shall designate an
investigator or a panel of investigators, preferably lawyers, who shall
conduct hearings and render a report of and submit their findings and
recommendation to the IACC through the CIU Head, within fifteen
(15) days from the conclusion of the investigation. In investigating
complaints on disciplinary cases, the investigator or panel of
investigators shall observe closely pertinent provisions of the
Administrative Code of 1987, civil service rules and regulations, and
other related laws.

Section 6. Subpoena and Subpoena Duces Tecum. — For
purposes of investigating complaints pursuant to the Administrative
Code of 1987 and civil service rules and regulations, the DESLA, the
designated investigator or the Chairperson of the panel of
investigators is authorized to summon witnesses by subpoena and
require the production of documents by subpoena duces tecum,
administer oaths, take testimony, receive evidence submitted during
the proceedings, and recommend the preventive suspension of the
respondent as the nature of the offense and the evidence warrants.

All issuances or portions thereof which are inconsistent with this
Memorandum Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8thday of November , the Year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By Authority of the President:

CAS.
Ex4cutive