Office of the President
of the hilippines
Malacatiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 20

STRENGTHENING THE RULES FOR THE FILING OF
REQUESTS FOR THE ISSUANCE OF PROCLAMATIONS
DECLARING SPECIAL NON-WORKING DAYS OR
HOLIDAYS

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 292 s. 1987 authorizes the President
to issue proclamations fixing a date or declaring a status or condition of public
moment or interest upon the existence of which the operations of a specific law or
regulation is made to depend;

WHEREAS, EO No. 292 likewise authorizes the President to proclaim any
local special day for a particular date, group or place;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order (MO) No. 292 s. 1995 directs all parties to
file requests for the issuance of Presidential Proclamations declaring special day or
holidays no less than thirty (30) days before the special day, holiday or event
sought to be covered by the proclamation;

WHEREAS, it has been observed that numerous requests for the issuance
of Presidential Proclamations are filed only a few days before the date itself or
event;

WHEREAS, it has also been observed that some requests are filed with
other offices thus causing unnecessary delays in the processing of the
proclamation requests; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen the existing rules for the issuance
of Presidential Proclamations declaring special non-working days or holidays.

NOW THEREFORE, in the interest of efficiency in the processing of
requests for the issuance of Presidential Proclamations, the following are hereby
ordered:

Section 1. All requests for the issuance of Presidential Proclamations
declaring special non-working days or holidays must be filed with and
received by the Office of the President no less than thirty (30) days
before the special day, holiday or event sought to be covered by the
proclamation. Subject to the discretion and power of the President to
issue proclamations, any request not filed within the prescribed period
shall be received without any action or the same shall be a ground for
the denial of the request.

Section 2. All such requests for the issuance of Presidential
Proclamations declaring special non-working days or holidays shall be
filed with the Office of the President or the Office of the Executive
Secretary. The Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal
Affairs shall continue to function as the central secretariat handling the
processing of the requests for the issuance of Presidential
Proclamations.

Section 3. MO No. 292 s. 1995 is hereby repealed. All other circulars,
rules and regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
Section 4. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain
valid and subsisting.

Section 5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this27thday of February in the year of our Lord
Two Thousand and Twenty Four.

By authority of the President:

 

    

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTJFIED COPY

 
  

    
 
    

    

 

ATTY. Ke = N. ESPINO
S- 2-28 -eaACTING “DIRECTOR IV