Office of the President
of the Jhilippines

flalacanang
MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 13

CONSTITUTING THE REVIEW AND COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE IN THE
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PROPER

Republic Act (RA) No. 6713 or the “Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for
Public Officials and Employees” requires public officials and employees to accomplish
and file under oath their statement of assets, liabilities and net worth (SALN), and
disclosure of business interests and financial connections (DBIFC), including those of
their spouses and of unmarried children under eighteen (18) years of age living in their
households.

Pursuant thereto, Rule VIII of the “Rules Implementing the Code of Conduct
and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees” authorizes certain officials
of the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial Departments, as well as Constitutional
Commissions and Offices, to establish compliance procedures for the review of
SALNs to determine whether the same have been properly accomplished and filed.

The Civil Service Commission (CSC), through CSC Resolution No. 1300455
dated 04 March 2013, amended the guidelines relative to the persons authorized to
review and evaluate submitted SALNs and DBIFCs under Rule VIII of the Rules, and
requires each agency/office to have a Review and Compliance Committee (RCC),
composed of a Chairperson and two (2) members, to perform certain functions and
duties relative to the review and evaluation of SALNs and DBIFCs.

In accordance with CSC Resolution No. 1300455, and by virtue of Section 27,
Chapter 9, Title Ill, Book III of Executive Order No. 292 or the “Administrative Code of
1987,” an RCC is hereby constituted for each of the following sets of officials and
personnel in the Office of the President (OP) Proper, to be composed of the following:

a. For officials in the OP Proper who are Presidential appointees:

 

Chairperson : Undersecretary of the Office of the Executive Secretary
(OES)

Members : Two (2) Assistant Secretaries of the OES

b. For officials and personnel in the OP Proper who are non-Presidential

Chairperson : The Deputy Executive Secretary for Internal Audit
(DESIA)

Members : Assistant Executive Secretary of the Office of the
DESIA (ODESIA)

Director of the ODESIA

The RCCs shall facilitate the review and compliance procedures in the filing
and submission of SALNs and DBIFCs in the OP Proper and shall have the following
responsibilities and duties with respect to the assigned officials and/or personnel:

a. Receive SALNs and DBIFCs submitted by OP Proper officials and/or
personnel;

b. Evaluate whether the same have been submitted on time, complete and in
proper form; ;

c. Notify officials and/or personnel who have incomplete and/or apparent
erroneous data in their SALN and DBIFC to correct/supply the desired
information;

d. Prepare a list of officials and/or personnel, in alphabetical order, who (i)
filed their SALN and DBIFC with complete data; (ii) filed their SALN and
DBIFC but with incomplete data; and (iii) did not file their SALN and DBIFC,
and submit the same to the Executive Secretary, copy furnished the CSC,
on or before May 15 of every year;

e. Issue compliance orders requiring officials and/or personnel (i) who have
incomplete/erroneous data in their SALN and DBIFC to supply/correct the
desired information; and (ii) who did not file/submit their SALN and DBIFC
to comply;

f. Refer the list of officials and/or personnel who failed to submit or to correct
their SALNs and DBIFCs to the Executive Secretary or the OP Internal
Affairs and Complaints Committee, as the case may be, for the institution
of disciplinary administrative proceedings;

g. Supervise the transmittal of all original copies of the SALNs and DBIFCs
received, on or before June 30 of every year, to the concerned repository
offices/agencies; and

h. Perform such other tasks in furtherance of the foregoing and/or consistent
with existing laws, rules and regulations relative to the filing and submission
of SALNs and DBIFCs.

Subject to existing laws, rules and regulations, the RCCs shall jointly submit to
the Executive Secretary a revised compliance procedure for the review of SALNs and
DBIFCs in the OP Proper, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Order.

All orders or issuances or portions thereof, including Memorandum Order No.
182 (s. 2005), as amended, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby revoked,
amended or modified accordingly.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of May , in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

By authority of the President:

     
    

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIRD, COPY

| ATTY. CONCEPCION FERY E. FERROLING-E20AD

~ Si LG) ie,