Office of the President
of ie hilippines
al

acaftany

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. _ 22

FURTHER RECONSTITUTION OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT GROUP

Memorandum Order No. 12, dated 14 February 2023, reconstituting the Office

of the President Performance Management Group (PMG), created through
Memorandum Order No. 7, dated 08 November 2016, to oversee and manage the
implementation of the Performance-Based Incentive System and Strategic
Performance Management Systems in the Office of the President (OP) Proper, is
hereby further reconstituted as follows:

Designation Designee
Chairperson : Executive Secretary
Vice-Chairperson —_: Undersecretary, Office of the Executive Secretary
Members : Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration

: Deputy Executive Secretary for General Administration

: Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs

: Representative,
Office of the President Career Executive Service Officers’
Association, Inc.

: President, Office of the President Employees’ Network

The reconstituted OP-PMG shall perform the following functions and

responsibilities:

13

2.

8.

9.

Regularly review the OP Organizational Performance Indicators Framework
(OPIF);

Ensure that office performance targets and measures, as well as the budgets,
are aligned with the OP-OPIF and related issuances on performance
management;

Issue guidelines to office heads regarding their annual performance indicators
and targets;

Approve office performance commitments and ratings;

Act as final arbiter for performance management issues in OP;

Recommend potential top performers and provide inputs to the Program on
Awards and Incentives for Service Excellence Committee for the grant of
awards and incentives;

Set policies and ensure the implementation of the 4-stage Strategic
Performance Management System Cycle for the 1st and 2" levels;

Set policies and ensure the implementation of the appropriate Performance
Management System for 3 level career and non-career officials;

Ensure and monitor the implementation of the Quality Management System in
the OP; and

10. Undertake all other performance-related initiatives in the OP.

“Memorandum Order No. , 8. 2024
- Further Reconstitution of the Office
of the President Performance
Management Group”

The Technical Services Office and the Human Resource Management Office,
both under the Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and
Administration, shall jointly provide administrative, technical, and secretarial support
services to the PMG. The PMG may likewise create technical working group/s as
may be necessary.

All previous issuances regarding the composition of the OP-PMG are hereby
revoked, amended, or modified accordingly.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

 

Manila, 27 March 2024