@ffice of the President
of the Philippines

alacattanyg

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 10

RECONSTITUTING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PERFORMANCE

MANAGEMENT GROUP

The Office of the President Performance Management Group (PMG), created

through Memorandum Order No. 7, dated 08 November 2016, to oversee and manage the

implementation of the Performance-Based Incentive System and Strategic Performance
Management Systems in the Office of the President (OP) Proper, is hereby reconstituted as
follows:

Designation Designee

Chair : Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration

Vice-Chair —: Deputy Executive Secretary for Internal Audit

Members : Deputy Executive Secretary for General Administration

=

8.
9.

10.

: Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs
: Chief-of-Staff, Office of the Executive Secretary

: Assistant Secretary designee from the Office of the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary
: President, Office of the President Career Executive Service Officers’ Association, Inc.

: President, Office of the President Employees’ Network
The reconstituted OP-PMG shall perform the following functions and responsibilities:

Regularly review the OP Organizational Performance Indicators Framework (OPIF);
Ensure that office performance targets and measures, as well as the budgets, are
aligned with the OP-OPIF and related issuances on performance management;

Issue guidelines to office heads regarding their annual performance indicators and
targets;

Recommend to the Executive Secretary the approval of the office performance
commitments and ratings;

Act as final arbiter for performance management issues in OP;

Recommend potential top performers and provide inputs to the Program on Awards
and Incentives for Service Excellence Committee for the grant of awards and
incentives;

Set policies and ensure the implementation of the 4-stage SPMS Cycle for the 1*
and 2" levels;

Set policies and ensure the implementation of the appropriate PMS for 3” level
career and non-career officials;

Ensure and monitor the implementation of the Quality Management System in the
OP; and

Undertake performance-related initiatives as directed by the Executive Secretary.

The Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance and Administration —

Technical Service Office and the Human Resource Management Office shall jointly provide
administrative, technical, and secretarial support services to the PMG. The PMG may
likewise create technical working group/s as may be necessary.

Memorandum Order No. 7, dated 08 November 2016 is hereby repealed. All other

issuances that are inconsistent with the provisions in this Order are hereby revoked,
amended, or modified accordingly.

Manila,

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

08 November 30992