Office of the President
of the 3phtlippines

flalacatiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 17

DIRECTING THE ABOLITION OF THE NORTH LUZON RAILWAYS
CORPORATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the North Luzon Railways Corporation (NORTHRAIL) was
registered with the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) on 31 July 1995, as a
wholly-owned subsidiary of the Bases Conversion and Development Authority (BCDA)
with the principal mandate to develop, construct, operate and manage a railroad
system to serve Metro Manila, Central and Northern Luzon;

WHEREAS, on 20 May 2019, through Memorandum Order No. 2019-05, the
Governance Commission for GOCCs (GCG) ordered the deactivation of NORTHRAIL;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5(a) of Republic Act (RA) No. 10149 or the
“GOCC Governance Act of 2011,” the GCG has determined that NORTHRAIL has met
the standards for abolition upon determining that: (a) NORTHRAIL is not producing
the desired outcomes; (b}) NORTHRAIL is no longer achieving the objectives and
purposes for which it was designed and created; and (c) NORTHRAIL is not cost
efficient and does not generate the level of social, physical and economic returns vis-
a-vis the resource inputs;

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:
Section 1. Abolition of NORTHRAIL. The NORTHRAIL is hereby abolished.

Section 2. BCDA as the Administrator and Liquidator of NORTHRAIL. The
Board of Directors of the BCDA shail act as the administrator and liquidator of
NORTHRAIL and implement the following activities, among others:

a. Settle the liabilities of the NORTHRAIL, including the payment of separation
incentive pay to affected officials and personnel of NORTHRAIL;

b. Undertake steps necessary in the liquidation of NORTHRAIL’s assets, and assist
in the winding-up of its corporate affairs;

c. Conduct an inventory of all NORTHRAIL's existing programs and projects which
are to be terminated or transferred to concerned government agencies, subject to
existing laws, rules, and regulations;

Conduct an inventory of all NORTHRAIL's assets and liabilities, and thereupon
formulate an action plan by which said assets and liabilities may be disposed of
and settled, subject to existing laws, rules, and regulations;

Formulate a Change Management Plan for affected stakeholders of NORTHRAIL;
Conduct an inventory of all pending cases brought by and against NORTHRAIL,
and thereupon formulate the appropriate actions needed to resolve said cases,
including the total amount of contingent liabilities arising therefrom, if any;

Surrender to the Commission on Audit the original copies of NORTHRAIL’s
corporate books of account and financial records; and

Perform such other actions as may be necessary to implement this Order.

Section 3. Participation of Concerned Government Agencies. The following

government agencies shall assist the BCDA in implementing the provisions of this
Order:

a.

The GCG shall monitor the implementation of the abolition of NORTHRAIL. For
this purpose, the BCDA Board, acting as the Administrator and Liquidator, shall
submit a quarterly report to the GCG on the implementation of this Order;

The Department of Transportation as the supervising agency of NORTHRAIL, shail
continue to oversee the programs and activities relative to the liquidation and
winding-up of the affairs of NORTHRAIL;

The SEC shall assist the BCDA in ensuring that the dissolution of the Corporation
is conducted in accordance with the provisions of RA No. 11232 or the “Revised
Corporation Code of the Philippines,” and other pertinent laws, rules, and
regulations; and

The Office of the Government Corporate Counsel shall provide the necessary legal
assistance to the BCDA relative to the dissolution and winding-up of the affairs of
NORTHRAIL.

Section 4. Separation Incentive Pay of Affected Officials and Personnel. All

affected officials and personnel of NORTHRAIL may avail of the following separation
benefits:

ere tate LA dct) REECE)

 

 

 

 

 

 

First 20 years 1.00 x MBS* x No. of years

20 years and 1 day to 30 years 1.25 x MBS x No. of years

30 years and 1 day and above 1.50 x MBS x No. of years
*Monthly Basic Salary

The separation pay authorized herein shail be charged against the available

corporate funds of the NORTHRAIL, subject to existing budgeting, accounting and
auditing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Repeal. All other orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed
or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 19th day of October , in the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

By authority of the President: