MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDERNO. 76

DECLARING THE TARA, BASA! TUTORING PROGRAM AS A
FLAGSHIP PROGRAM OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article Il of the Constitution provides that the State
shall promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and
independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies that
provide adequate social services, promote full employment, a rising standard of living,
and an improved quality of life for all:

WHEREAS, Section 13, Article II of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to: (a) recognize the vital role of the youth in nation-building; (b) promote and
protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well-being; and (c)
inculcate patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and
civic affairs;

WHEREAS, Section 2, Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the State
shall encourage non-formal, informal, as well as self-learning, independent, out-of-
school study programs, and other non-traditional learning systems, particularly those
that respond to the needs of the community;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 123 (s. 1987), as amended by EO No.
292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987,” mandates the Department of Social Welfare
and Development (DSWD) to formulate, develop, and implement plans, programs, and
projects on social welfare and development aimed at providing assistance to the most
vulnerable members of society;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a Member-State of the United Nations (UN), is
fully committed to realizing the UN Sustainable Development Goal Nos. 1 and 4, which
pertains to the eradication of poverty in all forms through the implementation of
appropriate social protection systems and measures, and establishment of inclusive
and equitable quality education and promotion of lifelong learning opportunities for all,
respectively;

WHEREAS, one (1) of the objectives of the Philippine Development Plan
2023-2028 and the Administration's 8-Point Socioeconomic Agenda is to accelerate
poverty reduction and economic transformation in the country, by providing accessible
and quality education and job opportunities for all Filipinos;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, on 02 August 2023, the DSWD launched the “Tara, Basa! Tutoring
Program,” a holistic and community-based social welfare and development program
that aims to help elementary learners, who have difficulties learning how to read, to
develop their foundational reading skills while offering short-term work for financially
challenged tertiary level students;

WHEREAS, according to the DSWD, the “Jara, Basa! Tutoring Program” shall
serve as a social intervention program catering to three (3) beneficiaries belonging to
low-income families: (a) tertiary level students who shall be deployed as tutors or youth
development workers; (b) parents and guardians of elementary students who are
struggling readers; and (c) elementary students struggling or unable to read;

WHEREAS, the declaration of the “Tara, Basa! Tutoring Program” as a
Flagship Program of the National Government will ensure the assistance of National
Government Agencies (NGAs) and Local Government Units (LGUs), as well as
encourage the private sector, in establishing a collaborative learning program that
aims to provide educational opportunities for elementary students and financial
assistance to tertiary level students, parents and guardians; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VI of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Flagship Program. The “Tara, Basa! Tutoring Program” is hereby
declared as a Flagship Program of the National Government under the DSWD.

Section 2. Implementation. The DSWD, in coordination with the Department
of Education, Commission on Higher Education, National Youth Commission, State
Universities and Colleges, LGUs and other relevant NGAs and stakeholders, shall
undertake the necessary steps for the successful implementation and expansion of
the Program, subject to existing laws, rules, and regulations. For this purpose, the
DSWD shall establish the key components of the Program, including, but not limited
to:

Identification of eligible beneficiaries;

Formulation of learning and development activities;

Development of databases for progress reporting; and

Creation of evaluation and monitoring frameworks for the Program.

ao79

The DSWD shall submit to the Office of the President, through the Office of the
Executive Secretary, an annual report on the status and progress of the
implementation of the “Tara, Basa! Tutoring Program.”

Section 3. Convergence. All NGAs are hereby directed and LGUs are hereby
encouraged to provide full support to and cooperation with the DSWD to ensure the
successful implementation of this Order.

Section 4. Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern. The DSWD shall
determine the appropriate organizational structure, staffing pattern, and corresponding
qualification standards for all positions necessary for the implementation of this Order,
and submit the same for review and approval of the President and/or the Department
of Budget and Management (DBM), subject to existing laws, rules and regulations,
including the Organization and Staffing Standards and Guidelines issued by DBM and
Civil Service Commission.

Pending approval of the organizational structure and staffing pattern, the
DSWD may tap into their existing personnel to ensure the effective implementation of
this Order.

Section 5. Implementing Guidelines. Within thirty (30) working days from the
effectivity of this Order, the DSWD, in coordination with relevant government agencies,
shall formulate and issue guidelines necessary for the effective implementation of this
Order.

Section 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against current and available appropriations of concerned
agencies, subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and
regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary for the continued
implementation of this Order shall be included in the budget proposals of said
agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 7. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

Section 8. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect upon publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of November ,in
the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President: