MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 66

REORGANIZING THE INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE ON ZERO
HUNGER, FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 101 (S.
2020) FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, Section 11, Article XIII of the Constitution mandates the State to
adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development which shall
endeavor to make essential goods, health and other social services available to all the
people at affordable cost;

WHEREAS, Paragraph 2, Article 11 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights provides that States Parties, such as the
Philippines, shall recognize the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger,
and undertake measures which are needed to improve methods of production,
conservation and distribution of food, among others;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 101 (s. 2020) established the
Inter-Agency Task Force on Zero Hunger (Task Force on Zero Hunger) to, among
others, ensure that government policies, initiatives and projects on attaining zero
hunger shall be coordinated, responsive, and effective;

WHEREAS, EO No. 101 provides that the Cabinet Secretary shall be the
Chairperson of the Task Force on Zero Hunger;

WHEREAS, in view of EO No. 1 (s. 2022) which abolished the Office of the
Cabinet Secretariat, EO No. 27 (s. 2023) reorganized the Task Force on Zero Hunger
by, among others, designating the Secretary of the Department of Social Welfare and
Development as Chairperson;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Circular No. 47 (s. 2024) directed the Task Force
on Zero Hunger to ensure the continuous and effective implementation of the
Enhanced Partnership Against Hunger and Poverty Program which aims to
institutionalize the government's efforts to mitigate hunger, and promote food and
nutrition security;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028 underscores the
importance of a whole-of-government approach in achieving proper nutrition and food
security; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Amendment. Sections 1 and 2 of EO No. 101 (s. 2020), as
amended by EO No. 27 (s. 2023), is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Section 1. Creation of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Zero
Hunger. The Inter-Agency Task Force on Zero Hunger (Task Force on Zero
Hunger) is hereby created, to be composed of the following:

Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and
Development

Co-Chairperson : Executive Director, National Nutrition Council
Vice-Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Agriculture
Members : Secretary, Department of Agrarian Reform;

Secretary, Department of Budget and Management;

Secretary, Department of Education;

Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural
Resources;

Secretary, Department of Health;

Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment;

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local
Government;

Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry;

Secretary, Department of Science and Technology;

Secretary, Presidential Communications Office;

Secretary, National Economic and Development
Authority;

Chairperson, Commission on Higher Education; and

Director-General, Technical Education and Skills
Development Authority.

The Task Force on Zero Hunger members may designate an alternate
to represent their respective offices in their absence. Such alternate must be
fully authorized to decide for and on behalf of the Task Force on Zero Hunger
member.

As may be necessary and upon the approval of the President and/or
the Executive Secretary, the Task Force on Zero Hunger is hereby authorized
to further reorganize its composition, subject to existing laws, rules and
regulations.

Section 2. Powers and Functions of the Task Force. The Task Force
on Zero Hunger shall ensure that government policies, initiatives and projects
on attaining zero hunger shall be coordinated, responsive and effective.
Towards this end, the Task Force on Zero Hunger shall have the following
powers and functions:

XXX

f. Ensure the continuous and effective implementation of the
Enhanced Partnership Against Hunger and Poverty Program;

g. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President
and/or the Executive Secretary.”

Section 2. Unaffected Provisions. Except as expressly modified by this Order,
all other provisions of EO No. 101 (s. 2020) shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 3. Repeal. EO No. 27 (s. 2023) is hereby repealed. All orders, rules,
regulations and issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order, are
hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 4. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not affected thereby shall continue to be in
full force and effect.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 06 dayof August , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

fj N. ESPINO
ACTING/ DIRECTOR IV

 

IC OF THE PHILIPPINES 3

REPUBL:

PBBM005261