MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 54

REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COORDINATING
AGENCY AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 246 (s. 1987) created the National
Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA) as the focal point for direction, coordination,
and integration of government activities involving national intelligence, and the
-preparation of intelligence estimates of local and foreign situations for the formulation
of national policies by the President;

WHEREAS, there is a need to reorganize the NICA to adapt to the evolving
threats to national security and ensure a more vigorous intelligence collection, intensify
internal and external coordination with foreign and domestic counterparts, and prepare
intelligence and security assessments and estimates using data analytics to ensure
national security and promote national interest;

WHEREAS, Section 92 of the General Provisions of Republic Act No. 11975 or
‘the “General Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2024” provides that the President is
authorized to create new offices and modify the existing organizational structure of
agencies in the Executive branch, as well as create new positions or modify existing
ones whenever public interest so requires;

WHEREAS, Section 9 of EO No. 246 provides that the organization and staffing
pattern of the NICA shall be recommended by its Director General for the approval of
the President;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title Ill, Book III of EO No. 292 (s. 1987)
or the “Administrative Code of 1987” provides that the President has the continuing
authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Section 1. Establishment of the Office of the Deputy Director General for
» Cyber and Emerging Threats. The Office of the Deputy Director General (ODDG) for
» Cyber and Emerging Threats is hereby established under the NICA, which shall
provide direction to the overall planning, supervision and coordination of the NICA on
counterintelligence and counter-measures against cybersecurity threats, weapons of
mass destruction, and other emerging threats which are non-traditional in nature and
have the potential to challenge traditional security approaches which may be unsuited

in addressing them.

The ODDG for Cyber and Emerging Threats shall be headed by a Deputy
Director General (DDG), with the rank of Assistant Secretary, to be appointed by the
President.

Section 2. Organizational Structure of the ODDG for Cyber and Emerging
Threats. The ODDG for Cyber and Emerging Threats shall be composed of the
following units:

a. Directorate for Counterintelligence and Security (DCS). The DCS shall serve
as the focal point of the NICA for the National Government's coordination
activities on counterintelligence.

 

The existing DCS under the ODDG for Operations is hereby transferred to the
ODDG for Cyber and Emerging Threats.

b. Directorate for Cyberintelligence and Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
(DCCWMD). The DCCWMD, which is hereby established, shall be responsible

for the NICA’s conduct of national (i) cyberintelligence research using data
analytics; and (ii) intelligence activities to counter chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear threats, as well as emerging threats.

The DCCWMD shall also lead the NICA’s internal (i) response operations;
(ii) security and safety assessment; (iii) network monitoring; and (iv) information
and communications technology development and management. It shall also
develop and manage the National Cyber Intelligence Network, and supervise
the NICA’s Cybersecurity Desks in all Regional Offices.

The DCCWMND shall be headed by an Assistant Director General, with the rank
of Director IV, to be appointed by the President.

Section 3. Additional Functions of the NICA. To the extent consistent with
existing laws, rules and regulations, and in addition to its present functions, the NICA
shall have the authority to:

a. Request the detail of personnel from other government departments, agencies,
bureaus, offices, and institutions, subject to the approval of the head of office
and availability of personnel, to ensure the effective coordination, integration
and fusion of information relative to national intelligence concerns; and

‘b. Be requested by constitutional bodies, the judiciary, and both Houses of
Congress to integrate information and/or intelligence, and coordinate with

appropriate government agencies the conduct of national activities involving
intelligence and/or investigation on matters of national security.

Section 4. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against current and available appropriations of the NICA,
subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations.
Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary for the continued implementation of
this Order shall be included in the budget proposal of the NICA, subject to the usual
budget preparation process.

Section 5. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 19th dayof January in
the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Twenty-Four

 

_ By the President:

 

  
  

Office of the President
MALACANIANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

   

  

A

E N. ESPINO
<y I-22-any ACTING DIRE

CTOR IV