MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 93

SUSPENDING THE IMPORTATION OF REGULAR MILLED AND
WELL-MILLED RICE FOR 60 DAYS

WHEREAS, Section 13, Article XII of the Constitution provides that the State
shall pursue a trade policy that serves the general welfare;

WHEREAS, Section 5, Article XI of the Constitution mandates the State to
provide support to the agricultural sector through appropriate research and
technology, and adequate financial, production, marketing, and other support
services;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 8178 or the “Agricultural
Tarrification Act,” as amended by RA Nos. 11203 and 12078, declares it a policy of
the State to ensure food security and to make the country’s agricultural sector viable,
efficient, and globally competitive;

WHEREAS, Section 3, Chapter 1, Title IV, Book IV of Executive Order (EO)
292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987” mandates the Department of Agriculture (DA)
to plan, formulate, implement, regulate, and monitor programs and activities relating
to agriculture, food production, and supply;

WHEREAS, on 8 August 2025, the DA reported that the strong local production
of rice in early 2025 and the heavy arrival of imported rice in the previous months due
to the reduced tariff rates for imported rice have resulted in the sharp decrease in the
price of rice across the market;

WHEREAS, according to DA, there is a need to suspend the importation of
regular milled and well-milled rice for 60 days, which will coincide with the peak of
harvest season, to enable the domestic market to absorb the local supply, stabilize
prices, and help Filipino farmers sell their pa/ay at a fair and reasonable price;

WHEREAS, Section 3 of RA No. 12078 empowers the President to suspend or
prohibit further importation of rice for a limited period and/or a specified volume
whenever there is an excessive supply of imported or locally produced rice resulting
in an extraordinary decrease in local prices of rice; and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the Executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Suspension of importation of Regular Milled and Well-Milled
Rice. Upon the recommendation of the DA, the importation of regular milled and
well-milled rice is hereby suspended.

The suspension of importation shall not cover specialty rice varieties not
commonly produced by local farmers.

Section 2. Period of Suspension. The importation of regular milled and
well-milled rice shall be suspended beginning on 1 September 2025 and shail be
effective for 60 days or until 30 October 2025.

The period of suspension may be shortened or extended, as may be necessary,
upon the joint recommendation of the DA, Department of Economy, Planning, and
Development (DEPDev), and Department of Trade and Industry (DT)).

For this purpose, the DA, DEPDev, and DTI shail convene within 30 days upon
effectivity of this Order to evaluate the effects of the suspension of importation on the
supply and prices of rice in the country, and within 15 days therefrom submit a joint
recommendation to the President, through the Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Directives to DA. The DA is hereby directed to lead and monitor
the implementation of the suspension of rice importation, and undertake necessary
measures to ensure that the country’s supply of rice remains sufficient during the
period of suspension, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

The DA, in coordination with DEPDev and DTI, shall regularly submit to the
President, through the Executive Secretary, reports on the implementation of this
Order, which shall contain comprehensive information on the current supply of locally
produced rice and the prevailing local prices.

Section 4. Implementing Guidelines. The DA, in coordination with Bureau of
Customs and DTI, shall immediately issue the necessary guidelines for the effective
implementation of this Order, which shall include, among others, the participation and
coordination of concerned agencies, and enforcement and monitoring mechanisms to
ensure successful implementation of this Order.

Section 5, Convergence. All departments, agencies, bureaus, and offices of
the National Government are hereby directed, to render full assistance and
cooperation to ensure the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 6. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order is held invalid or
unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and
effect.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 29th day of August , in the year
of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President: 7

 

Office of the President
MALACA\ y {@ RECORDS OFFICE

CER

DIRECTOR IV

 

   

cu z
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

HU OYUN A

PBBM009738