MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 64

UPDATING THE SALARY SCHEDULE FOR CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT
PERSONNEL AND AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF AN ADDITIONAL
ALLOWANCE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Item 1 of Congress Joint Resolution (JR) No. 4 (s. 2009) and
Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11466 or the “Salary Standardization Law of 2019,”
affirm the policy of the State to provide government personnel with just and equitable
compensation in accordance with the principle of equal pay for work of equal value
under the Compensation and Position Classification System (CPCS);

WHEREAS, JR No. 4 and RA No. 11466 recognize the need to ensure that the
compensation of all civilian personnel shall generally be competitive with those in the
private sector doing comparable work, in order to attract, retain and motivate a corps
of competent and dedicated civil servants;

WHEREAS, Section 13 of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 985 or “The Budgetary
Reform Decree on Compensation and Position Classification of 1976,” as amended,
states that the Salary Schedule and the Wage Schedule shall be revised periodically
subject to the approval of the President, in relation to: (a) the level of salaries and
wages and employee benefits currently prevailing in private industry for comparable
work; (b) changes in the basic work week; or (c) changes in the Minimum Wage Law;

WHEREAS, Item 17 (iv) of JR No. 4 provides that the Department of Budget
and Management (DBM) shall recommend for the consideration and approval of the
President, the updating of the CPCS for civilian personnel and Base Pay Schedule for
military and uniformed personnel, as weil as the policies on and levels of allowances,
benefits and incentives applicable to all government personnel, including those for
exempt entities;

WHEREAS, Section 17 of RA No. 11466 states that al! provisions of PD No.
985, as amended by PD No. 1597, RA No. 6758 or the “Compensation and Position
Classification Act of 1989,” as amended, JR No. 1 (s. 1994), JR No. 4, and Executive
Order (EO) No. 201 (s. 2016), which are not inconsistent with, expressly modified,
revoked or repealed in the said Act shall continue to be in full force and effect;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 marked the fourth and final tranche of the
implementation of the Modified Salary Schedule for Civilian Government Personnel
under RA No. 11466;

WHEREAS, given the prevailing economic circumstances, including the
erosion of purchasing power due to inflation, there is a need to update the salaries,
and benefits of government personnel in order to maintain a competent, committed,
agile and healthy workforce, thereby promoting social justice, integrity, efficiency,
accountability, and excellence, and ultimately translating to increased productivity and
higher-quality public services; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution mandates the President
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Compensation Adjustment Strategy. To ensure an effective,
competitive, and sustainable CPCS, the existing Salary Schedule for Civilian
Government Personnel is hereby updated to conform with the following:

a. The compensation of all civilian personnel shall generally be competitive with the
private sector in order to attract, retain, and engage high-performing civil servants;

b. The pay distinctions shall be based upon substantive differences in duties,
responsibilities, accountabilities, and qualification requirements of the positions;

c. The value of government employee compensation is maintained over time; and

d. The compensation scheme must be within the financial capacity of the government,
with the Personnel Services (PS) cost maintained at a reasonable level in relation
to the overall government expenditure.

Section 2. Coverage. The updated Salary Schedule authorized herein shall
apply to all civilian government personnel in the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial
Branches; Constitutional Commissions and other Constitutional Offices; Government-
Owned or -Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) not covered by RA No. 10149 or the
“GOCC Governance Act of 2011,” and EO No. 150 (s, 2021); and local government
units (LGUs), regardless of appointment status, whether regular, contractual or
casual, appointive or elective, and on full-time or part-time basis.

The salary increase authorized herein shall not apply to individuals whose
services are engaged through job orders, contracts of service, consultancy or service
contracts with no employer-employee relationship, as well as GOCCs covered by a
separate CPCS established by the Governance Commission for GOCCs (GCG) and
approved by the President.

Section 3. Updated Salary Schedule, including Step Increments. The
updated Salary Schedule for Civilian Government Personnel, to be implemented in
four (4) tranches, shall be as follows:

First Tranche

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Second Tranche

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

—-

 

mi

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Third Tranche

Sle Lav :
ee Step 1 Step 2 BS) (=) 0) Step 4 Step5 Step6 +Step7

Stof2 37,904

 

—
BS

 

 

Step 8

 

 



Fourth Tranche

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

=f

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The rates in the above updated Salary Schedule represent the monthly
remuneration for regular or contractual personnel, whether appointive or elective, and
working on full-time basis. The remuneration for those on part-time basis shall be
proportionate to the actual services rendered.

 

The daily wage for casual personnel shall be computed by dividing the
corresponding monthly salary rate in the above Schedule by twenty-two (22) working
days.

Section 4. Salary Adjustment for Personnel of LGUs. The updated Salary
Schedule authorized herein for civilian government personnel may likewise be granted
to personnel of LGUs, subject to the following:

a. Authorization from their respective sanggunian as provided under Sections
447(a), 458(a), and 468(a) of RA No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code of
1991,” as amended, and

b. Compliance with the PS limitation in the LGU budget under Sections 325 and
331 of RA No. 7160.

The rates of pay in LGUs, which shall be determined on the basis of the class
and financial capability of each LGU shall be at the following percentages of the rates
in the Salary Schedule under Section 3 hereof, subject to any modification that will be
made pursuant to RA No. 11964 or the “Automatic Income Classification of Local
Government Units Act,” and its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR):

Percentage of the Salary Schedule
Po For Provinces/Cities | ___ For Municipalities |

 

LGUs may fully adopt the Salary Schedule in Section 3 hereof, notwithstanding
the above ceilings, subject to compliance with the PS limitation and budgetary
authorization requirements of RA No. 7160, as well as the guidelines to be issued by
the DBM pursuant to Section 7(d) of RA No. 11964 and its IRR: Provided, that the
salary schedule adopted shall be uniformly applied to all positions in the said LGU.

The basic pay of barangay personnel shall be in the form of honoraria
consistent with RA No. 7160, which shall be at the same percentage of the Salary
Schedule adopted by the LGU. They may be given Year-End Bonus (YEB) based on
the monthly honoraria as of October 31 of the year and Cash Gift of Five Thousand
Pesos (P5,000).

However, the minimum YEB of One Thousand Pesos (?1,000) for the punong
barangay and Six Hundred Pesos (P600) for other mandatory barangay officials shall
not be subject to the PS limitation.

Section 5. Implementation Schedule. The updated Salary Schedule in
Section 3 hereof shall be implemented in National Government Agencies (NGAs) in
four (4) tranches, with the first tranche beginning on 1 January 2024, the second
tranche beginning on 1 January 20285, the third tranche beginning on 1 January 2026,
and the fourth and final tranche beginning on 1 January 2027.

For covered GOCCs and LGUs, the implementation period shall not be less
than four (4) years, depending on their financial capabilities: Provided, that each
tranche shall start no earlier than the dates abovementioned.

GOCCs and LGUs which do not have adequate or sufficient funds shall partially
implement the Salary Schedule authorized herein. In case of partial implementation,
the same shall be at a uniform percentage across all positions for every GOCC/LGU.

Section 6. Retroactive Application. The first tranche of implementation of the
Salary Schedule for civilian personnel shall be effective 1 January 2024.

For covered GOCCs, the retroactive application of the first tranche shall be
subject to their capacity to pay and compliance with other requirements under existing
laws: Provided, that the initial implementation shall not be earlier than 1 January 2024.

For LGUs, the implementation of the first tranche shall be subject to the
pertinent provisions of this Order and RA No. 7160.

Section 7. Medical Allowance. Beginning FY 2025, a Medical Allowance in
an amount not exceeding Seven Thousand Pesos (P7,000) per annum shall be
granted to each qualified government civilian personnel as a subsidy for the availment
of health maintenance organization (HMO)-type benefits. The Medical Allowance shall
be categorized under the Standard Allowances and Benefits component of the Total
Compensation Framework embodied in JR No. 4 and RA No. 11466. The grant of the
Medical Allowance shall be subject to the conditions and guidelines to be issued by
the DBM or the GCG, as the case may be.

The following are excluded from the grant of the herein Medical Allowance:

a. Government officials and employees who are already receiving HMO-based health
care services by virtue of special laws; and

b. Officials and employees in the legislative and judicial branches and other offices
vested with fiscal autonomy. i

The heads of the foregoing agencies and offices may grant a similar Medical
Allowance to their employees or continue to procure allowable HMO plans, subject to
the limitations and guidelines that the DBM may issue in consultation with the said
offices.

Section 8. Exempt Entities. Exempt entities refer to: (i) government agencies
that are not covered by the CPCS authorized under RA No. 6758; (ii) GOCCs
governed by the CPCS established by the GCG under RA No. 10149 and EO No. 150;
and (iii) those authorized by law and have actually implemented their own CPCS.

The exempt entities shall be governed by their respective CPCS, which shall
be made effective upon the recommendation of the DBM or the GCG, as the case may
be, and approved by the President.

Section 9. Applicability to Certain Officials. Consistent with Section 6, Article
VII and Section 10, Article VI of the Constitution, the salaries authorized herein for the
President of the Philippines, Vice President of the Philippines, and Members of the
Congress shall take effect only after the expiration of the respective terms of the
present incumbents.

Section 10. Funding. The funding sources for the amounts required to
implement this EO shall be as follows:

a. For NGAs, the amount needed for the salary adjustment in FY 2024 shall be
charged against any available appropriations under RA No. 11975 or the “Fiscal
Year 2024 General Appropriations Act (GAA)” and any other available
appropriations, subject to relevant budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules and
regulations. The DBM, following the compensation adjustment strategy embodied
in Section 1 hereof, and consistent with its authority under Section 7 of RA No.
6758, shall then be authorized to implement or adjust the compensation
corresponding to the appropriations provided in the GAA.

The funding requirement for the salary adjustment in FYs 2025, 2026, and 2027
will be included in the proposed annual National Expenditure Program (NEP)
submitted to Congress for authorization.

b. ForGOCCs, the amounts shall be charged against their respective corporate funds
in the corporate operating budgets approved by the DBM.

c. ForLGUs, the amounts shall be charged against their respective local government
funds in accordance with the pertinent provisions of this EO and RA No. 7160.

d. Funding requirement for Medical Allowance for FY 2025 and succeeding fiscal
years shall be included in the NEP as a component of the Standard Allowances
and Benefits of the Total Compensation Framework, subject to the approval of
Congress.

Section 11. Implementing Guidelines. The DBM shall issue the guidelines
necessary to implement specific provisions of this EO.

Section 12. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full
force and effect.

Section 13. Repeal. All other orders, rules, regulations, guidelines and
issuances, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are
hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

Section 14. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this  2nq day of august , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

A N. ESPINO
ACTIN DIRECTORIV ~

 

  

HE PHILIPPINES

ll i Hi if WRIA UA 10