MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDERNO. 75

STRENGTHENING THE CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE
EXPOSITIONS AND MISSIONS

WHEREAS, under Republic Act (RA) No. 7844 or the “Export Development Act
of 1994,” it shall be the policy of the State to, among others, evolve export development
into a national effort;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 989 (s. 1984) established the Philippine
Trade Exhibition Center (PTEC), for the purpose of strengthening the export promotion
program of the country;

WHEREAS, in order to strengthen export promotion and to support the PTEC,
EO No. 989 directed the Center for International Trade Expositions and Missions, Inc.
(CITEM), a government-owned or -controlled corporation (GOCC) under the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), to undertake the day-to-day management
and operations of PTEC;

WHEREAS, EO No. 133 (s. 1987), as amended by EO No. 242 (s. 1987),
reorganized the DTI and its attached agencies, and merged CITEM with PTEC, with
the latter as the surviving entity;

WHEREAS, by virtue of EO No. 242, PTEC was renamed as CITEM;

WHEREAS, there is a need to revisit and strengthen the organizational
structure of CITEM to ensure an integrated approach in export marketing towards
attaining the objective of reinforcing the country’s posture as a leading producer of
quality export products and services;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title Ill, Book Ill of EO No. 292 or the
“Administrative Code of 1987” authorizes the President to reorganize the
administrative structure of the Office of the President (OP) in order to achieve
simplicity, economy, and efficiency; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the

power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Reorganization of the CITEM Governing Board. The CITEM shall
be governed by CITEM Governing Board (CITEM Board) which shall be composed of
the following:

Secretary, DTI, as Chairperson;

Secretary, Department of Agriculture (DA);

Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA);

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG);
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology (DOST);

Secretary, Department of Tourism;

President and General Manager, Government Service Insurance System;
Representative, OP; and

Private Sector Representative, to be appointed by the President.

“~sar*oa9T9

The election of the Vice Chairperson and the Executive Director by the CITEM
Board from among its ranks shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions of RA
No. 10149 or the “GOCC Governance Act of 2011;” Provided that, the Executive
Director should be a Filipino citizen, and should possess a bachelor’s degree and
master’s degree in business, marketing, promotions, public administration, and/or any
related field, with demonstration of expertise in the respective area.

The ex-officio members of CITEM Board may designate their respective
alternates who shall be the officials next-in-rank to them, and whose acts shall be
considered the acts of their principals.

The CITEM Board shall have regular meetings once every quarter and such
special meetings as may be called upon by the Chairperson when deemed necessary.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The CITEM shall continue to conduct
domestic and international trade fairs, selling missions, in-store promotions, and
similar projects, activities, and programs, which are aimed at promoting Philippine
products and services to the global market. Towards this end, the CITEM shall:

a. In coordination with agencies and offices with mandates and functions related to
export marketing and promotions, plan and implement trade fairs, missions, and
other export promotional activities to showcase Philippine products and services,
and promote the country’s participation in overseas trade fairs;

b. Implement industry development programs for export products and services,
including merchandise and technical assistance programs;

c. Generate consumer-level awareness and demand for Philippine products globally
through in-store promotion and participation in overseas trade fairs, expositions,
and missions; and

d. Perform such other functions necessary to attain the objectives of this Order,
subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

For this purpose, within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Order, the
CITEM, in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and
such other relevant agencies, shall come up with a roadmap that will detail the
strategic plans and programs to further strengthen the mandates of CITEM, including,
among others, the establishment of an exhibition facility and/or permanent showrooms
and outlets designed to host trade shows, exhibitions, conferences, and other similar
events, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 3. Agency Support. All relevant departments, agencies, bureaus,
offices, and instrumentalities shall render full support and assistance to CITEM to
ensure the effective implementation of this Order.

Moreover, all departments, agencies, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities
with functions related to export promotion may collaborate and seek assistance from
CITEM in the implementation of relevant programs and projects, subject to existing
laws, rules and regulations.

Section 4. Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern. Within six (6)
months from the effectivity of this Order, the CITEM shall determine the appropriate
organizational structure, staffing pattern, and corresponding qualification standards for
all positions in CITEM, and submit the same for review and approval of the Governance
Commission for GOCCs, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Implementing Guidelines. Within 30 days from the effectivity of this
Order, the CITEM shall issue the necessary guidelines for the effective implementation
of this Order. The Implementing Guidelines shall include the following, among others:
(a) duties and functions of member-agencies of the CITEM Board and Executive
Director; and (b) rules for the conduct of meetings of the CITEM Board.

Section 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the initial implementation of
this Order shall be charged against current and available appropriations of
member-agencies of the CITEM Board and the annual corporate operating budget of
CITEM, subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and
regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary for the continued
implementation of this Order shall be included in the budget proposals of CITEM and
its member-agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 7. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

Section 8. Repeal. All other issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof that are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22nd dayof November , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

Omce of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTYFIED COPY

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PBBM006543