ADOPTING THE NATIONAL ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING,
COUNTER-TERRORISM FINANCING AND
COUNTER-PROLIFERATION FINANCING STRATEGY 2023-2027,
REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING
AND COUNTER-TERRORISM FINANCING COORDINATING
COMMITTEE, AND AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 68
(S. 2018) FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 9160, as amended by RA No.
11521 or the “Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2001,” declares it a policy of the State to
ensure that the Philippines shall not be used as a money laundering site for the
proceeds of any unlawful activity, and that the State, consistent with its foreign policy,
shall extend cooperation in transnational investigations and prosecutions of persons
involved in money laundering activities wherever committed, as well as in the
implementation of targeted financial sanctions related to the financing of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism, and financing of terrorism;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 68 (s. 2018) created the National
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing (AML/CTF) Coordinating
Committee tasked to facilitate inter-agency coordination relative to the country’s
AML/CTF policies, and adopted the National AML/CTF Strategy (NACS) 2018-2022
to enable the government, as well as the private sector, to have a coordinated and
strategic approach towards combating money laundering and terrorism financing in
the country;

WHEREAS, in August 2019, the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering
concluded the Third Mutual Evaluation of the Philippines, which assessed the levels
of technical compliance of Philippine laws, rules and regulations with international
AML/CTF standards, and the effectiveness of the country’s overall AML/CTF system;

WHEREAS, in October 2019, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) affirmed
the Third Mutual Evaluation Report (MER) of the Philippines, and placed the
Philippines under a twelve-month Observation Period, pursuant to the FATF
International Co-operation Review Group (ICRG) process;

WHEREAS, in June 2021, the Philippines was included in the FATF list of
“Jurisdictions Under Increased Monitoring” or the “Grey List” for its failure to show

tangible and positive progress in addressing all key recommended actions in the Third
MER;

WHEREAS, the reorganization of the National AML/CTF Coordinating
Committee, and adoption of an updated NACS will strengthen existing measures to
improve the effectiveness of the country’s anti-money laundering, counter-terrorism
financing and counter-proliferation financing (AML/CTF/CPF) regime, and allow the
Philippines to exit the FATF Grey List; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. NACS 2023-2027. The NACS 2023-2027, which is annexed to this
Order, is hereby adopted. The adoption of the NACS 2023-2027 shall be for the
purpose of enabling the Philippines to address the ICRG Action Plans, ensure that the
Philippines exits the FATF Grey List, and improve its AML/CTF/CPF regime.

bureaus, and offices of the National Government, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) are directed, and all local government units are
encouraged, to formulate and implement relevant strategy plans and programs to
execute the NACS 2023-2027.

Section 2. Reorganization. The National AML/CTF Coordinating Committee
is hereby renamed as the National Anti-Money Laundering/Counter-Terrorism
Financing/Counter-Proliferation Financing Coordinating Committee (NACC) to cover
as well activities related to countering proliferation financing.

The NACC shall be chaired by the Executive Secretary, while the Governor of
the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), who is also the concurrent Chairperson of the
Anti-Money Laundering Council (AMLC), shall serve as the Vice-Chairperson. The
members shall consist of the heads of the following agencies:

Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA);

Department of Finance (DOF);

Department of Justice (DOJ);

Department of National Defense (DND);

Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG);
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI);

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC);

Insurance Commission (IC);

Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation;
Cagayan Economic Zone Authority;

Aurora Pacific Economic Zone and Freeport Authority; and
National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA).

“Fro searoaogD

The Chair, Vice-Chair, and members of the NACC may designate their
alternates, with ranks not lower than an Undersecretary or its equivalent, who are fully
authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The Office of the Ombudsman may become a member of the NACC, subject
to the Ombudsperson’s concurrence.

Section 3. Secretariat. The AMLC Secretariat shall serve as the Secretariat
of the NACC, and shall provide technical and administrative support to the NACC
and its sub-committees. For this purpose, the AMLC Secretariat shall be the primary
body in-charge of disseminating and communicating the NACS 2023-2027 to
concerned government agencies.

Section 4. Powers and Functions of the NACC. In addition to the powers
and functions of the NACC under EO No. 68, the NACC shall further provide overall
policy and strategic direction and oversee the implementation of the NACS
2023-2027. For this purpose, the NACC shall facilitate inter-agency coordination
relative to the development of national AML/CTF/CPF policies in accordance with
existing AML/CTF/CPF laws and international standards, and ensure the effective
and efficient implementation of the national AML/CTF/CPF strategy by providing
directives to concerned agencies on major issues on the implementation thereof and
monitoring the formulation and implementation of relevant strategy plans and
programs.

Upon the recommendation of the NACC sub-committees, the NACC shall
review and update the NACS 2023-2027 on a semi-annual basis or as the need arises
to ensure that it remains consistent and relevant with the level and direction of the

The NACC is hereby authorized to continuously assess and evaluate, and on
the basis thereof, realign the functions of its existing sub-committees, reorganize the
same, and create additional sub-committees as may be necessary, subject to existing
laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Terrorism Financing and _ Proliferation Financing
Sub-Committees. Subject to Section 4 hereof, the NACC Terrorism Financing and
Proliferation Financing Sub-Committee, created under Section 6(d) of EO No. 68, is
hereby reorganized into two (2) separate sub-committees:

a. Terrorism Financing Sub-Committee (TFSC). The TFSC shall be primarily
responsible for developing, implementing, and monitoring action plans focused on
the identification, investigation, and prosecution of terrorism financing, and the
confiscation of proceeds, instruments, and subjects thereof. The TFSC shall
provide support and coordinate efforts to implement strategic objectives relative to
AML/CTF/CPF awareness activities and relevant action plans. The TFSC shall be
composed of the following:

Head : NICA
Members : AMLC;
DFA;

Department of Justice

DND;

DILG;

Department of Trade and Industry

SEC;

Anti-Terrorism Council - Program Management Center;
Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP);

Bureau of Customs (BOC);

Bureau of Immigration (Bl);

Department of Social Welfare and Development;
Intelligence Service (IS), AFP;

National Bureau of Investigation (NBI);

National Security Council (NSC);

Philippine Coast Guard (PCG); and

Philippine National Police (PNP).

b. Proliferation Financing Sub-Committee (PFSC). The PFSC shall be primarily
responsible for developing, implementing, and monitoring action plans focused on
the identification, investigation, and prosecution of proliferation financing, and the
confiscation of proceeds, instruments, and subjects thereof. The PFSC shall
provide support and coordinate efforts to implement strategic objectives relative to
AML/CTF/CPF awareness activities and relevant action plans. The PFSC shall be
composed of the following:

Head
Members

DTI - Strategic Trade Management Office
AMLC;

Armed Forces of the Philippines

BSP;

BOC;

BI;

DOF;

DFA;

Department of Justice

DND;

IG;

IS-AFP;

NICA;

NBI;

NSC;

PNP;

PCG;

SEC;

Maritime Industry Authority; and
Philippine Center on Transnational Crime.

Section 6. AML/CTF/CPF Awareness Sub-Committee. Subject to Section 4
hereof, the AML/CTF Awareness Sub-Committee, created under Section 6(e) of EO
No. 68, is hereby renamed as the AML/CTF/CPF Awareness Sub-Committee
(ACCASC) to also cover activities related to countering proliferation financing.

The ACCASC shall be primarily responsible for implementing action plans
related to AML/CTF/CPF awareness. The AMLC shall serve as the head of the
ACCASC, and all agencies represented in the NACC and its sub-committees shall be
members thereof. The Philippine Information Agency, Presidential Communications
Office, and other concerned government agencies may be called upon by the NACC
to provide assistance.

Section 7. Implementing Guidelines. The NACC shall formulate and issue
guidelines as may be necessary for the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 8. Funding. The funding requirements necessary for the
implementation of this Order shall be charged against the respective appropriations
of concerned government agencies, and the respective corporate operating budgets
of concerned GOCCs, subject to availability thereof and compliance with pertinent
budgeting and accounting laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding
requirements necessary for the continued implementation of this Order shall be
included in the budget proposals of the covered agencies, subject to the usual budget
preparation process.

Section 9. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid
or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 10. Repeal. EO No. 68 is hereby amended. All other orders, rules and
regulations, issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of
this Order, are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 11. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this4th day of July , in the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

HT MAI

PBBM002386

NATIONAL ANTI-MONEY
LAUNDERING
AND COUNTERING THE FINANCING
OF TERRORISM STRATEGY

Table of Contents

INTRODUCTION ou... ecccececseseesceseeecsesscseesesevscscsssseesesssesaesteaesevseessessesaessesessecsesassevascseaeeeseneee 3
THE VISION. STATIEMEN Tiswssssiscvassseascnnenupvousynesnessunapaeecustscesnreenmyane mney eumemnenmensnveleensis 3
THE: MISSION STATEMENT wcocssscsssssssusererereseenazevr ara cavseaieapaantmmet ee eR TS AONE ck tearanrenne 3

STRATEGIC OBJEC VES scssrsvezasarauscessisnaasesnunisesatectanesensanesnstncoetsnreannsaneneaseenneesnesvararcaners eenaveewne 5
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE Len. eccsssssesecsessenersesseceenssseesssesssseesenecseceesseessnessessssessssecsasseesaesneenes Z

ADDRESSING DEFICIENCIES IN A TIMELY MANNER............:-c:secssssesssctessesssssessesecaeseeees 7
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2 scccsssevenvssxpsecivsznservanes vrscrizasacaaenvarenvyeuseananesenevareamareisiaTavieTesie dare onnenne 9
MONEY LAUNDERING INVESTIGATIONS, PROSECUTIONS, AND CONFISCATIONS ...... 9

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3

TERRORISM: FINANCING .occcccstsisessoroersrnascanneareenasrvornenerorne areenneanananmenmusneerne 12
STRATEGIC OBIECTIVE 4 sssrstsonistenesseoecuneosnnareerareeresverenanasaevermemenanenninesTe neat Cepiai ies ee 15
PROLIFERATION FINANCING 2.0... ceceteescseseseerereraeaeecsesecessesenenecsesesesasseaseasaes 15
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 5 ..eceeccccscccssssscssesevsesseescecacsesseeesaeerenecaeessecaesiecssiensssesseeseveeeateneees if
TRANSPARENCY OF BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP INFORMATION ............c:cccsccsccseseeeseees a7
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE Gwecsescs:cnenenerencne semen arn Ee ETN ER NTT 19

SUPERVISION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND DESIGNATED NON-FINANCIAL
BUSINESSES AND PROFESSIONS

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 7

AMIL/CFT AWARENESS. ............ccssesseesecssssseseesessesecsscsessecucsessessesesersessesscsssesevavsseveveveae 23

ANNEX 1 - SUPPORTING AGENCIES

Page 2 of 31

INTRODUCTION

On 12 November 2018, then President Rodrigo Roa Duterte issued Executive Order
(EO) No. 68, adopting the National Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing
of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Strategy (NACS) 2018 — 2022. EO 68 likewise created the National
AML/CFT Coordinating Committee (NACC) to champion the implementation of the NACS.

With the expiration of the NACS 2018 — 2022, the Philippine Government adopts a
new National AML/CFT Strategy for 2023 - 2027. The Philippine government’s adoption
of the NACS 2023 — 2027 as its national policy based on and informed by the risks and
deficiencies identified in the Philippines’ 2019 Mutual Evaluation Report (MER) is
consistent with FATF Recommendation 2. It reaffirms the authority of the NACC to
spearhead the development of AML/CFT policies consistent with the Philippines’ legal
framework and international standards.

The NACS 2023 — 2027 embodies the Philippine Government’s strong political
commitment in its fight against money laundering (ML), terrorism financing (TF), and
proliferation financing (PF). It recognizes the need for a coordinated, collaborative, and
strategic approach involving the government, financial institutions, and other
stakeholders. Thus, the NACS 2022 -2027 espouses a “one nation approach” in
addressing the risks, correcting deficiencies, and strengthening the country’s AML/CFT
system.

It affirms the Vision — Mission Statement of the NACS 2018 — 2022, which defines the
priorities to enable the Philippine Government to systematically approach a clear vision
and undertake a clearly defined mission. Compliance with international AML/CFT
standards is at the core of this strategy, as this promotes financial integrity and supports
the fight against crimes.

THE VISION STATEMENT

Maintain an internationally compliant and effective AML/CFT regime
by ensuring that the Philippines shall not be used as a money laundering,
terrorism financing and proliferation financing site as well as preserving
the integrity of the country’s financial system.

THE MISSION STATEMENT

Combating money laundering, its predicate offenses, terrorism, terrorism
financing and proliferation financing by strengthening the AML/CFT legal
framework, establishing a strong coordination mechanism, intelligence sharing and
enforcement efforts among relevant government agencies and carrying out
effective supervision and preventive measures in line with international standards,
and increasing society’s AML/CFT awareness and support.

Similar to the NACS 2018 — 2022, the NACS 2023 — 2027 identifies key areas of focus
in order to effectively combat money laundering, terrorism financing, and proliferation
financing. It provides for action plan items that address strategic deficiencies identified in
evaluations conducted to assess the country’s compliance with international standards
and the effectiveness of its AML/CFT system. Collaboration of key government agencies is
an essential component in realizing this goal.

Page 4 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES

The NACS 2023 — 2027 sets out Strategic Objectives responsive to risks and
deficiencies of the country’s AML/CFT systems. Each strategic objective has corresponding
action plan items that should be prioritized and accomplished immediately while ensuring
that the outcomes reached are sustainable in the long run.

Objective 1

Objective 2

Objective 3

Objective 4

Objective 5

Objective 6

Objective 7

eae esol) sant

Demonstrate that the Philippines has addressed strategic
deficiencies identified in international AML/CFT assessments and
that the measures contribute to effective and sustainable
outcomes.

Strengthen law enforcement and prosecutorial capacity for the
effective development of financial intelligence, Investigation,
Prosecution, and Confiscations in relation to Money Laundering
and its Predicate Offenses

Strengthen Mechanisms to Identify, Investigate, and Prosecute
Terrorism Financing, including through the Implementation of
Measures to Prevent and Disrupt Terrorism Financing

Enhance and implement the framework on Proliferation Financing
of Weapons of Mass Destruction

Promote transparency and ensure access to beneficial ownership
information by competent authorities

Enhance risk-based supervision of financial institutions and
designated non-financial businesses and professions (DNFBPs) to
promote understanding of risks and understanding of obligations
among supervised sectors

Promote AML/CFT Awareness of Government Agencies, Covered
Persons, and the General Public to Effectively Combat Money
Laundering, Terrorism Financing, and Proliferation Financing

Philippine agencies are committed to swiftly resolving the identified strategic
deficiencies and expeditiously implementing the action plan items. Relevant agencies shall
consider these strategic objectives in formulating and implementing relevant work plans
and programs to execute herein strategic objectives.

Within each strategic objective, lead agencies are identified with the primary
responsibility of implementing and reporting on the required actions. Agencies that are
likewise concerned with the outcome of the action item are similarly identified to support

Page 5 of 31

its implementation. All other government agencies should ensure that their plans and
programs support the NACS strategic objectives.

Page 6 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1
ADDRESSING DEFICIENCIES IN A TIMELY MANNER

Demonstrate that the Philippines has addressed strategic deficiencies identified in
international AML/CFT assessments and that the measures contribute to effective and
sustainable outcomes.

In August 2019, the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG)! adopted the
Philippines Mutual Evaluation Report (MER), which provides an assessment of the country’s
technical compliance with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)* Standards and
effectiveness of its AML/CFT system. The MER identified strategic deficiencies, which made
the Philippines a candidate for the FATF Greylist.

The Philippines was placed under a 16-month “Observation Period” which was the
country’s last chance to address all deficiencies as indicated in the seventy (70) MER
Recommended Actions (MRAs). After the Observation Period, the Philippines submitted a
Post Observation Period Report providing a comprehensive progress report by relevant
agencies on how deficiencies were addressed.

The deficiencies that were noted in the MER pertain to various aspects of the
Philippines AML/CFT framework:

e Need to pass relevant laws to improve the Philippines AML/CFT legal
framework;

e Effective implementation of a risk based supervision of covered persons;

e To have timely access to beneficial ownership information by Law
Enforcement Agencies;

e Improve the investigation and prosecution of money laundering and
terrorism financing cases, aligned with the country’s risk profile;

e Improve confiscation of proceeds of crimes at the point of conviction;

e Implementation of cross border cash measures in all international ports;

e Awareness improvement of relevant stakeholders on targeted financial
sanctions framework; and

e Implementation of measures to protect non-profit organizations from TF
abuse.

Supervisors, regulators, law enforcement agencies, prosecutors, and other relevant
government agencies were tasked to address the identified deficiencies following their
functions.

* The APG is a FATF Style Regional Body to which the Philippines is a founding member. Pursuant to
membership rules of the APG, its members shall undergo a mutual peer review system to determine levels
of effectiveness and technical compliance to the FATF Standards. These peer review system is called “Mutual
Evaluation”

? The FATE is an inter-governmental body that sets standards and promotes effective implementation of
legal, regulatory and operational measures for combating money laundering, terrorist financing and other
related threats to the integrity of the international financial system.

Page 7 of 31

Based on the assessment of the FATF’s International Cooperation Review Group
(ICRG), it was determined that tangible and positive progress was not made across all key
MRAs. The failure of the Philippines to show tangible and positive progress in its AML/CFT
system was due to lack of material time for relevant government agencies to implement
appropriate effectiveness measures. As a result, the Philippines was included in the
FATF’s list of “Jurisdictions Under Increased Monitoring," commonly known as the
“FATF’s Grey List”. The FATF ICRG provided eighteen (18) action plan items that Philippine
authorities must implement within given time frames to exit the grey list.

Broadly, the 18 ICRG action plan items cover supervision of covered persons; access
to beneficial ownership information; enhancements in money laundering and terrorism
financing investigations, prosecutions and confiscations; enforcement of cross-border
declarations; use of targeted financial sanctions in terrorism/TF and _ proliferation
financing; and risk-based measures to protect non-profit organizations.

All action plan items have expired on January 2023. As of writing, there are seven
(7) addressed/largely addressed action plan items, with the remaining ten (10) partly
addressed and one (1) not addressed action plan items.

While the FATF has not called upon jurisdictions to impose financial
countermeasures upon a listed country, it may do so when that country fails to meet the
deadlines in accomplishing the various action items. These countermeasures would treat
all Filipinos and their businesses as high risk to money laundering and terrorism financing
and would lead to additional costs and delays in transactions. For overseas Filipinos
workers, it would mean higher remittance costs, thus, less money for daily food and
necessities of their families in the Philippines. For Philippine businesses, it would mean
higher interest rates, thus higher production costs. Moreover, higher costs and additional
layers of customer due diligence may lead to de-risking of Filipino individuals and
businesses, that is, rejecting having any business relations with all Filipinos.

For the Philippines to exit the “FATF greylist”, all the ICRG Action Plans should be
assessed to be largely addressed.

Thus, all relevant government agencies shall affirm their commitment to swiftly
address their respective ICRG action plan items and strengthen inter-agency coordination
mechanisms to ensure sustained implementation towards positive and tangible progress.
All relevant agencies shall likewise commit to gather and regularly provide qualitative and
quantitative information that would evidence the implementation of the action plan
items.

Page 8 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2
MONEY LAUNDERING INVESTIGATIONS, PROSECUTIONS, AND CONFISCATIONS

Strengthen law enforcement and prosecutorial capacity for the effective
development of financial intelligence, Investigation, Prosecution, and Confiscations
in relation to Money Laundering and its Predicate Offenses

Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and the AMLC have the authority and function
to develop financial intelligence, investigate ML, its Predicate Offenses, Terrorism and
Terrorism Financing. The prosecution of ML is principally carried out through the
Department of Justice or the Office of the Ombudsman, as the case may be. The objective
is not only to prosecute the crime but also to confiscate its proceeds.

The Philippines has demonstrated an increase in ML investigations and
prosecutions in accordance with its risk profile, but further increase in the numbers of ML
investigations and prosecutions, especially with respect to high-risk predicate offenses, are
required as well as predicate crimes with transnational element/foreign proceeds in which
formal and informal cooperation has been sought.

Priority Areas for the NACS Action Plan

Risk Assessments, International Evaluations, and the relevant government agencies
have identified areas for improvement on the capacity and collaboration of the FIU, LEAs,
and Prosecutors.

e The 2019 Mutual Evaluation Report found inadequate resourcing with respect
to development of financial intelligence and money laundering investigations,
being that the AMLC was the only designated authority to investigate ML at
that time. AMLC was also the main agency which has responsibility to
confiscate criminal proceeds through civil forfeiture actions.

To address the issues on investigation resources, the Philippines has
coordinated with various LEAs and implemented the Deputized AMLC Financial
Investigators (DAFI) framework to serve as force multipliers in the conduct of
ML investigations. The purpose of the DAFI program is to enhance the capacity
of LEAs in the development of financial intelligence and the conduct of financial

investigation, which they can do in parallel with their predicate crime
investigations.

The AMILC has likewise increased its manpower complement and implemented
innovations relative to financial intelligence analysis. The financial intelligence
products are disseminated to LEAs to support their ML and predicate crime
investigations.

e Inthe last NRA, predicate offenses rated high are the following: a) smuggling;
b) violations of intellectual property law; c) illegal manufacture and possession

Page 9 of 31

of firearms, ammunition and explosives; d) environmental crimes; e)
investment fraud and estafa; f) violation of dangerous drugs law; and g) plunder
and violations of the anti-graft and corrupt practices act. A 2020 Risk Study also
identified Online Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of Children as a high-risk crime.

While there has been an increase in the number of money laundering
investigations and prosecutions in recent years, the numbers remain relatively
low particularly in relation to other high-risk crimes. There is a need to
predicated on these high-risk offenses through strengthening coordination
mechanisms among the LEAs, Prosecutors, AMLC, and other relevant agencies.

Formal and informal international cooperation mechanisms are not fully
utilized when transnational elements and foreign proceeds are identified in on-
going investigations. There has been a low number of outgoing mutual legal
assistance requests. There is also a need to increase investigations and
prosecutions of crimes with transnational elements and foreign proceeds,
especially among DAFI agencies.

To strengthen the country’s framework for confiscation of proceeds of crimes,
the Supreme Court issued the Rules on Criminal Forfeiture in 2021. The Rules
also provides for provisional remedies in criminal forfeiture involving money
laundering and its predicate crimes. There is a need to further implement the
Rules to support seizure and confiscations by LEAs and prosecutors.

Philippine LEAs conduct asset tracing as part of their financial investigations.
LEAs and Prosecutors also utilize a number of measures (administrative, civil
and criminal) to confiscate proceeds of crime. The number of seizures and
confiscations, however, remains relatively low particularly in relation to other
high-risk crimes. There is a need to sustainably increase the number of seizures
and confiscation actions, including as part of criminal actions.

In 2021, the Supreme Court also included ML and Forfeiture actions within the
jurisdiction of the Special Commercial Courts (SCC). This ensures that SCC
judges will enhance their expertise in handling ML and confiscation actions. In
addition, the Supreme Court designated additional SCCs, bringing the total to
147 SCCs located across various regions.

The LEAs, Prosecutors, and other relevant LEAs should continuously enhance
their knowledge and capacity in order to address the evolving trends of ML, TF,
and predicate offenses. This can be done through continuing training programs
and strategic research on ML, TF, and crime trends.

The 2019 MER found that there are low confiscations related to cross border

declarations was underpinned by limited coverage of sea/airport entry/exit
points and the staffing shortages, may be a contributing factor.

Page 10 of 31

The Bureau of Customs has now implemented cross border declaration
measures across all major international sea and airports.

Measures are also in place to enhance the detection and identification of false
declarations and confiscations. The BOC should continue implementing these
measures to ensure the collection of cross-border declarations, detection of
false declarations and institution of confiscation actions, when so warranted.

The action plan items to be identified by the relevant sub-committee and the
different agencies shall collectively be implemented by all concerned agencies to enhance
their capacity for enforcement and prosecution. Priority is given for actions related to
predicate offenses considered as high risk.

Page 11 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3
TERRORISM FINANCING

Strengthen Mechanisms to Identify, Investigate, and Prosecute Terrorism Financing,
including through the Implementation of Measures to Prevent and Disrupt Terrorism
Financing

Terrorists and threat groups are continuously increasing and evolving their ability to
diversify, resort to various sources of funds, and exploit means and channels to transfer or
move funds to support their operations, logistics and other terrorist activities. To
successfully prevent terrorism, terrorist financing needs to be countered efficiently, as TF
is a key phenomenon that allows these terrorist groups to succeed. Thus, it is essential to
have efficient coordination and cooperation among law enforcement and intelligence
agencies, financial intelligence units, government agencies, and private stakeholders, to
ensure strong political commitment at all levels.

Since the passage of R.A. 11479, otherwise known as the Anti-Terrorism Act, the
Philippines has been issuing resolutions for designations of terrorist. In addition, the AMLC
issues corresponding resolutions containing sanctions freeze order against these
designated persons/entities. The financial institutions respond to these resolutions by
asset freezing without delay. Based on international assessments, the Philippines must
continue to strengthen its framework on denial of funds of designated persons and
entities.

For Non-profit organizations (NPO), the Philippines conducted the 2020 Sector Risk
Assessment. Asa result, the Philippines conducted risk-based audits on NPOs in 2022 and
completed the audit/examination of twenty-one (21) NPOs. The Philippines should
continue conducting these audits as a measure to prevent terrorist financing abuse.

Based on international assessments, the Philippines LEAs should increase its TF
identification, investigation, and prosecution, in line with the risk profile. Also, the
Philippines should continue to increase its dedicated TF investigators and strengthen its
investigation and prosecution capacity.

Priority Areas for the NACS Action Plan

Terrorism and terrorism financing threat was assessed more extensively under the
latest Terrorism and Terrorist Financing Study. The threats and vulnerability posed by
Terrorism and Terrorism Financing were rated Medium High. The terrorism and TF risk in
the Philippines has been downgraded from HIGH to MEDIUM HIGH. Said rating entails that
the public and private sector continue their efforts and strategies that have been
undertaken and implemented in the combat against terrorism and its financing. However,
the Philippines must continue to be aggressive in its efforts in combating terrorism and its
financing. Terrorist groups, international and domestically, are still present; though their
activities are becoming dormant and are waning.

Page 12 of 31

The level of TF investigative activities was found to be inconsistent with the
Philippines TF risk profile. At the time of the ME, there were no TF
prosecutions.

To address this, the Philippines dedicated considerable resources for TF
investigation and prosecution. The DAFI program ensures that LEAs have the
capacity and skills to identify and investigate TF. The Department of Justice
likewise increased its resources to support TF Prosecutions.

The Supreme Court of the Philippines identified fifteen (15) Regional Trial
Courts (RTC) across the region to handle terrorism and counter-terrorism
financing cases involving crimes under the Anti-Terrorism Act (RA. 11479) and
the Terrorism Financing Prevention and Suppression Act (RA 10168). Said
courts are “designated to exclusively and speedily hear, try and decide” the
cases committed in respective regions.

There should be continuous provision of capacity building activities to enhance
and update skills of investigators, including for financial investigation training
on different types of TF activity. Capacities of the dedicated prosecutorial and
judicial resources should be continuously enhanced.

While there has been an increase in TF identification and investigation efforts,
improvements are still necessary to further increase the numbers in line with
the risk profile.

DAFls/LEAs should increase use of TF identification mechanisms, including but
not limited to proactive initiation of financial inquiries, conduct of separate
parallel financial investigations and use of various coordination mechanisms.
This should include strengthening Intelligence-sharing, cooperation, and
collaboration with other jurisdictions.

DAFIs/LEAs should likewise increase its TF investigations with particular focus
on standalone TF offenses and financing of terror networks as well as TF
arising out of counter terrorism actions and investigations.

These identification and investigation actions should translate to prosecution
of criminal cases on terrorism financing.

At the time of the MER, strategic deficiencies were noted on the targeted
financial sanctions (TFS) framework on terrorism financing as the proscription
process under the Human Security Act (HSA) is not in line with the requirements
of UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) No. 1373. Due to these deficiencies,
the Philippines made limited use of the designation framework to deny funds
to and freeze assets of terrorists.

The deficiency in the legal framework has since been addressed with the
passage of Republic Act No. 11479, or the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA). Since

Page 13 of 31

then, Philippine authorities have designated terrorists and_ terrorist
organizations and have frozen funds/assets pursuant to AMLC’s sanctions
freeze order. Philippine authorities should continue using the designation
framework to effectively deny funds to designated persons and entities.

The Philippines continuously assesses terrorism financing risks associated with
non-profit organizations. In the 2018 risk study, a number of unregistered
organizations were identified with potential TF risk. In the 2021 study
conducted by the SEC, risks were again assessed, and mitigation measures were
implemented.

The SEC, together with other regulators, has been conducting an aggressive
information campaign to educate NPOs on the abuse of NPOs for TF purposes
and to encourage registration with the SEC. The SEC likewise conducts risk
based supervision to protect the NPO sector and promote legitimate activity.
SEC and other competent authorities should continue taking appropriate
measures with respect to the NPO sector, including measures to address
unregistered organizations, without disrupting legitimate NPO activities.

Page 14 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 4
PROLIFERATION FINANCING

Enhance and implement the framework on Proliferation Financing of Weapons of
Mass Destruction

On 30 January 2021, Republic Act (RA) No. 11521, otherwise known as “An Act
Further Strengthening the Anti-Money Laundering Law”, took effect and gave birth to the
Philippines’ legal framework prohibiting activities related to the financing of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (PF). The law also empowered the AMLC to
impose targeted financial sanctions against the properties of designated individuals or
entities pursuant to UNSCR 1718 and 2231.

After the effectivity of RA No. 11521, the AMLC issued AMLC Regulatory Issuance 2
- 2021, the PF Targeted Financial Sanctions Guidelines, to assist all covered persons in
complying with their obligations under AMLC Resolutions issued to implement TFS
obligations, including freeze without delay, in relation to UNSC Resolutions 1718 and 2231.

In addition, the DTI — Strategic Trade Management Office (STMO) issued
Memorandum Circular No. 21-06 (MC), Implementation of Financing and Brokering Under
Republic Act No. 10697, otherwise known as Strategic Trade Management Office to
implement the requirements of UNSCR Nos. 1718 (2006) and 2231 (2015).

The MC is issued pursuant to the penal provision provided under Section 19(a)(3) of
Republic Act 10697 or the Strategic Trade Management Act. Violations of Section 19 (a)(3)
in relation to PF pursuant to UNSCR 1718 and 2231, is now considered as a predicate
offense to ML [Section 3(i)(34), AMLA, as amended by RA No. 11521]

The MC requires any natural or juridical person to apply for an individual
authorization from STMO before they can engage in brokering activities or making
available or providing funds to facilitate the movement/flow of any strategic goods and/or
related services if the parties involved in the transaction/s is any of the following:

a. a designated person under UNSCR 1718 and its subsequent resolutions;

b. a designated person under UNSCR 2231 and its subsequent resolutions;

c. any entity owned or controlled by a designated person;

d. any individual or entity who acts on behalf of or under the direction of a
designated person; or

e. any person in, or who is a national of, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.

The MC also prohibit any natural or juridical person operating within the Philippines
or any Filipino person, wherever located, is prohibited from engaging in brokering and
financing activities, if the parties involved in the transaction/s is any of the following:

a. a designated person under UNSCR 1718 and its subsequent resolutions;
b. a designated person under UNSCR 2231 and its subsequent resolutions;

Page 15 of 31

c. any entity owned or controlled by a designated person;

d. any individual or entity who acts on behalf of or under the direction of a

f. designated person; or

€. any person in, or who is a national of, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.

Priority Areas for the NACS Action Plan

The legal framework related to Proliferation of the Financing of Weapons of Mass
Destruction is in its infancy stage. Thus, relevant government agencies should continue to
undertake awareness and capacity building activities to ensure understanding of the public
and effective implementation of the measure.

Likewise, relevant government agencies should adopt a cooperation mechanism to
ensure a collaborative approach in the identification, investigation, and prosecution of
cases related to PF.

To ensure standard approach and effective implementation of the measure,
standard training and capacity building activities should be undertaken and relevant
manuals covering topics such as, but not limited to investigation and exchange of
information should be developed and published.

The Philippines should conduct a gap analysis of its current PF framework and

undertake a separate PF Risk Assessment to ensure that its PF legal framework is aligned
with international standards.

Page 16 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 5
TRANSPARENCY OF BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP INFORMATION

Promote transparency and ensure access to beneficial ownership information by
competent authorities

Legal persons are created through registration with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) and the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) while Trust entities
are regulated and supervised by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.

Information on the creation and types of legal persons in the Philippines are available
to the public. Likewise, the SEC, CDA and the BSP have mechanisms in place to ensure that
beneficial information is submitted, stored and up to date.

Competent authorities have access to beneficial ownership information in the
possession of registries, regulators, and financial institutions (CDD Documents). However,
timely access of competent authorities, as well as the updating of beneficial ownership
information remains to be a challenge.

Priority Areas for the NACS Action Plan

Risk Assessments, International Evaluations, and the relevant government agencies
identified areas for improvement on the transparency of legal persons and access to
beneficial ownership information.

e Inthe last NRA, it was noted that not all competent authorities have access
to beneficial ownership information held by bank because of the operation
of bank secrecy laws.

To address this issue, the SEC and the AMLC should continue to enhance
its mechanisms to ensure that competent authorities, including the LEAs,
are able to access beneficial ownership information in a timely manner.

e There is a need for the Philippines to enhance and streamline LEAs access
to BO information, through the AMLC’s mechanisms, including by
improving the timeliness and accuracy of such access and enforce BO
disclosure obligations to obtain a higher level of timely submission of the
GIS through the application of proportional and dissuasive sanctions to
non-compliant corporations.

To address this, the SEC should endeavor to increase the number of LEAs
and other Competent Authorities with direct access to BO information

through the signing of the necessary MOAs/Data Sharing Agreements.

The SEC should continue its efforts, by issuing aggressive policies, in
promoting its programs, through continuous outreach actions, related to

Page 17 of 31

the enrolment of legal persons on its eFAST platform to increase the
number of legal persons that comply with BO disclosure.

e The SEC should continue to take appropriate enforcement actions against
legal persons that fail to comply with BO disclosing obligations including
the application of proportionate and dissuasive sanctions and the revision
of the penalties applicable to delinquent corporations.

Relevant government agencies should develop plans and programs to implement
and address the identified priority areas.

Page 18 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 6

SUPERVISION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND DESIGNATED NON-FINANCIAL
BUSINESSES AND PROFESSIONS

Enhance risk-based supervision of financial institutions and designated non-financial
businesses and professions (DNFBPs) to promote understanding of risks and
understanding of obligations among supervised sectors

The supervisors for financial institutions are the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP),
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and Insurance Commission (IC). The BSP is the
supervisor for banks and non-bank financial institutions (NBFls), such as pawnshops and
remittances. The SEC is the supervisor for securities dealers, broker, investment houses,
mutual funds and other entities dealing in currency, commodities, or financial derivatives,
The IC is the supervisor for insurance companies, pre-need companies, health
maintenance organizations and their respective intermediaries. The SAs exercise AML
supervision through the issuance of policies and regulations, conduct of examination, and
meetings and dialogues with supervised institutions.

The Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR), the Cagayan
Economic Zone Authority (CEZA), and the Aurora Pacific Economic Zone and Freeport
Authority (APECO), were designated by law as the appropriate government agencies
(AGAs) with authority to supervise, assess and monitor compliance of casinos with the
obligations under the AMLA.

The AMLC is the AML/CFT Supervisor for covered Designated Non-Financial
Businesses and Professions (DNFBPs) such as dealers in precious metals and precious
stones, company service providers, persons, including lawyers and accountants engaged
in certain activities provided by the law,? and real estate brokers and dealers.

Priority Areas for the NACS Action Plan

Deficiencies noted in the 2019 MER are focused on DNFBPs and other high-risk
sectors such as money service businesses (MSBs) and junkets. Weaknesses were also
observed across all sectors in the understanding and implementation of targeted financial
sanctions (TFS) obligations on terrorism financing and proliferation financing. At that time,
the Philippines TFS framework for TF and PF also have strategic deficiencies.

° DNFBP Supervisors have made enhancements to their risk-based supervision
framework. Supervision is at varying stages of implementation. Supervision
plan should ensure that higher risk covered persons are prioritized.

° Persons, including lawyers and accountants, who provide any of the following services: a) managing of
client money, securities or other assets; b) management of bank, savings or securities accounts; c)
organization of contributions for the creation, operation or management of companies; and d) creation,
operation or management of juridical persons or arrangements, and buying and selling business entities.

Page 19 of 31

For DNFBPs, other than casinos, registration with the AMLC is currently low,
with the universe of DNFBPs that should be covered still uncertain. AMLC
should implement a strategy to identify DNFBPs to be registered. This should
include outreach and possible sanctioning for non-compliance. Concurrently,
AMLC should progress its DNFBP examination and enforcement measures,
prioritizing higher risk DNFBPs, with a focus on their implementation of
AML/CFT obligations, particularly their reporting obligations.

For casinos, PAGCOR should continue implementation of risk-based
supervision, including conduct of examinations and enforcement measures,
prioritizing higher risk casinos and sub-sectors. Offshore gaming operators
(OGOs) and their service providers (SPs) were recently included under the
AMLC and were considered a high-risk sector.

CEZA and APECO recently adopted their own risk-based policy framework.
With respect to APECO, while it has no licensees with authority to operate, it is
ready to implement its framework once operations are allowed. With respect
to CEZA, it has disseminated questionnaires to their supervised casinos to
ensure adequate risk identification of individual casinos to guide its supervision
plan.

There were concerns regarding casinos outsourcing of customer due diligence
(CDD) obligations to junket operators, given the major risks posed by junkets.
PAGCOR has issued new regulations on fit and proper requirements for junket
operators. Examinations conducted by PAGCOR should determine and ensure
that CDD requirements on junket participant are conducted by the casinos and
that adequate AML/CFT risk mitigation measures are implemented.

Money service businesses (MSBs) have undergone an extensive re-registration
process. There were challenges in identifying and sanctioning unregistered
MSBs. The BSP has instituted several measures to identify these unregistered
MSBs. These measures should be continuously implemented to ensure
protection of the sector and mitigation of risks.

Strategic deficiencies in the TFS legal framework were addressed with the
passage of the ATA providing for a UNSCR 1373 designation framework, and
Republic Act 11521, or the 2021 Amendments to the AMLA, providing for a TFS
framework on proliferation financing under UNSCR 1781 and 2231.

The AMLC has issued the necessary regulations to guide covered persons in
their implementation of TFS TF and PF obligations. Supervisors should ensure
that their supervised sectors understand their TFS obligations. Likewise,
supervisors should check that covered persons are implementing their TFS
obligations.

Page 20 of 31

In 2015, Republic Act No. 10697 or the Strategic Trade Management Act (STIMA) was
enacted. The law defined strategic goods as, products that, for security reasons or due to
international agreements, are of such military importance that their export is either
prohibited altogether or subject to specific conditions. Such goods are generally suitable
to be used for military purposes or to produce weapons of mass destruction (WMD). The
law regulates activities related to strategic goods, including its export, import, transit,
transshipment, re-export, reassignment, and provision of related services. It created the
Strategic Trade Management Office (STMO) under the Department of Trade and Industry
(DTI), to serve as the executive and technical agency of the national government for the
establishment of the management systems for the trade in strategic goods.

On 19 July 2020, Republic Act 11479 or the “Anti-Terrorism Act of 2020” took effect.
The ATA provides for the legal framework for UNSCR 1373. The salient provisions of the
ATA include:

a. Expansion of the definition of the crime of terrorism;

b. Criminal provisions in relation to foreign terrorist fighters;

c. Expansion of investigative powers of competent authorities for terrorism
investigations;

d. Designation of terrorist individual, groups of persons, organizations or
associations;

e, Proscription of terrorist organizations, association, or group of persons;

f. Authority of the AMLC to investigate, inquire and examine bank accounts;
and to issue freeze order;

g. Expanded composition of the Anti-Terrorism Council, which now includes
the AMLC Secretariat Executive Director.

On 19 October 2020, the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the ATA also
took effect.

Proliferation financing was not assessed as part of the 2.4 NRA. The country’s
framework for regulation of strategic goods is still evolving, and needs to be further
developed to address growing concerns on WMD and to make it more compliant with
international standards.

e The STMA regulates financing of strategic goods only under the provision of
“related services”. There is a need for clearer guidelines to regulate the
financing aspect.

e To effectively regulate entities engaged in manufacturing, exporting and
importing of strategic goods, there is a need to create a database and
determine the level of risk of these entities.

In the development of action plans to address terrorism and TF risks, priority is given
in engaging security/intelligence agencies to include terrorism financing in their area of
focus. This is to ensure that LEAs and security/intelligence agencies also gather evidence
pertaining to financing of terrorists, terrorist organizations and acts of terrorism, and refer

it to the AMLC for proper investigation.

The agencies concerned also recognize that spread of terrorism in certain regions
can also be curbed with the help of the local government units in high-risk regions. Thus
there is need to reinforce local government mechanisms in this regard.

?

The action plan should addresses the presence of foreign terrorist fighters and the
vulnerability of MSBs, NPOs and Overseas Filipino Workers, including seafarers. Targeted
outreach is thus crucial to educate these sectors on how to prevent their abuse for TF
purposes.

Finally, the focus of the PF action plans is on the further development of the

regulatory framework, including the conduct of a risk assessment to properly understand
the nature of business of concerned entities.

Page 22 of 31

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 7
AML/CFT AWARENESS

Promote AML/CFT Awareness of Government Agencies, Covered Persons, and the
General Public to Effectively Combat Money Laundering, Terrorism Financing, and
Proliferation Financing

A government who is informed of the ML/TF risks is essential in order to effectively
combat ML, its predicate offenses, terrorism and TF. This enables government to apply a
risk-based approach in allocating resources and implementing measures to preventive or
mitigate ML/TF.

Covered persons who are knowledgeable and conscious of their AML/CFT obligations
and the risks faced by the sector are able to effectively prevent ML and assist the
government in the investigation and prosecution of crimes. This also raised the
effectiveness of compliance level of financial institutions and DNFBPs.

Finally, a general public who is aware of the ML/TF trends, typologies and risks is an
effective partner of the government. It will prevent vulnerable sectors and groups of
people from being exploited for money laundering and terrorism financing purposes.

Priority Areas for the NACS Action Plan

The Level of AML/CFT awareness has an impact on the implementation of AML/CFT
obligations, investigations, and prosecutions, and on the formalization of the economy.
The action plans under this strategic objective are also cross-cutting with other strategic
objectives

° The increase in investigative and prosecutorial resources should be
complemented with continuous capacity building to ensure that dedicated
LEAs and prosecutors are able to adequately conduct ML/TF investigations,
prosecutions and confiscations.

° The designation of additional Special Commercial Courts and of Anti-
Terrorism/Terrorism Financing Courts is a welcome development. Judges and
prosecutors assigned in these courts should undergo the necessary trainings
to enhance their expertise.

° Timely access and accuracy of beneficial ownership information can contribute
to investigations by LEAs. There is a need to continue the aggressive
information campaign for legal persons to submit their BO declaration forms
as part of the General Information Sheet. The campaign should likewise inform
legal persons on sanctions that can be imposed for failure to submit the BO
declaration form. Awareness of LEAs on how to access BO information should
also be enhanced.

° The registration of other DNFBPs remains a challenge. There is a need to
conduct an information campaign to identify DNFBPs and enforce registration
requirements. Likewise, for registered DNFBPs, there is a need to continue
trainings to promote implementation and understanding of their AML/CFT
obligations and risks.

° Risk studies, strategic analysis, and typologies of the AMLC assists covered
persons in identifying and reporting suspicious transactions.

° The use of Public Private Partnership mechanisms should be maximized in the
field of exchange of studies, typology developments, capacity building
activities, and awareness programs.

Aside from risks identified in the 2°4 NRA, deficiencies noted in international
assessments, discussion in existing coordination mechanisms identifies lack of public
awareness on money laundering, predicate offenses and terrorism financing contribute to
prevalence of these crimes.

Page 24 of 31

IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW OF THE NATIONALAML/CFT STRATEGY

The National AML/CFT Strategy is a product of the collaborative efforts of key AML/CFT
government agencies. Its implementation will be the responsibility of all relevant government agencies
which contributed and committed to the strategic objectives and action plans.

A National AML/CFT Coordinating Committee (NACC) shall facilitate inter-agency coordination
focused on the development of national policies on AML/CFT /CPF consistent with relevant
AML/CFT/CPF laws and international standards, champion the implementation of the NACS 2023-2027
and provide directives to relevant agencies on major issues on the implementation of the NACS 2023-

The National AML/CFT Coordinating Committee shall have the following functions:

Provide overall policy and strategic direction and oversee the implementation of the NACS;
Coordinate the development and implementation of AML/CTF/CPF policies and activities
to ensure consistency with the NACS, relevant AML/CTF/CPF laws, and international

Recommend to relevant government agencies policy and/or operational actions, consistent
with the strategic objectives of the NACS, to ensure a multi-agency national response to

Ensure that the roles and responsibilities of relevant government agencies as stated in the
NACS are efficiently and effectively carried out;

Invite other government agencies and instrumentalities to be part of the NACC or any of its
sub-committees, as may be necessary;

Formulate and adopt operational guidelines and rules of procedure for the implementation
of a national AML/CFT/CPF strategy, and as may be necessary to carry out its functions and
duties;

Call upon any relevant agency, office, or instrumentality to provide assistance, as may be necessary

Convene and consult relevant AML/CFT/CPF public and private stakeholders on operational
and policy issues that may have implications on the implementation and effectiveness of
the NACS;

Facilitate the periodic conduct of the money laundering and terrorist financing risk
assessment and recommend action plans, which may be included in the NACS, to address
the risks identified;

Evaluate the effectiveness of the NACS in light of the evolving ML/TF risks and compliance
with international AML/CFT/CPF standards;

Establish and maintain coordination with technical assistance providers to assist relevant
government agencies in the implementation of action plans provided in the NACS; and
Promote activities to spread awareness of the NACS and identified high ML/TF/PE risk
areas.

Page 25 of 31

There is also created several sub-committees to assist the NACC in the proper implementation
of the strategic objectives and action plans.

a) ‘The Financial Intelligence, Law Enforcement and Prosecution sub-committee
(FILEPSC) shall be primarily responsible for the implementation and monitoring
of action plans under Strategic Objective 1 (Addressing Deficiencies in a Timely
Manner), Strategic Objective 2 (Money Laundering Investigation, Prosecutions,
and Confiscations), and Strategic Objective 5 (Transparency of Beneficial
Ownership Information). The FILEPSC shall likewise provide support and
coordinate efforts in the implementation of Strategic Objective 7 (AML/CFT
Awareness).

b) The Supervision of Financial Institutions Sub-Committee (SFISC) shall be
primarily responsible for the implementation of the relevant action plans
under Strategic Objective 1 (Addressing Deficiencies in a Timely Manner),
Strategic Objective 6 (Supervision of Financial Institution and Designated Non-
Financial Businesses and Professions). The SFISC shall likewise provide support
and coordinate efforts in the implementation of Strategic Objective 3
(Terrorism Financing), Strategic Objective 4 (Proliferation Financing), Strategic
Objective 5 (Transparency of Beneficial Ownership Information), and Strategic
Objective 7 (AML/CFT Awareness).

c) The Supervision of Designated Non-Financial Businesses and Professions Sub-
Committee (SDSC) shall be primarily responsible for the implementation of the
relevant action plans under Strategic Objective 1 (Addressing Deficiencies in a
Timely Manner), Strategic Objective 6 (Supervision of Financial Institution and
Designated Non-Financial Businesses and Professions). The SDSC shall likewise
provide support and coordinate efforts in the implementation of Strategic
Objective 3 (Terrorism Financing), Strategic Objective 4 (Proliferation
Financing), Strategic Objective 5 (Transparency of Beneficial Ownership
Information), and Strategic Objective 7 (AML/CFT Awareness).

d) The Terrorism Financing Sub-Committee (TFSC) shall be primarily responsible
for the implementation of the action plans under Strategic Objective 1
(Addressing Deficiencies in a Timely Manner), and Strategic Objective 3
(Terrorism Financing). The TFPFSC shall likewise provide support and
coordinate efforts in the implementation of Strategic Objective 7 (AML/CFT
Awareness).

e) The Proliferation Financing Sub-Committee (PFSC) shall be primarily
responsible for the implementation of the action plans under Strategic
Objective 1 (Addressing Deficiencies in a Timely Manner), and Strategic
Objective 4 (Proliferation Financing). The PFSC shall likewise provide support
and coordinate efforts in the implementation of Strategic Objective 7
(AML/CFT Awareness).

f) The AML/CFT Awareness Sub-Committee (ACASC) shall be primarily
responsible for the implementation of the action plans under Strategic

Page 26 of 31

Objective 7 (AML/CFT Awareness). The ACASC shall likewise provide support
and coordinate efforts in the implementation of Strategic Objective 1
(Addressing Deficiencies in a Timely Manner ).

A Secretariat is formed, which shall be responsible for, among others, the coordination, logistics
and operations of the meetings, and coordination with and monitoring of duties and responsibilities
of the NACC and its sub-committees.

As part of the implementation of the National AML/CFT Strategy, key government agencies shall
integrate the identified action plans within their agency’s and come up with their own action plans,
consistent with the identified strategic objectives. Each agency shall provide reports on progress made
against the strategic objectives and amendments to the agency’s action plans, where appropriate to
do so.

The National AML/CFT Strategy is adynamic document as ML/TF risks of the country changes from

time-to-time. As such, the National Coordinating Committee shall revisit and update the strategic
objectives and action plans in 2025, or as the need arises, to keep it relevant.

Page 27 of 31

ANNEX 1 - SUPPORTING AGENCIES

Financial Intelligence Unit

Anti-Money

Laundering Council
{AMLC)

Supervising Agencies

Appropriate Government Agencies

Central Bank of the Philippines (BSP)

Philippine Amusement and Gaming
Corporation (PAGCOR)

Insurance Commission (IC)

Cagayan Economic Zone Authority (CEZA)

Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC)

Aurora Pacific Economic Zone and Freeport
(APECO)

Relevant Government Agencies

Anti-Terrorism Council (ATC)

National Privacy Commission (NPC)

ATC - Program Management Center
(ATC-
PMC)

National Security Council (NSC)

Bureau of Customs (BOC)

National Telecommunications Commission
(NTC)

| Bureau of Immigration (BI)

Office of the Ombudsman (OMB)

Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR)

Office of the Solicitor General (OSG)

Civil Aviation Authority of the
Philippines

(Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines)

Philippine Coast Guard (PCG)

Office of Transportation Security (OTS)

Overseas Workers Welfare Administration
(OWWA)

Department of Environment and
Natural
Resources (DENR)

Yes

Philippine Center on Transnational Crime
(PCTC)

Department of Finance (DOF)

Philippine Coast Guard (PCG)

Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA)

Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation
(PDIC)

Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT)

Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency
(PDEA)

Department of Interior and Local
Government

Philippine Judicial Academy (PhilJA)

Department of Labor and Employment
(DOLE)

Philippine Overseas Employment
Administration
(POEA)

Department of Trade and Industry —
Strategic Trade Management Office
(DTI-STMO)

Philippine National Police — Anti-
Cybercrime Group (PNP — ACG)

Intellectual Property Office of the
Philippines

PNP — Anti-Kidnapping Group (PNP — AKG)

Page 28 of 31

(IPOPHL)

Land Registration Authority (LRA)

PNP — Criminal Investigation and
Detection Group (PNP — CIDG)

Land Transportation Office (LTO)

PNP — Directorate for Intelligence (PNP —
DI)

Manila International Airport Authority
(MIAA)

PNP — Directorate for Investigation and
Detective
Management (PNP-DIDM)

PNP — Intelligence Group (PNP — IG)

Maritime Industry Authority (VARI

National Bureau of Investigation (NBI)

Presidential Anti-Organized Crime
Commission (PAOCC)

National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council (NDRRMC)

Presidential Legislative Liaison Office (PLLO)

Supreme Court — Office of the Court
Administrator (SC — OCA)

National Intelligence Committee of

National Intelligence Coordinating
Agency
(NICA) |

Page 29 of 31

TABLE OF ACRONYMS

ACASC AML/CFT Awareness Sub-Committee

AGA Appropriate Government Agencies

AML/CFT Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism

AMLA Anti-Money Laundering Act of 20010r Republic Act 9160

AMLC Anti-Money Laundering Council

APECO Aurora Pacific Economic Zone and Freeport Authority

BIR Bureau of Internal Revenue a

BNI ‘Bearer Negotiable Instruments

BOI Board of Investments

BSP Central Bank of the Philippines

CDA Cooperative Development Authority

CEZA Cagayan Economic Zone Authority

cP Covered Person

DNFBP Designated Non-Financial Business and Professions

DOJ Department of Justice

DTI Department of Trade and Industry

FATF Financial Action Task Force

FILEPSC Financial Intelligence, Law Enforcement and Prosecution sub-committee

FIU Financial Intelligence Unit

HSA Human Security Act of 2007 or the Republic Act 9372

Ic Insurance Commission

KYC Know-Your-Customer

LEA Law Enforcement Agencies

ML Money Laundering

MLAT | Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties

MOA | Memorandum of Agreement

MSB | Money Service Business

NACB | National AML/CFT Coordinating Body

NACS National Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism
Strategy

NAEC National AML/CFT Executive Committee (NAEC)

NAWG National AML/CFT Working Group

NBFI Non-Bank Financial Institutions

NBI National Bureau of Investigation

NCMF National Commission for Muslim Filipinos

NPO Non-Profit Organizations

NRA National Risk Assessment

NSSLA Non-Stock Savings and Loan Associations

ocD Office of Civil Defense

OFW Overseas Filipino Workers

OSG Office of the Solicitor General

PAGCOR Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation

PDEA Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency

PF Proliferation Financing

PNP Philippine National Police

POC Peace and Order Councils

RA Republic Act

SA Supervising Authorities

Page 30 of 31

SDSC

Supervision of Designated Non-Financial Businesses and Professions Sub-
Committee

SEC Securities and Exchange Commission

SFISC Supervision of Financial Institutions Sub-Committee
STMA Strategic Trade Management Act

STMO Strategic Trade Management Office

Suspicious Transaction Report

TF Terrorism Financing

TFPFSC Terrorism Financing and Proliferation Financing Sub-Committee

TFPSA Terrorism Financing Prevention and Suppression Act or Republic Act 10168
WB World Bank

WMD | Weapons of Mass Destruction

Page 31 of 31