MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 16

REORGANIZING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful executions of laws;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III of Executive Order (EO) No. 292
of the “Administrative Code of 1987,” provides that the President, in order to achieve
simplicity, economy and efficiency, shall have the continuing authority to reorganize
the administrative structure of the Office of the President (OP);

WHEREAS, EO No. 2(s. 2022) reorganized the communications agencies and
offices, in view of the need to rationalize and consolidate the communications arm of
the Administration for a more efficient delivery of public service;

WHEREAS, EO No. 11 (s. 2022), which further streamlined the administrative
structure of the OP, renamed the Office of the Press Secretary as the Presidential
Communications Office (PCO), and placed the same under the direct control and
supervision of the President;

WHEREAS, under EO No. 11, the PCO shall be responsible for crafting,
formulating, developing, enhancing, and coordinating the messaging system of the
Executive branch and the OP; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to reorganize the PCO to ensure rationalization of
its organizational structure, functions, and staffing pattern, consistent with the
Administration’s continuing efforts towards efficiency and responsiveness in the
delivery of critical mandates to the Filipino people;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Presidential Communications Office. The PCO, which shall be

headed by a Secretary, shall serve as the primary office of the Executive branch in
engaging and involving the citizenry and the mass media in enriching the quality of

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

public discourse on all matters of governance. For this purpose, the PCO shall be
responsible in crafting, formulating, developing, enhancing, and coordinating the
messaging system of the Executive branch and the OP.

Section 2. Structure of the PCO. The PCO Secretary, in the exercise of overall
control and supervision of the PCO, shall be assisted by five (5) Undersecretaries and
fourteen (14) Assistant Secretaries, with one (1) Assistant Secretary directly reporting
to the PCO Secretary. The Secretary is hereby authorized to continuously assess and
evaluate, and on the basis thereof, transfer, delineate, reassign, or reorganize the
functional areas of responsibility of each Undersecretary and/or Assistant Secretary
as he or she may deem necessary.

The Undersecretaries shall each be assigned and put in charge of the following
functional areas of responsibility:

Traditional Media and External Affairs;
Digital Media Services;

Content Production;

. Broadcast Production; and

Operations, Administration and Finance.

P2959

The PCO Secretary and the Presidential Adviser for Creative Communications
shall closely coordinate with each other on matters relating to communications and
information dissemination, and the development and enhancement of the messaging
system of the Executive branch and the OP.

Section 3. Traditional Media and External Affairs. The Undersecretary for
Traditional Media and External Affairs shall, among others, be responsible for
formulating and implementing messaging directives, and ensuring the efficient delivery
of essential communication and messaging services of the Executive branch and the
OP through various industry assets. The Undersecretary shall be assisted by five (5)
Assistant Secretaries who shall each be in charge of Radio, Print, Television, External
Affairs, and Media Accreditation and Relations, respectively.

Section 4. Digital Media Services. The Undersecretary for Digital Media
Services shall be tasked to, among others, formulate and implement programs and
policies on the responsible and efficient use of digital media assets and
communication tools. The Undersecretary shall be assisted by two (2) Assistant
Secretaries: one (1) for Digital Media and Communications; and one (1) for Digital
Assets Management.

Section 5. Content Production. The Undersecretary for Content Production
shall, among others, be in charge of providing close-in coverage of the official activities
of the President, as well as the management and utilization of data related thereto.
The Undersecretary shall be assisted by one (1) Assistant Secretary.

Section 6. Broadcast Production. The Undersecretary for Broadcast
Production shall, among others, manage and organize live productions for broadcast.
The Undersecretary shall be assisted by one (1) Assistant Secretary.

Section 7. Operations, Administration and Finance. The Undersecretary for
Operations, Administration and Finance shall, among others, be responsible for the
delivery of essential administrative and financial services to support the core mandates
of the PCO. The Undersecretary shall be assisted by four (4) Assistant Secretaries
who shall each be in charge of Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations
(GOCCs), Finance, Administration, and Operations, respectively.

The People’s Television Network, Inc., APO Production Unit, Intercontinental
Broadcasting Corporation, and National Printing Office are hereby attached to the
PCO, which shall exercise administrative supervision over said attached agencies.
The Assistant Secretary for GOCCs shall supervise, coordinate, and monitor the
activities of the aforementioned agencies, oversee their compliance with their core
mandates, evaluate their performance, and recommend changes to their structure and
operations, if necessary, to ensure quality public service.

Section 8. Other Communication Agencies. The following communication
agencies shall be under the direct control and supervision of the PCO:

Presidential Broadcast Service-Bureau of Broadcast Services;
Bureau of Communication Services;

News and Information Bureau;

Freedom of Information-Program Management Office;
Philippine Information Agency (PIA); and

Presidential Broadcast Staff-Radio Television Malacafiang.

~oao7®

The PIA shall continue to be headed by a Director-General, with the rank of an
Undersecretary, and shall be supported by four (4) Deputy Directors-General with the
rank, salary and emoluments of an Assistant Secretary, and four (4) Assistant
Directors-General with the rank, salary and emoluments of a Director IV. The Deputy
Directors-General and Assistant Directors-General shall be entitled to their respective
support staff. The divisions and regional offices of the PIA shall each be headed bya
Director Il, to be appointed by the Director-General, subject to existing laws, rules and
regulations. The PCO Secretary, in coordination with the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) and the Career Executive Service (CES) Board, as the case may
be, may recommend the qualification standards for the aforementioned positions
within the PIA, in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 9. Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern. All existing
divisions and units of the PCO shall be reorganized consistent with the functional
areas provided under this Order. The PCO Secretary, in coordination with the DBM,
may recommend the abolition of redundant positions, divisions, and units, subject to
existing laws, rules and regulations. Affected personnel of the PCO shall be allowed
to avail of the benefits provided under existing laws, if applicable. The DBM is hereby
ordered to release the necessary funds for the benefits of eligible employees.

The PCO Secretary shall further determine the appropriate staffing pattern and
corresponding qualification standards for all positions under the new structure. For this
purpose, the PCO shall submit to the DBM, for review and approval, a revised
organizational structure and staffing pattern of the PCO, pursuant to this Order and
subject to compliance with relevant laws, rules and regulations.

3

Section 10. Funding. The funds necessary for the implementation of this Order
shall be charged to the available appropriations of the PCO, subject to relevant
budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules and regulations. Thereafter, the subsequent
funding requirements for the purpose shall be included in the budget proposal of the
PCO, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 11. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 12. Repeal. This Order hereby amends or modifies relevant provisions
of EO No. 2 (s. 2022). All other issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof that are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 13th dayof February , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

/) /)

{/ [/. .
(ne Pan hiiaaes
LUCAS P. BERSAMI
/Exécutive Secretary

Office of the President
MALACARANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFVED COPY

 

  
 

F THE PHILIPPINES

REPUBLIC 01
HY DON ON 4

PBBM001513