APPROVING THE COMPENSATION AND POSITION
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM Il AND PAY GRADES FOR
GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR -CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS,
REPEALING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 150 (S. 2021), AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Section 5, Article |X-B of the Constitution mandates the Congress
to provide for the standardization of compensation of government officials and
employees, including those in government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs) with original charters, taking into account the nature of the responsibilities
pertaining to, and the qualifications required for their positions;

WHEREAS, Section 8 of Republic Act (RA) No. 10149 or the “GOCC
Governance Act of 2011” mandates the Governance Commission for GOCCs (GCG),
after conducting a compensation study, to develop a Compensation and Position
Classification System (CPCS) for GOCCs that consists of classes of positions grouped
into such categories as the GCG may determine, subject to the approval of the
President;

WHEREAS, on 01 October 2021, Executive Order (EO) No. 150 (s. 2021)
approved the CPCS | and the Index of Occupational Services, Position Titles, and Job
Grades for GOCCs (lIOS-G) Framework for the GOCC Sector;

WHEREAS, EO No. 150 applied the CPCS | and the IOS-G Framework to all
GOCCs, Government Financial Institutions (GFls), Government Instrumentalities with
Corporate Powers (GICPs)/Government Corporate Entities (GCEs), including their
subsidiaries, unless excluded from the coverage of RA No. 10149;

WHEREAS, Section 9 of EO No. 150 provides that the GCG En Banc shall
review the CPCS three (3) years after its effectivity, and every three (3) years
thereafter, taking into account the performance of GOCCs, their overall contribution to
the national economy, and the possible erosion in purchasing power due to inflation
and other factors;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the foregoing mandate and in consideration of
emerging sectoral needs, the GCG undertook a comprehensive evaluation of the

CPCS | under EO No. 150 and consulted various stakeholders to develop a more
responsive compensation system for the GOCC sector;

WHEREAS, such study and consultations identified opportunities to enhance
the CPCS |, particularly in refining job grade distinctions and improving access to
employee health benefits, prompting the GCG to develop CPCS Il with key
enhancements, including salary adjustments to address job grade distortions and the
introduction of medical allowance to support employee welfare; and

WHEREAS, after exhaustive deliberation and review, the GCG En Banc,
through GCG Resolution No. 02 (s. 2025), has resolved to approve and endorse
CPCS II, and submitted the same to the President of the Philippines for adoption and
approval:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution
and by existing laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Coverage. The CPCS II attached hereto is hereby approved and
shall apply to all GOCCs, GFls, GICPs/GCEs (hereinafter collectively referred to as
GOCCs), including their subsidiaries, unless excluded from the coverage of RA No.

The CPCS Il is hereby confirmed not to apply to GOCCs with approved
dispositive actions such as merger (exclusively referring to the GOCC to be absorbed),
consolidation, abolition, deactivation, privatization, or such other related action as may
be determined by GCG. The GCG shall have the authority to formulate the appropriate
compensation framework for GOCCs falling under this paragraph, benchmarked
against the Total Compensation Framework provided in the CPCS II.

The GCG shall have the authority to convert or revise the existing position
classification system of GOCCs to align with the CPCS II under this Order. All positions
in GOCCs shall then be allocated by GCG to their proper position titles and pay grades
in the IOS-G to be issued by GCG pursuant to Section 14 hereof.

Section 2. No Authority to Negotiate/Bargain on the Economic Terms and
Conditions of Collective Negotiation Agreements (CNAs)/Collective Bargaining
Agreements (CBAs). While recognizing the Constitutional rights of workers to
self-organization, collective bargaining, and negotiations, the Governing Boards of
GOCCs shall not negotiate the economic terms and conditions of the CNAs/CBAs with
their respective officers and employees.

CNA incentives shall be guided by the policies and guidelines established by
the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and shall be extended to cover
non-chartered GOCCs to promote uniformity of allowable incentives within the GOCC
Sector.

Section 3. Effective Dates of the CPCS Il. GOCCs that have already
implemented the CPCS | under EO No. 150 may adopt the monthly basic salaries
(MBS) under this Order and the enhanced allowances, benefits, and incentives (ABIs)

retroactive to 01 January 2025, upon receipt of their Authority to Implement (ATI) from
GCG.

The MBS structure and ABls of a GOCC that has not yet implemented the
CPCS | under EO No. 150, and which seeks to implement the CPCS II, shall be made
effective upon issuance of their corresponding ATI from GCG.

Section 4. Non-Diminution of Authorized Salaries. In the implementation of
the CPCS Il, there shall be no diminution in the existing authorized salaries of
incumbent officers and employees of GOCCs. For purposes of this Order, authorized
salaries shall refer to the salary structure that has been duly authorized by the Office
of the President (OP), GCG, and/or by law. An approval of the salary structure from
the GOCC Governing Board alone, shall not be considered as authorization.

Section 5. Compensation System. The existing compensation granted by
GOCCs to its officers and employees, including any approved enhancements made
to the same, shall be standardized in accordance with the CPCS II approved under
this Order. No additional compensation outside the CPCS II shall be granted by the
GOCC Governing Board, unless the same has been endorsed by the Supervising
Agency, recommended by GCG, and approved by the President.

GOCCs under the supervision of OP shall submit their request under this
provision directly to GCG after approval by their respective Governing Boards.
Thereafter, the GCG shall submit its recommendation to OP.

Section 6. Rationalization of the Provident Fund. The CPCS II rates on the
contributions to the Provident Fund shall apply to GOCCs, subject to the rationalization
measures outlined in the CPCS Il.

Section 7.Application of Step Increment. All officers and employees of
GOCCs that have not yet implemented the CPCS | under EO No. 150 shall
automatically start at Step 1 of the prescribed MBS structures in the CPCS II, unless
otherwise provided therein. The progressions in the step increments may be adjusted,
subject to the implementing guidelines to be issued by GCG.

GOCCs that are already implementing the CPCS | under EO No. 150 shall
continue with their salary step progression, subject to the implementing guidelines to
be issued by GCG.

Section 8. Periodic Review of the CPCS. The GCG En Banc shall review the
CPCS three (3) years after its effectivity, and every three (3) years thereafter, taking
into account the performance of GOCCs, their overall contribution to the national
economy, their strategic importance, and the possible erosion in purchasing power
due to inflation and other factors.

Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, the GCG En Banc may recommend specific adjustments to the CPCS II, as may be necessary, for approval of the President.

Section 9. Reports. The GCG shall submit to the President, through the Office
of the Executive Secretary, a bi-annual report that shall include, among others, a
summary of the authorizations issued by GCG for all covered GOCCs and the status
of implementation of this Order.

Section 10. Funding. The implementation of compensation adjustments shall
depend on the financial capability of a GOCC and its corporate operating budget
(COB) as approved by the GOCC Governing Board and DBM.

The amounts required for the implementation of the CPCS II shall be charged
against the GOCC’s Personnel Services appropriations under its approved COB,
provided that a GOCC shall be prohibited to source payment from the following:

a. Loans;
b. Sale of GOCC’s asset/s for the sole purpose of compensation adjustment; and
c. Other schemes analogous to the foregoing.

GOCCs shall not increase their service fees for the purpose of augmenting
deficiencies in the amounts prescribed herein, and neither shall compensation
adjustments adversely affect the implementation of programs/projects, as well as the
attainment of performance targets.

For GOCCs subsidized by the National Government, the amounts required for
the implementation of the CPCS II shall not entail additional subsidy or equity from the
National Treasury.

Section 11. Affordability. GOCCs in Category 1 of the CPCS II that do not
have adequate or sufficient funds to implement the rates thereunder, as may be
determined by GCG, shall partially implement the salary schedule under this Order at
a lower uniform percentage across all positions for every GOCC.

GOCCs in Categories 2 and 3 of the CPCS II that do not have adequate or
sufficient funds to implement the rates thereunder, as may be determined by GCG,
shall adopt the salary schedule of lower tiers or that of Category 1.

Section 12. Mandatory Action and Separation Incentive Pay. Any GOCC
that fails or refuses to implement the CPCS II rates, or the lower amounts provided
under Section 11 as may be applicable, shall undergo a mandatory action and be
reorganized, merged, streamlined, abolished, or privatized pursuant to Section 5(a) of
RA No. 10149, upon recommendation of the GOCC’s Supervising Agency.

All officers and employees who will be affected by the mandatory action in view
of the implementation of the CPCS II shall be granted separation incentive pay (SIP)
using the following formula, unless GCG recommends lower rates to OP:

YEARS OF SERVICE RATES

First 20 years 1.00 x MBS x No. of years
20 years and 1 day to 30 years 1.25 x MBS x No. of years
30 years and 1 day and above 1.50 x MBS x No. of years

“Years of Service” shall be understood as either Government Service or GOCC
Service. For the purpose of computing the applicable early retirement incentive (ERI)
or SIP, the specific years of service to be credited shall depend on the Category and
Tier of the GOCC. In this regard, the GCG shall issue the necessary guidelines for the
implementation of this provision to be submitted to the President for approval.

Section 13. Involuntary Separation and Early Retirement Incentive.
its discretion, to grant ERI to officers and employees who voluntarily elect to be retired,
and SIP to those involuntarily separated from service, in accordance with the rates
provided under Section 12 of this Order, unless adjusted rates are recommended to
and approved by OP. The grant of ERI and SIP under this Order shall be prospective,
and is in addition to retirement or separation benefits under existing laws, such as RA
No. 8291 or the “Government Service Insurance System Act of 1997,” RA No. 8282
or the “Social Security Act of 1997,” or Presidential Decree No. 442 or the “Labor Code
of the Philippines,” as amended, taking into consideration the Constitutional
proscription against double compensation.

The ERI and SIP authorized under this Order shall not be applicable to GOCCs
which may already be entitled to ERI and/or SIP provided by other EOs issued by OP.

Upon a recommended personnel action of a GOCC, whether pursuant to
Section 5(a) of RA No. 10149 or otherwise, the GCG En Banc, may also authorize the
grant of ERI and/or SIP to officers and employees who may qualify. In this regard, the
GCG shall submit, for approval of the President, the relevant guidelines to implement
this provision.

The GCG, as the Implementing Agency of this Order, is hereby authorized to
resolve any question that may arise from this provision.

Section 14. |OS-G Framework. The GCG shall issue, upon approval of the
President, the |OS-G Framework for the GOCC Sector relative to CPCS II. Pending
issuance of the aforementioned I|OS-G Framework, the GCG may refer to the DBM
2022 Index of Occupational Services to determine the proper position titles and for
such other purposes as may be deemed necessary by GCG.

Section 15. Implementing Guidelines. The GCG En Banc is hereby
authorized to issue implementing or clarificatory guidelines as may be necessary to
carry out the objectives of this Order and/or the attached CPCS Il, including, but not
limited to, those relating to affordability, step increments, hiring rates, overtime pay,
night shift differential, merit increases, separation pay programs, and grant of higher
Performance-Based Bonus (PBB) rates for GOCCs under Categories 2 or 3 of CPCS
ll, taking into consideration prevailing practices in the private sector and the guiding
principles provided in the CPCS Il.

The guidelines on the grant of higher PBB rates for GOCCs under Categories
2 or 3 of CPCS II shall be submitted for approval of the President.

The DBM shall provide such relevant assistance to the GCG, as may be
necessary, in the issuance of guidelines on matters pertaining to compensation
adjustments of GOCCs.

Section 16. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order is declared
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid
and subsisting.

Section 17. Repeal. EO No. 150 is hereby repealed. All other orders, rules and
regulations, issuances, or any part thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions
of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 18.Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 16th day of September , in the
Year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By the President: o

PUBLIC 01 T)

IL:

PBBM010040

CPCS Il ATTACHED TO EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 95 (S. 2025)

COMPENSATION AND PoOsiTION CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM II FOR THE
GOCCs CovERED BY REPUBLIC AcT No.10149

I. GUIDING PRINCIPLES. This Compensation and Position Classification System
(CPCS) II shall be implemented, enforced, and interpreted in accordance with the
following guiding principles:

1. The CPCS II has been designed to provide government-owned or -controlled
corporations (GOCCs) with adequate operational autonomy and flexibility
towards ensuring efficient and effective implementation of a total
compensation framework within their organizations to ensure that:

(a) The adoption of reasonable, justifiable and appropriate remuneration
schemes prevents or deters the granting of unconscionable and/or
excessive remuneration packages;

(b) The total compensation framework shall generally be comparable with the
private sector doing comparable work in order to attract, engage, and
retain the right talent and in compliance with prevailing laws on minimum
wages;

(c) The compensation frameworks adopted by GOCCs shall operate within
their affordability limits and sustainability capacities, and in accordance
with their GOCC classification as provided herein;

(d) There shall be adherence to the principle of equal pay for work of equal
value, with due regard for other verifiable factors such as the sector where
the GOCCs are classified; and

(e) The rewards system supports and encourages performance-driven,
productive, and efficient organizations.

2. The CPCS II shall be updated periodically by the Governance Commission for
GOCCs (GCG) based on the following parameters:

(a) A review of the GOCC compensation rates every three (3) years, without
prejudice to the provisions of the Executive Order (EO) to which this CPCS
ll is attached;

(b) The performance of the GOCC and its overall contribution to the national
economy;

(c) Drastic changes in market or business environment; and
(d) Implementation of new compensation schemes in National Government
Agencies.
Il. DEFINITION OF TERMS.

“Authorized Allowances, Benefits, and Incentives (ABls)” refer to the financial or
non-financial compensation that has been duly authorized by the President of the
Philippines and/or by law. An approval from the GOCC Governing Board alone,

regardless if the GOCC is chartered or non-chartered, shall not be considered as
authorization.

“Authorized Salaries” refer to the salary structure that has been duly authorized by
the President of the Philippines, GCG, and/or by law. An approval of the salary
structure from the GOCC Governing Board alone, regardless if the GOCC is
chartered or non-chartered, shall not be considered as authorization.

“Board of Directors/Trustees” or “Governing Board” refers to the collegial body that
exercises the corporate powers, conducts all business and controls or holds all
properties of a GOCC, whether it be formally referred to as the “Board of
Directors,” “Board of Trustees” or some other term in its Charter, Articles of
Incorporation or By-Laws.

“Charter” refers to a law or statute creating a chartered GOCC and defining its
franchise.

“Chartered GOCC’ refers to a GOCC, including Government Financial Institutions,
created and vested with functions by a special law.

“Chief Executive Officer (CEO)” refers to the highest-ranking corporate executive,
who could be named as the President or the General Manager, Chief Operating
Officer, Executive Director, or Administrator of a GOCC.

“Commercial GOCCs” refer to GOCCs that undertake operations or provide
services that compete with the private sector. Such commercial activities can
include, but are not limited to:

a. Design and conceptualization of the products/services;

b. Manufacturing and production of the products/services;

c. Sales;

d. Logistics involved in delivering the products/services to the end customer;
e. Customer service;

f. Property development and management;

g. Banking operations; and

h. Extractive industries (e.g., oil, gas).

“Collective Negotiation Agreement (CNA)” or “Collective Bargaining Agreement
(CBA) refers to the negotiated contract between an accredited employees’
organization representing a negotiating unit and the employer/management
concerning terms and conditions of employment and improvements thereof that
are not fixed by law.

“Employee” when used with reference to a person in the public service, includes
any person in the service of the Government or any of its agencies, divisions,
subdivisions, or instrumentalities.

“Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) Employees” refer to employees holding plantilla
positions in a GOCC.

“GCG or the Governance Commission’ refers to the lead Implementing Agency of
the CPCS, including this CPCS Il, for the GOCC Sector.

“GCG En Banc’ refers to the collegial body composed of the GCG Chairperson
and two (2) Commissioners, and the Secretaries of the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) and the Department of Finance, that exercises regulatory,
supervisory, and policy-making functions for GOCCs covered by Republic Act
(RA) No. 10149 or the “GOCC Governance Act of 2011.”

“Government Financial Institutions (GFls)” refer to financial institutions or
corporations in which the Government directly or indirectly owns majority OF the
capital stock and which are either: (1) registered with or directly supervised by the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP); or (2) collecting or transacting funds or
contributions from the public and places them in financial instruments or aSsets
such as deposits, loans, bonds and equity including, but not limited to, the
Government Service Insurance System and the Social Security System.

“Government. Instrumentalities with Corporate Powers (GICPs)/Government
Corporate Entities (GCEs)” refer to instrumentalities or agencies Of the
Government, which are neither corporations nor agencies integrated within the
Departmental Framework, but vested by law with special functions or jurisdiction,
endowed with some if not all corporate powers, administering special funds, and
enjoying operational autonomy usually through a charter including, but not limited
to, the following: the Manila International Airport Authority, Philippine Ports
Authority, Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation, Metropolitan Waterworks and
Sewerage System, Laguna Lake Development Authority, Philippine Fisheries
Development Authority, Bases Conversion and Development Authority, Cebu Port
Authority, Cagayan de Oro Port Authority, San Fernando Port Authority, Local
Water Utilities Administration, and Asian Productivity Organization.

“Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporation (GOCC)” refers to any agency
organized as a stock or non-stock corporation, vested with functions relating to
public needs whether governmental or proprietary in nature, and owned by the
Government of the Republic of the Philippines directly or through its
instrumentalities either wholly or, where applicable, as in the case of stock
corporations, to the extent of at least a majority of its outstanding capital stock:
Provided, however, That for purposes of the CPCS Il, the term “GOCC” shall
include GICP/GCE and GFI as defined herein.

“Job Grade” refers to the numerical representation of the relative internal values
of jobs in a GOCC’s plantilla in accordance with the CPCS attached to EO No.
150 (s. 2021).

“Monthly Basic Salary (MBS)” refers to the amount actually received per month by
an officer or employee and determined in accordance with the applicable salary
structure, policies, and guidelines of the CPCS, including this CPCS Il.

“National Government’ refers to the entire machinery of the central government,
as distinguished from the different forms of local governments.

“Non-chartered GOCC” refers to a GOCC organized and operating under the
applicable Corporation Code of the Philippines.

“Non-commercial GOCCs” refer to GOCCs whose primary operations do not
compete with the private sector, such as:

a. Non-government business enterprises, as determined by the Commission on

Audit;

b. GICPs;

c. Those organized for cultural, educational, civic, scientific, or charitable
purposes;

d. Those with social protection objectives;

e. Those which have privatized operations and primarily generate revenue
through collection of concession fees;

f. Those which primarily derive business income from activities undertaken for
developmental purposes (e.g., interest on investments, lease or sale of
properties);

Those which are conduits for sector development;
Marketing arms of the National Government to support its programs;

i. Those which primarily generate revenue through fees borne out of their
regulatory powers; and

j. Registered as non-stock, non-profit corporations, including foundations.

“Officer” refers to a person whose duties, not being of a clerical or manual nature,
involve the exercise of discretion in the performance of the functions of the
Government. When used with reference to a person having authority to do a
particular act or perform a particular function in the exercise of governmental
power, “officer” includes any government employee, agent, or body having
authority to do the act or exercise that function.

“Parent GOCC” refers to a GOCC that owns, holds, or controls, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, at least a majority of the
outstanding capital stock of the subsidiary.

“Pay Grade (PG)” refers to the numerical representation of the relative internal
values of jobs in a GOCC’s plantilla. The PG will dictate the MBS of said jobs
based on the Salary Structure under this CPCS II.

“Supervising Agency’ refers to a government agency to which a GOCC is attached
for purposes of policy and program coordination and for general supervision.

“Total Compensation Framework (TCF)” refers to all financial and non-financial
compensation components such as basic salaries, ABIs, and variable pay.

COVERAGE. The CPCS II shall apply to all GOCCs, including their subsidiaries,
which are covered by RA No. 10149.

The CPCS II shall apply to all positions on regular, contractual, or casual basis,
now existing or hereafter created in GOCCs, whether chartered or non-chartered,

and whether previously covered by, or previously exempted from, RA No. 6758 or
the “Compensation and Position Classification Act of 1989.”

IV. ExcLusions. The CPCS II shall not apply to the BSP, state universities and
colleges, cooperatives, local water districts, economic zone authorities, and
research institutions which are expressly outside the coverage of RA No. 10149.

GOCCs with approved dispositive actions such as merger (exclusively referring
to the GOCC to be absorbed), consolidation, abolition, deactivation, privatization,
or such other related action as determined by the GCG shall not be covered by
the CPCS II. The GCG shall have the authority to formulate the appropriate
compensation for GOCCs falling under this paragraph in accordance with
Section 1 of the EO on CPCS ll.

Excluded also from the coverage of the CPCS II are those individuals hired by
GOCCs without employer-employee relationships and paid from non-Personnel
Services appropriations/budgets, as follows:

(a) Consultants and experts hired to perform specific activities or
services with expected outputs;

(b) Laborers hired through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid
on piecework basis;

(c) Student workers and apprentices; and

(d) Those whose services are engaged through job orders,
contracts of service, or others similarly situated.

Finally, members of the Governing Board, except for the CEO, are likewise
excluded from the CPCS Il.

V. GOCC CLASSIFICATION UNDER THE CPCS Il. All GOCCs will be categorized and
graded under the CPCS II with due regard to the financial capability of the GOCC,
complexity which will determine the GOCC grade required for the organization to
operate and deliver its mandate/s will also be considered to determine the GOCCs’
classification under the CPCS ll. If circumstances so warrant, the GCG may review
the category, tier, and/or GOCC grade of all GOCCs that have already
implemented the CPCS, whether under EO No. 150 or this CPCS Il. Until the GCG
En Banc provides otherwise, the following rules shall apply for the classification of
GOCCs for purposes of the CPCS II:

4. GOCC CATEGORIZATION — GOCCs shall be categorized based on their nature
of operations and financial viability to sustain their operations/activities. The
GOCCs shall be categorized based on the following descriptors:

CATEGORY DESCRIPTORS

Category 1 | GOCCs that are not self-sustaining either because:

CATEGORY DESCRIPTORS

e They rely on National Government subsidies to fund
their day-to-day operations; and/or

e They have an average net loss for the last three (3)
years, regardless whether they receive subsidies or not.

Further, at the time of initial CPCS Il implementation,
GOCCs that failed to submit the required information on
their financials and FTE employees will also be included in
Category 1.

GOCCs that are self-sustaining through sources of funds

Category 2 generated from non-commercial activities.

GOCCs that are self-sustaining through sources of funds
Category 3 | generated from commercial activities, with products and
services that directly compete with the private sector.

2. GOCC Grapinc — Each GOCC shall be classified by its GOCC grade based
on the weighted average grade in these three (3) factors:

(a) Company Financials — 60%
(b) Complexity — 30%
(c) Number of FTE Employees — 10%
GOCC grading is the foundation of the job evaluation process for each GOCC.

The GOCC grade sets a cap to the number of grades in the organization and
determines the grade of the CEO.

Newly created GOCCs shall be subject to the guidelines to be issued by the
GCG En Banc.

2.1. Company Financials — GOCCs shall have a grade based on the average
relevant financial indicators over the last three (3) years as reported in
their audited financial statements and DBM and/or Board-approved
corporate operating budgets:

GOCC GRADE FINANCIALS (P)
16 < 3.975 billion
17 > 3.975 billion and < 7.95 billion
18 > 7.95 billion and < 26.5 billion
19 > 26.5 billion and < 53 billion
20 > 53 billion and < 106 billion

GOCC GRADE FINANCIALS (P)
21 > 106 billion and < 265 billion
22 > 265 billion and < 530 billion
23 > 530 billion and < 2.65 trillion
24 > 2.65 trillion and < 5.3 trillion
25 > 5.3 trillion

In consideration of the financial viability and source of funds to sustain an
organization’s full operations and activities, the financial indicators
applicable for each GOCC shall be dependent on the Category of the
GOCC. The three (3)-year financials will be averaged based on the
following formula for each category:

CATEGORY FORMULA
Category 1 Operating expense plus operating subsidies.
Operating expense (plus investment income, if any).
Category 2 Program subsidies will not be included in the computation
of financials of GOCCs under this category.
Category 3 Annual revenue or operating expense plus annual revenue
minus statutory contributions.

2.2. Complexity —- GOCCs shall have a grade for its complexity based on the
fixed grade equivalent of its categorization:

GOCC GRADE CATEGORY
16 Category 1
18 Category 2
20 Category 3

2.3. Number of FTE Employees — GOCCs shall have a grade based on the
number of FTE Employees as follows:

GOCC GRADE No. OF FTE EMPLOYEES
16 Less than 91
17 91 to 240
18 241 to 620
19 621 to 1,600
20 1,601 to 4,100

GOCC GRADE No. OF FTE EMPLOYEES
21 4,101 to 10,600
22 10,601 to 27,500
23 27,501 to 75,000
24 75,001 to 200,000
25 More than 200,000

2.4. Official GOCC Grade — The GOCC shall have a weighted average grade
based on Chapter V, Sections 2.1 to 2.3 to derive the official grade of the
GOCC. A sample computation is provided as follows:

COMPONENT WEIGHT GRADE pea
Financials 60% 16 9.60
Complexity 30% 18 5.40

FTE Employees 10% 18 1.80
GOCC Final Grade 17

The resulting weighted average grade shall be rounded off to get the final
GOCC Grade under the CPCS which shall be capped at Grade 20.

The conversion of the GOCC grade into the new salary tables will be
included in the guidelines that will be issued by the GCG.

VI. COMPENSATION SYSTEM. The total compensation granted to officers and
employees for services rendered shall hereinafter be limited to the following:

(a) Basic Salaries, including Step Increments
(b) ABIs

(c) Variable Pay (Performance-Based Bonus)

Provided, That the CPCS II does not cover indirect compensation that is not specified herein and is regulated under existing laws such as, but not limited to: life and retirement insurance benefits, employee compensation insurance, health insurance, and Pag-IBIG Fund benefits; Provided further, That the GCG En Banc may issue clarificatory guidelines relative to the aforementioned indirect compensation as may be necessary.

All GOCCs shall migrate to the rationalized and standardized TCF that shall be
implemented for their officers and employees in accordance with the basic
salaries, including step increments, ABIs, and variable pay provided herein. The
TCF to be adopted by GOCCs that have not yet migrated into the CPCS under EO
No. 150 and seek to implement the CPCS II shall be allowed upon authorization
of the GCG based on the GCG-certified GOCC Classification under Chapter V,
and the job evaluation of all positions of the GOCC based on the Index of
Occupational Services, Position Titles, and Job Grades for GOCCs in accordance
with Section 14 of the EO on CPCS Il.

A. BASIC SALARIES, INCLUDING STEP INCREMENTS

1. Basic Salaries — The MBS provided under the CPCS II is the maximum
amount that the GOCC can grant to its officers and employees which shall be
differentiated for Category 1 and Categories 2 and 3. A lower uniform
percentage of the prescribed rates herein may be implemented by the GOCC
based on its own implementation scheme of the CPCS Il, provided that such
scheme is based on:

(a) Affordability and sustainability of the GOCC to continually
implement the CPCS rates for its officers and employees;

(b) Provision of gradual annual salary increase with the salary
rates of the CPCS Il as the cap, as authorized by the GOCC
Governing Board; and/or

(c) Flexibility of the GOCC to provide its own salary tranches
such that the amounts in the salary structure herein shall be
the amount of the GOCC’s final tranche and shall only be
applied on the third year of implementation.

1.1. Salary Structure — There are a total of six (6) salary structures which
GOCCs can implement depending on their profitability and sustainability
of operations. Categorization and Tiering shall then be applied for
GOCCs to adopt the appropriate structure that is within their financial
capacity.

1.1.1. By Categorization -GOCCs under Category 1 shall follow one
structure and shall not be classified further into Tiers.

GOCCs under Categories 2 and 3 shall have a total of five (5)
structures wherein the applicable structure shall be based on the
Tiers provided herein.

1.1.2. By Tiering—GOCCs under Categories 2 and 3 shall be subjected
to Tiering which shall determine the corresponding salary
structure that the GOCC can implement based on the following
financials using the same formula provided under Chapter V,

Section 2.1:
TIERS FINANCIALS (P)
Tier 1 Between 1.98 billion to 3.97 billion
Tier 2 2 3.97 billion
Tier 3 = 20.32 billion
Tier 4 2 36.6 billion
Tier 5 2 53 billion

All GOCCs under Categories 2 and 3 with financials falling at
?1.98B and below will automatically follow the pay structure for a
Category 1 GOCC.

The GCG En Banc may adjust or set an appropriate Tier for a
GOCC by reason of its strategic importance to national economy
and development; Provided, That the GOCC’s financial viability to
sustain its operations/activities is considered and that the source
of funds for the adjustment shall not be subsidized by the National

Government or the parent GOCC, as may be applicable.

1.1.3. The MBS structure for a Category 1 GOCC shall be as follows:
Pay Category 1

1.1.4. The MBS structures for a Category 2 or 3 GOCC shall be as
follows:
Pay Categories 2 and 3 - Tier 1

Pay Categories 2 and 3 - Tier 2
i 25,637 | 25,710 | 25,782 | 25,855 | 25,927 | 26,000 | 26,072 | 26,145
Pay Categories 2 and 3 - Tier 3

Pay Categories 2 and 3 - Tier 4

Pay Categories 2 and 3 - Tier 5
t 27,324 | 27,401 | 27,479 | 27,556 | 27,633 | 27,711 | 27,788 | 27,865

The GCG shall issue an Authority to Implement (ATI) the CPCS II to each GOCC
for the conversion of their existing Job Grades (pursuant to the CPCS attached
to EO No. 150) into the salary compensation framework under this CPCS II.

2. Step Increments — Officers and employees of a GOCC may progress from
Step 1 to Step 8 within the particular PG of the position based on the
following:

e Meritorious performance based on a Performance Management System
approved by the Civil Service Commission (CSC) for chartered GOCCs and
by the Board for non-chartered GOCCs;

e Length of service in accordance with the rules and regulations to be
promulgated by the Governance Commission; and

e Adjustments for a specific person and/or position as approved by the
GOCC Governing Board and recommended by the Supervising Agency of
the GOCC to the GCG for final review and approval shall only be allowed
once and within six (6) months from the issuance of the ATI to the GOCC.

Guidelines for the grant of step increment may use as reference the rules and
regulations issued by the DBM.

2.1. For incumbents of GOCCs which have not yet implemented the
CPCS under EO No. 150 — Upon implementation of the CPCS Il, all
incumbent officers and employees of GOCCs shall be assigned to Step
1. If the current salary of the GOCC personnel is higher than the Step 1
rate of his/her assigned PG, his/her MBS shall be in accordance with the
following rules:

e If the current salary falls between two (2) Steps of the assigned PG,
the higher Step shall be granted to the personnel.

e Ifthe current salary is already above Step 8 of the assigned PG, such
current salary shall be retained as the MBS of the personnel and there

shall be no increase or diminution in the same.

2.2. For newly hired and newly promoted officers and employees -— All
officers and employees of GOCCs who are hired or promoted after the
implementation of the CPCS II shall be assigned to Step 1 of the PG
assigned to his/her position.

2.3. GOCCs that are already implementing the CPCS under EO No. 150
shall continue with their existing salary step progression, subject to the
implementing guidelines to be issued by the GCG.

B. ALLOWANCES, BENEFITS, AND INCENTIVES

1. Standard Allowances and Benefits — These refer to allowances and benefits
that are given across-the-board to officers and employees based on the
prescribed rates, guidelines, and regulations to be promulgated by the GCG
pursuant to the applicable standardized compensation laws and issuances for
National Government Agencies. These shall be limited to the following:

1.1. Year-End Bonus (YEB) — The YEB shall be granted annually based on
the one (1) month basic salary, subject to the eligibility conditions under
the applicable guidelines to be released by the GCG.

1.2. Cash Gift — Cash gift shall be granted annually as a year-end benefit.

1.3. Uniform/Clothing Allowance (UCA) — The UCA shall be granted
annually to provide the required proper uniform/clothing to employees.

1.4. Personnel Economic Relief Allowance (PERA) - The PERA shall be
granted monthly to augment the compensation of government personnel
against the rising cost of living.

1.5. Medical Allowance — All GOCCs may provide an annual medical
allowance to each qualified employee with the following maximum
allowable amounts:

° Category 1 - 7,000.00, or the amount provided for National Government Agencies, whichever may be higher;

. Categories 2 and 3 -

o Tier 1 - 10,000.00
Tier 2 - 15,000.00
Tier 3 - ®20,000.00
Tier 4 - ®27,000.00
Tier 5 - ®35,000.00

oooo°o

The grant of the medical allowance shall be in accordance with the
guidelines to be established by the GCG using as reference the
applicable standardized procedures and issuances for National
Government Agencies.

2. Specific-Purpose Allowances and Benefits — These refer to allowances
and benefits given to officers and employees in GOCCs under specific
conditions and situations related to the actual performance of work. The
prescribed rates, guidelines, and regulations to be promulgated by the GCG
shall be based on the applicable standardized compensation laws and
issuances for National Government Agencies. These shall be limited to the
following:

2.1. Hazard Pay — This is a compensation given to employees who, in the
actual performance of their duties and responsibilities, are actually
exposed to hazardous situations, such as, but not limited to, assignment
in strife-torn or embattled areas, distressed or isolated stations, prison
camps, mental hospitals, leprosaria, radiation-exposed
clinics/laboratories/workshops, disease-infested areas and areas
declared under state of calamity or emergency which pose occupational
risks or perils to life.

2.2. Compensation for Overtime Work — This shall serve as the
compensation for services rendered beyond the required forty (40) hours
of work in a week and those performed on rest days, holidays, and
non-working days. This can either be in the form of Compensatory
Time-Off or Overtime Pay.

2.3. Night Shift Differential Pay — This is a compensation premium given to
employees whose regular working hours fall within a specified period of
time.

2.4. Honorarium — This is a form of compensation that may be given for
services rendered beyond the regular duties and responsibilities of the
positions they occupy.

2.5. Special Counsel Allowance — This is an allowance given to
lawyer-personnel assigned in the legal office of GOCCs for their
appearance or attendance to court! hearings.

2.6. Representation and Transportation Allowances (RATA) — This is a
collective term for two distinct but complementary monthly allowances:
Representation Allowance (RA) and Transportation Allowance (TA). This
is given to officials of GOCCs down to Heads of Division or their

' Court as used in this section shall pertain to those under Judiciary.

21;

2.8.

2.9.

equivalent for their transportation and representation expenses while in
the actual performance of their duties and responsibilities.

Subsistence Allowance — This is an allowance given to employees
who, by nature of their duties and responsibilities, have to make their
services available in their places of work even during mealtimes.

Magna Carta Benefits for Public Health Workers (PHWs) — The
PHWs, as defined in RA No. 7305 or the “Magna Carta of Public Health
Workers’ are entitled to the benefits provided under the said law.

Magna Carta Benefits for Scientists, Engineers, Researchers, and
Other Science and Technology (S&T) Personnel — Employees
considered as S&T personnel as defined in RA No. 8439 or the “Magna
Carta for Scientists, Engineers, Researchers, and other S&T Personnel
in the Government” are entitled to the benefits provided under the said
law.

2.10.Magna Carta Benefits for Public Social Workers (PSWs) — All

registered PSWs as defined in RA No. 9433 or the “Magna Carta for
Public Social Workers” and employed in government service are entitled
to the benefits provided under the said law.

. Incentives — These refer to rewards granted for services for, and contributions
to, the GOCC. The prescribed rates, guidelines, and regulations of the items
herein shall be promulgated by the GCG based on the applicable standardized
compensation laws and issuances for National Government Agencies. These
shall be limited to the following:

3.1.

3.2.

3.3.

3.4.

3:5.

Loyalty Award — This is an incentive in recognition of loyalty to
government service.

Anniversary Bonus - This is an incentive given during the milestone
years of the GOCC as authorized by Administrative Order No. 263 (s.

Mid-Year Bonus - This is an incentive given to qualified officers and
employees equivalent to one (1) month basic salary.

Productivity Enhancement Incentive — This is a cash incentive meant
to improve the productivity of officers and employees.

CNA Incentive — This is an incentive given to officials and employees of
GOCCs with approved and successfully implemented CNAs_ in
recognition of their efforts in accomplishing performance targets at a
lesser cost.

The grant of the CNA Incentive shall be based on the guidelines to be
established by the Governance Commission, using as reference the
guidelines released by the DBM and/or the CSC.

3.6. Program on Awards and Incentives for Service Excellence
(PRAISE) — This is a program to provide monetary and/or non-monetary
incentives to recognize, acknowledge, and reward productive, creative,
innovative, and ethical behavior of employees.

Chartered GOCCs shall follow the guidelines issued by the CSC for the
establishment and maintenance of the PRAISE Program. Non-chartered
GOCCs may opt to adopt the PRAISE Program, provided that they
establish their own program using as reference the guidelines under
CSC issuances, and provided further, that the rates of monetary and/or
non-monetary incentives shall not exceed the rates under the CSC
issuances.

4. Additional Allowances, Benefits, and Incentives — Upon receipt of the
authorization from the GCG (i.e., the ATI) to implement the CPCS Il, all the
ABls of GOCC officers and employees, whether they are incumbents or new
hires, shall be limited to those provided under the CPCS Il. All additional
compensation outside of the CPCS II shall be approved by the Governing
Board, endorsed by the Supervising Agency, recommended by the GCG, and
approved by the President of the Philippines.

All orders, issuances, and memoranda that are contrary or inconsistent to the
provisions and grants provided under CPCS II shall automatically be repealed
upon implementation of the CPCS Il.

5. Discontinued Allowances, Benefits, and Incentives — The authorized ABls
currently being received by incumbents of GOCCs that are implementing
compensation frameworks different from what is provided in the CPCS under
EO No. 150 or the CPCS II shall be paid the three (3)-year present value of
such authorized ABls that will be discontinued under and upon implementation
of the CPCS II, using the following formula:

Total authorized excess ABIs for the first year

3 year present value = 10220

Total authorized excess ABIs for the second year

Total authorized excess ABIs for the third year

Only ABlIs that are duly authorized by the President of the Philippines and/or
by law shall be included in the computation of ABIs to be paid out to each

incumbent, subject to availability of the corporate funds and financial viability
of the GOCC.

This provision shall only be applicable to GOCCs that will migrate to the CPCS
ll after the effectivity of this Order.

C. VARIABLE PAY OR PERFORMANCE-BASED BONUS

1. Performance-Based Bonus (PBB) - This is a cash bonus given to qualified
officers and employees in recognition of their contribution to the
accomplishment of the GOCC’s overall targets and commitments.

1.1. Coverage — All officers and employees of GOCCs who occupy regular,
casual, or contractual positions with employer-employee relationship.

1.2. Rules and Regulations

Eligibility Requirements for GOCCs

1.2.1.1. Only GOCCs that have achieved a weighted-average
score of at least 90% in their Performance Scorecard for
the applicable year.

1.2.1.2. _GOCCs shall satisfy other conditions set by the GCG for
the grant of PBB.

Eligibility Requirements for individual officers and employees

1.2.2.1. Officers and employees must have rendered an
aggregate period of at least nine (9) months of
government service for the applicable year to be entitled
to the full grant of PBB. Those who do not meet the nine
(9)-month service requirement but have served for at
least three (3) months shall be entitled to PBB on a
pro-rata basis.

1.2.2.2. Officers and employees shall satisfy other conditions set
by the GCG to be entitled to the grant of PBB.

PBB rates — The rate of PBB is dependent on the performance of
an officer or employee, his/her MBS as of 31 December of the
applicable year, and the actual length of service he/she has
rendered.

Percentile PBB as % of MBS
Top: Maximum 10% 65.0%
Next: Maximum 25% 57.5%
Remaining: Minimum 65% 50.0%

All qualified officers and employees shall be entitled to PBB not
lower than 5,000.00 and not exceeding 65% of their individual

MBS as of 31 December of the applicable year. The percentage of
PBB to be paid to officers and employees based on their length of
service shall be as follows:

Length of Service % of PBB
At least 9 months 100%

1.2.4. Grant of higher PBB rate - GOCCs categorized either as Category
2 or 3 under the CPCS II may grant to a specific incumbent a higher
PBB rate of up to 150% of the incumbent's MBS, subject to the
approval of the GOCC Governing Board, endorsement of the
Supervising Agency of the GOCC, and final approval of the GCG.

1.3. To ensure consistency with the policies and guiding principles enshrined
in EO No. 61 (s. 2024), the grant of PBB shall be in accordance with the
guidelines to be established by the GCG, using as reference the
applicable standardized compensation laws and issuances for National
Government Agencies. In this regard, the GCG shall submit to the Office
of the President the guidelines for the grant of PBB.

VII. OTHER ENTITLEMENTS. The entitlements herein are indirect compensation and/or
are outside the TCF of GOCCs. These entitlements shall be granted based on the
prescribed rates, guidelines, and regulations to be promulgated by the GCG using
as reference the applicable standardized compensation laws and issuances for
National Government Agencies. These shall be limited to the following:

1.

Communication Allowance — Officers and employees of GOCCs may be
paid communication expenses incurred for the performance of their official
duties and responsibilities.

Leave Credits — All officers and employees of GOCCs, whether permanent,
temporary, casual, or contractual, who are employed with an
employer-employee relationship are entitled to earn leave credits.

Monetization of Leave Credits — All officers and employees of GOCCs

entitled to earn leave credits shall be allowed to monetize their unused leave
credits.

4. Terminal Leave Benefits — Officers and employees who retire, voluntarily
resign, or are separated from service shall be entitled to the commutation of
their leave credits.

5. Rehabilitation Privilege — Officers and employees who sustained wounds
and/or injuries while in the performance of official duties may avail of
rehabilitation privilege.

6. Cost of Participation in Conferences, Seminars, etc. — Officers and
employees may participate in conventions, seminars, conferences, symposia,
and similar gatherings, subject to the allowable cost for the participation.

7. Official Vehicles and Transport — Government motor transportation may be used by the personnel of GOCCs for official business.

8. Allowances for Local and Foreign Travel — This is an allowance for official
local and foreign travel of GOCC officers and employees.

9. Cultural and Athletic Activities — This is an annual authorized expense for
the purchase of uniforms or costumes and other related expenses in the
conduct of cultural and athletic activities.

10. Quarters Privileges — This is a benefit for GOCC officers or employees
assigned or transferred to a place other than their domicile or residence and
who do not own houses or rooms therein, by virtue of the GOCC’s policies on
reshuffling or rotation.

11. Relocation Allowance — This is an annual authorized expense meant to cover
expenses incidental to the transfer or assignment of GOCC officers or
employees due to internal policies on reshuffling or rotation.

12. Extraordinary and Miscellaneous Expenses (EME) — An annual authorized
expense for specified officials and those of equivalent rank occupying key
positions in GOCCs in recognition of the need to grant some form of expense
to enable them to meet various financial demands of their incumbency in their
positions. An annual miscellaneous expense is also authorized for each of the
offices under the specified officials and their equivalent ranks who are entitled
to EME.

Vill. PROVIDENT FuND (PF). The PF of GOCCs shall be in accordance with the
following:

CATEGORY RATIONALIZATION OF PF

e PF shall be subjected to DBM Budget Circular
No. 2008-3, or any subsequent issuances
thereof, provided that the employer’s share
shall be limited to 10%.

e The employer’s share shall be limited to 10%.

e The employee’s share shall be at a minimum

Category 1

Categories 2 and 3

? Rules, Regulations and Procedure on the Establishment and Administration of Provident Funds in the Philippine Government.

Xl.

CATEGORY RATIONALIZATION OF PF

rate of 3%. Any rate above 3% is subject to
written approval of the concerned employee.

The conditions on GOCCs with existing PF shall also be in accordance with the
following rationalization measures:

e GOCCs with current PF employer's share that is lower than the maximum of
10% shall have to request for approval from the President of the Philippines
should they intend to increase such employer's share. The request should
include a computation of the financial impact of the proposed increase in the
PF employer's share on the GOCC, approved by the Governing Board, and
endorsed by the Supervising Agency to the GCG for review and
recommendation to the President.

e GOCCs with current PF employer’s share that is higher than the maximum of
10% shall be limited to up to the applicable maximum rate listed above.

e GOCCs may choose to liquidate their existing PF and pay out their member
employees if they are not amenable to the new PF rates.

e Those GOCCs that intend to set up a PF shall request for approval from the
Office of the President, provided that the new PF is subject to the
rationalization of PF under the CPCS II.

e GOCCs with financials falling under ®1.98 Billion shall follow the PF rates for
Category 1.

. IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE OF THE CPCS II ABIS. GOCCs that have implemented

the CPCS under EO No. 150 may implement the enhanced ABls under this
CPCS II retroactive to 01 January 2025, upon receipt of their ATI from GCG.

GOCCs that have not yet implemented the CPCS under EO No. 150 shall
implement prospectively the ABls under this CPCS II, upon issuance of their
corresponding ATIs.

GUIDELINES PENDING THE ISSUANCE OF THE CPCS II GUIDELINES. Pending the
issuance of the applicable implementing guidelines by the GCG, GOCCs shall
use existing GCG, DBM, and CSC issuances for the rules, regulations, and,
whenever applicable, the rates for the grant of the ABls provided herein.

UPDATES ON RULES AND REGULATIONS. The GCG may issue updates on any rules and regulations implementing the CPCS II, and/or new guidelines on the CPCS II, as may be deemed necessary.