MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 339

REQUIRING ALL GOVERNMENT ENTITIES TO PURCHASE A RESERVE SUPPLY OF OIL PRODUCTS FOR POSSIBLE EMERGENCY USE

Upon recommendation of the National Emergency Commission and pursuant to the authority vested in me by Commonwealth Act No. 600, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, do hereby direct that the following regulations be observed by all departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Government in purchasing oil products for use in case of a possible emergency:

1. All government entities shall immediately provide for at least a 4-month reserve supply of gasoline, lubricating oil, grease, kerosene and diesel oil which can be readily accomplished by requisitioning these supplies in tin cans and storing them at safe and convenient places. In the case of oil products for lighthouses, a one-year reserve supply shall be required and properly stored.

2. In addition to providing a 4-month reserve supply of the above mentioned oil product, all government entities concerned shall continue to purchase such oil products as are necessary to meet their current requirements and hold their reserve supply until an actual emergency occurs or no new supplies can be obtained from the local oil companies. However, whenever current supplies are purchased, they should be placed in storage and an equal amount of the reserve supply made available for consumption, which procedure will prevent possible loss through deterioration of containers and at the same time keep the reserve supply intact for emergency use.

All orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Baguio this 3rd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Orders Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.