OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES WASHINGTON, D. C.

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 7-W

CREATING A POST-WAR PLANNING BOARD

WHEREAS the wanton invasion of the Philippines by Japanese armed forces, together with the subsequent military occupation of the nation by the enemy, have disrupted the normal development of peaceful progress; and

WHEREAS the problems of relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Philippines after the Japanese are driven out will be great and manifold, and will require lengthy study and careful planning; and

WHEREAS it appears necessary and desirable that such study and planning – and, wherever possible, preparatory action – be carried out at once in the interest of the people of the Philippines;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create and constitute a Posts-War Planning Board whose function are hereunder detailed:

1. To study and recommend plans for relief of the population immediately upon reoccupation of the Philippines, and to formulate proposals for the obtaining of such supplies as may be required for his purpose, and for the restoration of public and private property.

2. To study and recommend plans for the rapid rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Philippines economy, including agricultural, trade, industry, shipping, public works, education, public health and nutrition, maid the new condition that will exist after the defeat of the axis.

3. To study the post-war trade and other relationships between the Government of the Philippine Republic and other governments, with particular reference to the United States and to the neighbours of the Philippines in the Far East.

4. To study and recommend plans for the security of the Philippines after the defeat of Japan.

5. And, in general, to survey, collect data on, and analyze all post-war problems of the Philippines and to recommend plans and programs for the wise solution of these problems.

The Post-War Planning Board shall consist of: Hon. SerGio Osmeña, Vice President of the Philippines, Chairman; and Hon. Joaquin M. Elizalde, Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States; Hon. Andres Soriano, Secretary of Finance; Basilio Valdes, Secretary of National Defense; and Hon. Jaime Hernandez, Auditor General, members.  The board shall prepare such rules and regulations for its operations as may be necessary.  It shall have the authority, with the approval of the corresponding head of chief, to obtain the assistance of officers or members of any department, bureau, or office of the Government which may consider necessary for the proper performance of its duties.  The Board shall appoint and have a secretary who shall also act as its administrative officer.

The Board, within the limits of such funds as may be created or appropriated for the purpose, may employ the necessary personnel and make provisions for necessary supplies, facilities, travel and services.  The Chairman and members of the Board shall serve without compensation in such capacity.

Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America, this fifteenth day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred forty-three, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eighth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1943). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-w – 111]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.