MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 387

FIXING THE SCHEDULE OF BURIAL EXPENSES IN CASE OF DEATH FROM INJURIES RECEIVED OR SICKNESS CONTRACTED IN PERFORMANCE OF DUTY

For the purpose of uniformity, it is hereby ordered that the burial expenses of a person in the Philippine civil service, when allowed, except when otherwise specifically provided for by law, be fixed with the approval of the corresponding head of department in an amount which shall not exceed the following:

(a) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of five hundred pesos or less per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed sixty pesos;

(b) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than five hundred pesos per annum, but not exceeding one thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed eighty pesos;

(c) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than one thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding two thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one hundred pesos;

(d) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than two thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding three thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one hundred and twenty-five pesos;

(e) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than three thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding four thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one hundred and fifty pesos;

(f) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than four thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding five thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed one hundred and seventy-five pesos;

(g) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than five thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding six thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed two hundred pesos; and

(h) For an officer or employee receiving a salary of more than six thousand pesos per annum, reasonable burial expenses of not to exceed two hundred and fifty pesos.

Any officer or employee, whose compensation is fixed at other than the per annum basis, may be granted the sum for burial expenses allowable for that receiving compensation of the corresponding per annum basis.

Done at the City of Manila, this 18th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Orders Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.