MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 181

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SANTIAGO, ISABELA, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF CORDON

Whereas the inhabitants of the barrios of Cordon and San Luis, and their neighboring places, in the municipality of Santiago, Isabela, have petitioned that said barrios and places be organized into an independent municipality;

Whereas it appears that the municipality of Santiago is under obligation to pay for its legal share of the costs of the cadastral survey of said municipality;

Now, therefore, upon the recommendation of the provincial board of Isabela and the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the fifteen municipalities of the Province of Isabela, as established by section thirty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, Act Numbered Three thousand four hundred and sixteen, and Executive Order Numbered Thirty-five, series of nineteen hundred and twenty, are hereby increased to sixteen, by segregating from the municipality of Santiago, the barrios of Cordon and San Luis and their neighboring places, and organizing the same into an independent municipality under the name of Cordon, with the seat of government in the barrio of Cordon, subject to the condition that the new municipality shall assume the obligation of paying its proportionate share of the cost of the cadastral survey of the municipality of Santiago.

The municipality of Cordon as herein organized shall consist of the territory bounded on the north by the municipality of Santiago; on the east, by the municipality of Santiago; on the south, by the municipality of Bagabag, Province of Nueva Vizcaya; and on the west, by the municipality of Bagabag, Province of Nueva Vizcaya; and shall have the following boundaries:

Beginning from P. B. M. No. 1; thence, direct to P. B. M. No. 2; thence, direct to P. B. M. No. 3; thence, direct to P. B. M. No. 4; thence, direct to P. B. M. No. 5; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 4; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 5; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 19; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 18; thence, following the Dicaddanum Creek to B. B. M. No. 20; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 22; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 23; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 11; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 33; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 26; thence, direct to B. B. M. No. 34; thence, following the harrio road to B. B. M. No. 35; thence, following the barrio road to B. B. M. No. 36; and thence, direct to P. B. M. No. 1, point of beginning.

The municipality of Santiago shall consist of its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Cordon.

The organization herein made shall take effect July first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-seventh day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 181. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 876-877.