MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 146

ENFORCEMENT OF THE LONDON SUGAR AGREEMENT

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Commonwealth Act Numbered Two hundred and fifty-six, entitled “An Act confirming the commitments of the Commonwealth of the Philippines under the International Agreement regarding the production and marketing of sugar and the protocol annexed thereto, both signed in London on May sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven,” I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby order that:

1. The exportation of sugar in any of its commercial forms as defined in the said Agreement to countries other than the United States, its territories and possessions, is hereby prohibited, until an export quota shall have been allotted to the Philippines under article twenty of the Agreement in which event such quota shall be allocated among the producers and manufacturers of sugar in the Philippines on the basis prescribed in section six ( d ) of Public Act Numbered One hundred and twenty-seven of the Congress of the United States, approved on March twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, and such exportation shall only be made upon export permits signed and issued by the Philippine Sugar Administrator or his duly authorized representatives.

2. The Insular Collector of Customs shall not allow the loading of sugar in any of its commercial forms as defined in the said Agreement on any high seas vessel in Philippine waters unless the net weight of such sugar be fully covered by a permit signed and issued by the Philippine Sugar Administrator or his duty authorized representatives.

3. The Philippine Sugar Administrator and the Insular Collector of Customs are authorized to issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions of paragraphs one and two, respectively, of this Order.

Done at the City of Manila, this first day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum Library

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Executive Order No. 146. Messages of the President, 4 (1), pp. 1308-1309.