MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 23

DESCRIPTION AND SPECIFICATION OF THE FILIPINO FLAG

WHEREAS, section one, Article XIII of the Constitution prescribes what the Philippine National Flag should be without giving descriptions;

WHEREAS, Act Numbered Two thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight describes the construction of the Filipino Flag without the necessary specifications of the different elements of the flag;

WHEREAS, compliance with this Act has not been uniformly carried out and has caused the making of Filipino flags in disproportionate sizes with incorrect proportions of the different allegorical symbols of the flag; and

WHEREAS, to avoid irregularities and discrepancies, it is necessary to follow the Constitutional provisions and Act Numbered Two thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight with uniformity;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of thePhilippines, do hereby promulgate and order that the following specifications for the Philippine National Flag be strictly observed by all civil and military branches of the Government:

1. The maximum length of the flag is twice its width; the minimum length is twice the altitude of the equilateral triangle.

2. Any side of the equilateral triangle is as long as the width of the flag.

3. (See accompanying illustration.) Solid golden sunburst without any markings―Sun with eight rays, equally spaced; Arc x with Sun ray = Free arc y; two opposite rays in horizontal axis and two in vertical axis; sun’s diameter D=w/5; each ray has one major beam, twice as broad as the minor beam on either side; length of major beam R=5/9 D; length of minor beam r = 4/5 R.

[drawing of Phil. Flag]

4. Three five-pointed golden stars of equal size, each star with one point directed to the vertex of the angle enclosing it; diameter of circumscribed circle of each star = 5/9 D diameter of inscribed circle of each star = 2/9 D; distance from each corner = D/2.

5. Canvas-trimmed edge to the left of the triangle is approximately D/5 wide = not counted in measuring length of flag.

6. Flags made of silk will be trimmed on three edges with a knotted fringe of yellow silk D/5 wide.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fifth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 23. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 811-813.