MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 352

CONVERTING THE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF TAGUM, PROVINCE OF DAVAO, INTO A MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE SAME NAME

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Finance, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the municipal district of Tagum, Province of Davao, is hereby converted into a municipality under the same name, with the temporary seat of government at the barrio of Hijo.

The municipality of Tagum shall have the following boundary lines:

Beginning at the Bureau of Lands municipal boundary monument near the north of Lasang River and running in a northerly direction along said Lasang River to another Bureau of Lands municipal boundary monument near the junction of Maduao and Lasang Rivers; thence in a southwesterly direction to a Bureau of Lands municipal boundary monument at the junction of Tagactac and Bunawan Rivers to a Bureau of Lands municipal boundary monument near said river and approximately at latitude 7° 13′ north; thence in a westerly direction along this parallel to its intersection with meridian 125° 33′ east of Greenwich; thence due north following said meridian to its intersection with latitude 7° 28′ 20″ N.; thence in an easterly direction along the southern boundary line of the municipal district of Kapalong to the junction of Magdagundung and Liboganon Rivers; thence in an easterly direction following the southern boundary line of the municipal districts of Saug and Compostela to its intersection with meridian 125° 56′ 30″ east of Greenwich; thence due south following said meridian to its intersection with Lapinigan River; thence following the southwesterly course of Lapinigan River until its mouth at the Davao Gulf; thence following the coast line to Bureau of Lands municipal boundary monument near the mouth of Lasang River, the point of beginning.

The municipality of Tagum shall consist of the eight barrios of Bincoñgon, Hijo (Poblacion), Lasang, Madaum, Magugpo, Mawab, Pagsabañgan, and Tuganay.

The conversion herein made shall take effect on July 1, 1941.

Done at the City of Manila, this 27th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Orders Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.