MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 73

ESTABLISHING A CLASSIFICATION OF AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS

1. For the purpose of classifying airports and landing fields built or to be built, and fixing the responsibility for their proper construction, administration, use and maintenance, and upon the recommendation of the National Transportation Board created by Executive Order Numbered Forty-five, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby establish the following classification of airports and landing fields.

I. NATIONAL AIRPORTS:

All commercial airports including terminals or those located at provincial capitals or in other municipalities, which are along the main air traffic routes or which connect commercial centers and other points of importance in the country.

II. NATIONAL EMERGENCY LANDING FIELDS:

All landing fields constructed or to be constructed along regular air routes at maximum intervals of eighty kilometers (fifty miles) as a safety precaution in case of motor trouble or bad weather.

III. PROVINCIAL AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS:

All airports and landing fields that are financed exclusively from provincial funds and which are primarily of local importance.

IV. MUNICIPAL AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS:

All airports and landing fields built and maintained by municipalities with municipal funds.

V. MILITARY AIRPORTS:

All airports constructed and maintained by the Philippine Army which shall not be available for use by private and commercial airplanes except in case of emergency or upon the issuance of special permit by the Army authorities.

VI. PRIVATE AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS:

All airports or landing fields constructed and maintained by any private individual, copartnership, association, corporation, or jointstock company.

2. Pursuant to the above classification, the following airports and landing fields are hereby designated as:

I. NATIONAL AIRPORTS:

(1) Agusan Butuan Landing Field (completed)

(2) Albay Legaspi Landing Field (to be constructed)

(3) Antique San Jose de Buenavista (under construction)

(4) Batanes Basco Landing Field (to be constructed)

(5) Batangas Batangas Landing Field (completed)

(6) Benguet Baguio Landing Field (completed)

(7) Bohol Tabilaran Landing Field (completed)

(8) Bukidnon Malaybalay Landing Field (completed) Del Monte (Tankulan) (completed)

(9) Cagayan Tuguegarao Landing Field (to be constructed)

(10) Camarines Norte Daet Landing Field (completed)

(11) Camarines Sur Naga Landing Field (completed)

(12) Capiz Capiz (Loctugan Landing Field) (under construction)

(13) Cebu Cebu Landing Field (completed)

(14) Cotabato Cotabato Landing Field (completed)

(15) Davao Davao Landing Field (Cabaguio Landing Field) (completed)

(16) Ilocos Norte Laoag Landing Field (completed)

(17) Ilocos Sur Vigan Landing Field (completed)

(18) Iloilo Iloilo Landing Field (completed)

(19) Isabela Ilagan-Upi Landing Field (to be constructed)

(20) Leyte Tacloban Landing Field (completed)

(21) Masbate Masbate Landing Field (completed)

(22) Mindoro Calapan Landing Field (completed)

(23) La Union Naguilian Landing Field (completed)

(24) Nueva Ecija Cabanatuan Landing Field (completed)

(25) Nueva Vizcaya Bagabag Landing Field (under construction)

(26) Occidental Misamis Misamis Landing Field (proposed)

(27) Oriental Misamis Cagayan Landing Field (proposed)

(28) Occidental Negros Bacolod Landing Field (proposed)

(29) Oriental Negros Dumaguete Landing Field (under construction)

(30) Palawan Puerto Princesa Landing Field (proposed)

(31) Samar Calbayog Landing Field (proposed)

(32) Sorsogon Sorsogon Landing Field (proposed)

(33) Surigao Surigao Landing Field (proposed)

(34) Tarlac Tarlac Landing Field (under construction)

(35) Tayabas Lucena Landing Field (to be constructed)

II. NATIONAL EMERGENCY LANDING FIELDS:

(1) Batanes Contra Costa Landing Field (completed)

(2) Bukidnon Valencia Landing Field (completed) Kibawe Landing Field (completed)

(3) Bulacan Quingua Landing Field (completed)

(4) Capiz Buruanga (Caticlan Landing Field) (completed) Banga (Daja Landing Field) (completed)

(5) Cotabato Buluan Landing Field (completed)

(6) Iloilo Lambunao Landing Field (under construction)

(7) Marinduque Santa Cruz Landing Field (proposed)

(8) Mindoro Wasig Landing Field (completed)

(9) Palawan Iwahig Landing Field (completed)

(10) Pangasinan Rosales Landing Field (under construction)

(11) Romblon Ferrol Landing Field (to be constructed)

(12) Sorsogon Bulan Landing Field (proposed)

(13) Surigao Lianga-Barobo Landing Field (completed)

(14) Tayabas Alabat Landing Field (under construction) Catanauan Landing Field (proposed)

III. PROVINCIAL AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS:

*            *            *            *            *            *            *

IV. MUNICIPAL AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS:

*            *            *            *            *            *            *

V. MILITARY AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS:

(1) Camp Murphy, Philippine Army

VI. PRIVATE AIRPORTS AND LANDING FIELDS:

(1) Batangas Calatagan Landing Field (completed) Nasugbu Landing Field (completed)

(2) Camarines Norte Paracale Landing Field (completed)

(3) Laguna Canlubang Landing Field (Calamba) (completed)

(4) Manila Grace Park Landing Field (completed)

(5) Masbate San Agustin Landing Field (completed)

(6) Mindoro San Jose Landing Field (completed)

(7) Occidental Negros Bacolod Landing Field (completed) Fabrica Landing Field (completed) La Carlota Landing Field (completed)

(8) Pampanga Del Carmen Landing Field (completed)

(9) Sibuyan Island (Romblon) Magdiwang Landing Field (completed)

(10) Tarlac San Miguel Landing Field (completed)

GENERAL PROVISIONS

3. The acquisition, construction, administration, maintenance, and improvement of national airports shall be under the supervision of the Director of Aëronautics, and shall be financed from such special or annual appropriations as may be authorized by the Commonwealth Government for such purposes and from funds derived from Act Numbered Three thousand five hundred ninety-two, as amended.

4. The acquisition, construction, administration, improvement, and maintenance of national emergency landing fields shall be financed in the same manner as the national airports and shall be under the supervision of the Director of Aëronautics as in the case of the national airports.

5. The construction and maintenance of provincial airports and landing fields shall be carried out with the advice and under the general supervision of the Director of Aëronautics.

6. The construction and maintenance of municipal airports and landing fields shall be carried out with the advice and under the general supervision of the Director of Aëronautics.

7. Any provincial or municipal airport or landing field may be hereafter designated a national airport or landing field upon the request of the province or municipality concerned and with the favorable recommendation of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications.

8. The Secretary of Public Works and Communications is hereby authorized, upon the request of the provincial board and with the concurrence of the municipal council concerned, to designate any municipal airport as a provincial airport.

9. Private airports and landing fields shall not be available for use by commercial planes, except in case of emergency, unless they have been constructed in accordance with regulations of the Bureau of Aëronautics and a permit has been issued by that Bureau to this effect.

10. With the approval of the Secretary of Public Works and Communication, the Director of the Bureau of Aëronautics shall adopt and issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary from time to time to carry out the provisions of this Order and especially to govern the use of airports and landing fields, with the exception to those constructed and maintained by the Philippine Army.

This Order shall become effective on January first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven.

Done at the City of Manila, this third day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Executive Order No. 73. Messages of the President, 2. (1), pp. 905-910.