MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 236

PROVIDING FOR A SPECIAL PERMIT SYSTEM TO AUTHORIZE IMPORTERS, WHOLESALERS, AND RETAILERS TO TRADE AT PRICES HIGHER THAN THOSE FIXED IN EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 233

Whereas it has been found necessary that a procedure should be established to exempt some dealers from the requirements of Executive Order No. 233, current series, in cases when factory prices have increased beyond the limitations established by said Executive Order No. 233, in order to permit them to replenish their stocks of merchandise and to allow a regular flow of business or to fulfill contracts calling for delivery of goods at future dates;

Now, therefore, pursuant to the authority vested in me by Commonwealth Act No. 498, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, hereby prescribe the following rules:

1. The Emergency Control Administrator is hereby em­powered to issue special permits to importers, wholesalers and retailers to trade at prices higher- than those fixed in Executive Order No. 233 or in such other Executive Orders as may be issued in connection therewith or in addition thereto, when said importers, wholesalers and retailers submit satisfactory evidence that:

( a ) The c. i. f. price Philippine port of the commodity to be traded in has increased over the c. i. f. price Philippine port of the dealers’ present stock; and

(b) That the stock of the importer, wholesaler or retailer at the time of the Issuance of Executive Order No. 233 has been exhausted or will soon be exhausted and that new stock must be placed for sale.

2. No such special permit to sell at prices higher than those fixed in Executive Order No. 233 shall authorize a sale in every transaction for a price higher than 10 per centum over the cost price thereof.

3. The Emergency Control Administrator is hereby authorized to prescribe such forms and issue such preliminary permits as may be necessary to make effective the exercise if the authority herein vested in him.

Done at the City of Manila this 29th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 236. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 899-936.