MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 41

TRANSFER OF ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISION OVER THE BUREAU OF PRISONS TO THE PHILIPPINE ARMY

WHEREAS, the organization of the Philippine Army under Commonwealth Act Numbered One has made available the services of men in excess of the actual requirements of peace time activities of the former Philippine Constabulary;

WHEREAS, it would be profitable to use the services of such extra men to maintain surveillance over prisoners now confined in the Bilibid Prison and its dependencies;

WHEREAS, under Executive Order Numbered Twenty-six, appointing Major General Paulino Santos, Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army, he is expressly ordered to “continue to supervise the activities of the Bureau of Prisons” and “to exercise all authority with respect to that Bureau now vested in him as its Director;” and

WHEREAS, in view of the increased activities of the Department of Justice, it would be conducive to efficiency if the aforesaid Department should be relieved of such functions as may properly be assigned or transferred to other branches of the Government better equipped to perform them;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, and in pursuance of the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Five, hereby order that:

1. The administrative supervision over the Bureau of Prisons is hereby transferred from the Department of Justice to the Philippine Army: Provided, That all the present officers and personnel of the Bureau of Prisons shall continue in their respective offices and/or positions until removed in accordance with law.

2. The Bureau of Prisons shall continue to render the same services heretofore rendered by it to the Department of Justice in connection with the enforcement of the Indeterminate Sentence Law and the Adult Probation Law.

3. All existing laws and regulations governing the Bureau of Prisons shall continue in force and effect insofar as they are not incompatible with the provisions of the present Executive Order.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-ninth of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1936). Executive Order No. 41. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 844-845.