MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 325

REVISING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 290, DATED JULY 8, 1940, PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE GIVING OF SECURITY FOR EVERY FIREARM HELD UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 888 OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

Pursuant to the authority vested in me under section nine hundred and five of the Revised Administrative Code, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby issue the following rules and regulations to govern the giving of security for every firearm held on license issued under the provisions of section eight hundred and eighty-eight of the same Code:

1. Any person desiring to possess one or more firearms for personal protection or for use in hunting or other lawful purposes, and ammunition thereof shall, upon making application therefor and before receiving the license, for the purpose of security, deposit a United States or Philippine Government bond or make a cash deposit with the postal Savings Bank in the sum of forty pesos for each firearm for which the license is to be issued and indorse the certificate of deposit therefor to the Treasurer of the Philippines, such deposit to bear no interest; or give a personal or property bond signed by two (2) persons or by a surety company in such form as the President may prescribe, payable to the Government of the Philippines, in the sum of one hundred pesos for each such firearms.

2. Gun clubs duly organized and accredited by the Chief of Constabulary and their bona fide and active members may be allowed to possess firearms on licenses, provided that the club shall for the purpose of security, deposit United States or Philippine Government bond or make a cash deposit with the Postal Savings Bank (to bear no interest) or surety bond, to guarantee the safekeeping of the firearms or surety bond, to guarantee the safe-keeping of the firearms licensed to clubs and their members, under the following graduated schedule and conditions:

( a ) Graduated schedule:

(b) Gun clubs may be allowed to possess on licenses, for the use of its members at the clubs, not to exceed twenty (20) firearms (rifles, pistols, revolvers, or shotguns).

(c) The amount of ₱40 or ₱100, as the case may be, shall be forfeited or collected for each firearm lost.

(d) In case the amount of bond filed is not sufficient to cover the penalty for the number of lost firearms, the club shall pay the full amount corresponding to the number of lost firearms.

(e) Any club or member who loses a firearm shall within five (5) days report the loss in writing to the Chief of Constabulary. Failure to render the required report without justifiable reason, shall disqualify the club or member from possessing new or additional firearm.

( f ) All gun clubs shall furnish the Chief of Constabulary. within sixty (60) days from the date hereof, a list of their members in alphabetical order, giving the numbers of licenses and description of the firearms. The club shall also furnish the Chief of Constabulary, at the end of each month, a list containing the names of new members and members who have been separated, in the same manner as the original list is furnished.

3. The bonds existing upon the promulgation of this Executive Order shall continue as they are or, at the option of the interested party, the same can be renewed in accordance with the provisions hereof.

4. Executive Order Numbered Two hundred and ninety, dated July 8, 1940, is hereby revised accordingly.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirteenth day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 301-326]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.