MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 68

CREATING A FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSION TO ADVISE THE GOVERNMENT IN THE PLANNING AND CONSTRUCTION OF RIVER AND SEA PROTECTION AND OTHER RELATED WORKS

Whereas the planning and construction of flood control, sea protection and other related works to prevent or minimize danger to life and damage to property caused by floods and the erosive action of rivers and the sea should be made a subject of careful investigation and study so as to insure satisfactory and, as much as possible, lasting results consistent with economy in the expenditure of public funds;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby constitute and create a Flood Control Commission composed of the Director of Public Works as Chairman, and one representative from each of the following entities to be designated by the President from time to time, as members:

(1) Bureau of Forestry; (2) Manila Railroad Company; (3) Metropolitan Water District; (4)College of Engineering, University of the Philippines; (5) National Research Council; and (6) A civil engineer in private practice.

This Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Government, its branches, subdivisions, agencies, and instrumentalities in connection with the investigation, planning, and construction of flood control and sea protection and other related works, and in order to accomplish this purpose shall:

( a ) Examine any data and plan that may be submitted by any of the Government entities above referred to for river or sea protection and other related works;

( b ) Conduct such investigation as may be necessary to determine the feasibility of the projects submitted to its consideration or of such other projects and works as in its opinion should be undertaken by any of the Government entities above referred to in order to accomplish the objectives contemplated in this Executive Order; and

( c ) Draft such proposed legislation as may be necessary to put into effect the plans and schemes finally evolved and adopted by it, including a system of financing the effective prosecution thereof.

This Commission shall meet within one month after the appointment of all its members for the purposes of organizing and preparing plans for its work and shall thereafter hold meetings once a month or as often as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order.

With the approval of the proper Department Head or of the proper board or authority, the Commission may request the services or aid of any official or employee of any Bureau or office of the National Government or of any Government agency or instrumentality in the conduct of the work entrusted to it by virtue of this Executive Order.

The members of the Commission shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for actual and necessary traveling expenses in connection with the performance of their duties, chargeable to the appropriation authorized in the Public Works Appropriation Acts for the preliminary investigations and surveys of water supply, sea wall, water power, and river control projects.

Done at the City of Manila, this first day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Executive Order No. 68. Messages of the President, 2. (1), pp. 889-890.