MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 6

ORDER OF ISSUE OF CITY OF MANILA 1935 THIRTY-YEAR 5 PER CENT BONDS

WHEREAS, the Government of the City of Manila, by Resolution Numbered Four hundred seven series of nineteen hundred and thirty-four, duly adopted by the Municipal Board on the twenty-first day of December nineteen hundred and thirty-four, and approved by the Mayor of the City on December twenty-sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, has requested His Excellency, the Governor-General, to authorize the issuance and sale of bonds in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), United States currency, or five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00), Philippine currency, under the provisions of Act Numbered Three thousand four hundred fifty-six, the proceeds of which shall be spent exclusively in the construction of the Ayala Bridge Annex;

WHEREAS, Act Numbered Three thousand seven hundred eleven, as amended by Act Numbered Four thousand two hundred forty-seven, authorizes the Governor-General, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Finance, to issue in the name and in behalf of the City of Manila the bonds authorized to be issued under section one of Act Numbered Three thousand four hundred fifty-six, and to sell the said bonds in the Philippine Islands, through the Insular Treasurer, upon such terms and conditions as in his judgment are most favorable to the City of Manila;

WHEREAS, the Secretary of Finance, in his indorsement dated November twenty-fifth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, recommends the issue of these bonds under Act Numbered Three thousand four hundred and fifty-six, and the sale thereof in the Philippine Islands, as provided in said Act Numbered Three thousand seven hundred and eleven, as amended by Act Numbered Four thousand two hundred and forty-seven;

Now, therefore, pursuant to the provisions of Act Numbered Three thousand four hundred and fifty-six and of Act Numbered Three thousand seven hundred and eleven, as amended by Act Numbered Four thousand two hundred and forty-seven, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, in the name and in behalf of the “City of Manila 1935 Thirty-Year 5 per cent Bonds” in the amount of five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00), Philippine currency, to bear the date of December sixteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, payable thirty years after said date, said bonds to bear interest at the rate of five per centum per annum, payable semiannually. The bonds shall be in the denomination of fifty pesos or a multiple thereof, and may be coupon bonds or registered bonds, and shall be registered in the Treasury of the Philippines or its equivalent in legal tender currency of the United States, in the discretion of the Insular Treasurer. The said bonds shall be used exclusively for the construction of the Ayala Bridge Annex.

Done at the City of Manila, this ninth day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

TEOFILO SISON Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 6. Messages of the President, 1 (Rev. ed.), 200-201.