MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 186

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE LOSS OF FIREARMS HELD UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 881 OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by section nine hundred and five of the Revised Administrative Code, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby issue and promulgate the following rules and regulations to govern the loss of firearms held under special permit under the provisions of section eight hundred eighty-one of the said Code:

1. Any officer or employee of the Government who, having been issued a special permit to possess a firearm or firearms in accordance with section eight hundred eighty-one of the Revised Administrative Code, shall lose his firearm or firearms or shall fail to have the same forthcoming upon proper demand, shall be administratively fined by the Chief of Constabulary in the amount of forty pesos for each arm: Provided, however, that the President, in his discretion, may remit the fine imposed upon the licensee upon the presentation of satisfactory proof showing that his firearm was destroyed or lost beyond reasonable chance of recovery by any person, and through no fault or negligence of his.

2. In case of the loss of a firearm held under special permit, it shall be the duty of the Director or head of the Bureau or office to immediately notify the Chief of Constabulary thereof. It shall also be the duty of the Director or head of any Bureau or office to require any holder of firearm under special permit in his Bureau or office to surrender or otherwise account for the firearm or firearms before the holder thereof resigns, retires, or otherwise severs his connection with the Government. The Director or head of any Bureau or office shall be responsible for ; ” the collection of the administrative fine imposed by the Chief of Constabulary in accordance with the provisions of paragraph one hereof upon officials or employees of his Bureau or office, and for this purpose, he or his authorized representative shall require any licensee to pay the administrative fine imposed by withholding’ from the licensee’s salary the amount of the fine. Failure to comply with the duties imposed upon him under this paragraph shall render the Director or head of any Bureau or office personally liable for such administrative fine.

3. This Order shall apply to all firearms now covered by special permits, except those which had been lost before this date, in which case the fine shall be one hundred pesos as provided for in the former regulations.

Done at the City of Manila, this eleventh day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 186. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 891-892.