OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES WASHINGTON, D.C.

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 13-W

WHEREAS, it is my desire to provide the necessary relief for the people of the Philippines upon the landing of the forces of liberation;

WHEREAS, to that end, it is imperative that the purchase of the necessary amounts of food, medicine, clothing and other necessities be effected immediately and arrangements made for transportation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine Commonwealth Relief Committee, which will act under the supervision of and be directly responsible to the President of the Philippines.

The Philippine Commonwealth Relief Committee is charged with the following functions:

(a) to plan for the relief of the people of the Philippines in coordination with other agencies, official and private, dedicated to the same task;

(b) To purchase in behalf of the Philippine Government the supplies of food, medicine, clothing, and other necessities for the relief of the inhabitants of the Philippines, and make pertinent arrangements for transportation. All purchase contracts shall be made by the Philippine National Bank, New York Agency.

To effect the necessary purchases with the minimum of delay, I hereby authorize the initial appropriation of $5,000,000 from the general funds, this amount to be revolving when arrangement have been effected to secure reimbursement out of funds available for civilian relief under the act of December 23, 1941 (Public law 371), or out of any other funds available for this purpose.

All officials and employees of the Commonwealth Government and its instrumentalities are hereby directed to render such services as the Philippine Commonwealth Relief Committee may request in the performance of its duties.

Done at the City of Saranac Lake, State of New York, United States of America, this twentieth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1944). [Executive Order Nos. : 1w – 111]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.