MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 111

PROHIBITING AND RESTRICTING THE PRACTICE OF NEPOTISM

In the interest of an efficient administration and with a view to improving the morale of the public service, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by the laws of the Philippines, hereby promulgate the following prohibitions and restrictions in the matter of appointment of relatives:

1. All appointments in the National, provincial and municipal governments or in any branch and instrumentality thereof, whether in the classified or unclassified service, made in the favor of a relative of the appointing  authority or of the persons exercising immediate supervision over him, are hereby prohibited.

2. When there are already two or more members of one family in an office or Bureau, no other member of such family shall be eligible for appointment to any position therin.

As used in this Order, the word “relative” and the members of the family referred to herein are those related within the third degree either of consanguinity or of affinity.

The following are exempted from these rules: Persons employed in a confidential capacity, teachers, physicians or members of the Army: Provided, however, that in each particular instance full report of such appointment shall be made to the President.

In order to give immediate effect to this Order, cases of previous appointments which are in contravention hereof shall be corrected by transfer, and pending such transfer, no promotion shall be allowed in favor of the relative occupying a subordinate position or in favor of anyone of the members of the same family in a Bureau or office. In exceptional cases, where the application of this rule would impair the efficiency of the service or would produce a patent injustice, an appointment or promotion may be made with the approval of the Commissioner of Civil Service.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirtieth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 111. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 649-650.