MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 237

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 233, DATED NOVEMBER 8, 1939, ENTITLED “FIXING THE MAXIMUM SELLING PRICES OR CERTAIN ARTICLES OF PRIME NECESSITY”

1. Paragraph (3) of Executive Order Numbered Two hundred thirty-three, dated November eighth, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“3. The maximum prices set forth in the attached schedules for milk, sardines, corned beef, vegetable lard, sugar, wheat flour, galvanized iron sheets, plain galvanized wire, steel bars, nails, motor fuel alcohol, gasoline, petroleum, cement, mongo. meat, corn, and rice fixed herein shall apply to the respective brands specified and to such other brand or class of the same article as the Emergency Control Administration may, upon proper application, determine to be of a quality or class the same as or similar to, any of the it basic brands thereof. Until such determination shall have been made, no such new brand or class of any of the articles listed in the attached schedules or in any schedule which in the future may be appended hereto shall be sold at a price higher than the maximum price fixed for the lowest-priced brand or class of the same articles.

“The maximum prices herein fixed shall not apply to purchases made by the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines or by any of its sub-divisions, agencies, and instrumentalities, or by the Government of the United States or any of its agencies and instrumentalities, where such purchases call for articles of higher quality and different specifications than those ordinarily required of the articles listed in the attached schedules or in any schedule which in the future may be appended hereto.”

2. The attached Table No. 93, fixing the maximum prices for “Mother” condensed milk and for “Farm” and “Morning” evaporated milk; Table 95, fixing the maximum prices for “Golden Star” condensed milk and “Golden State” evaporated milk; Table 96, fixing the maximum prices for “Royal” eva­porated milk; Table 99, fixing the maximum prices for “Taniban” tinapa sardines; Table 100, fixing, the maximum prices for “Del Monte”, “Palace” and “Majid” sardines; Table 101, fixing the maximum prices for “Miki”, “Brisa de Oro”, “Asia” and “S & W” sardines: Table 102, fixing the maximum prices for “No. 1” plain sauce, and “No. 1” and “Escuela” Pilchards; Tables 103 and 105, fixing the maximum prices for “Royal” sardines and corned beef, respectively; Table 106, fixing the maximum prices for “Ranchero” corned Ibeef; and Table 111, fixing the maximum prices for “Rizal” petroleum are hereby appended to and-made integral parts of Executive Order No. 233.

3. The maximum prices fixed in Executive.Order No. 233 for “Hollandia”, “Molino”, “Frisian Flag”, “Royal” and “Dutch Baby”’ condensed milk; for “Alpine”, “Nestle”,'”Milkmaid,” “Dutch Baby”, “Frisian Flag”, and “All Pure” evaporated milk; for “No. 1”, “White Star”, “Portola”, “P.C.C.”, “El Rayo”, “Concha”, “Bandera” and “Mayon” sardines; for ”Emery”, “Libby’s”, “Armour”, and “Hereford” corned beef for vegetable lard; for flour; for gasoline; and for petroleum are hereby revised as shown in the attached tables Nos. 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111 and 112.

4. This Executive Order shall take effect in the manner and form provided under Paragraph 6 of Executive Order No. 233.

Done at the City of Manila, this 29th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 237. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 937-938.