MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 43

TRANSFERRING CERTAIN FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE BUREAU OF SCIENCE TO OTHER ENTITIES UNDER THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, by virtue of the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Five, a Government Survey Board has been created for the purpose of recommending to the President needed reforms in the present organization of the Government; and

WHEREAS, the said Government Survey Board has recommended the transfer of certain functions, duties, personnel, appropriations, books, records, equipment, supplies, lands, buildings, and other property of the Bureau of Science to other entities under the Commonwealth of the Philippines;

Now, therefore, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws and in pursuance of the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Five, it is hereby directed that—

1. The following functions and duties heretofore performed by the Bureau of Science shall be transferred therefrom to the Government organizations designated herein:

( a ) The analysis and inspection of foods and drugs in connection with the enforcement of the Food and Drugs Act, the Nutrition Laboratory, the Division of Biological Products, and the Alabang Vaccine and Serum Laboratory, to the School of Hygiene and Public Health of the University of the Philippines;

( b ) The Iloilo Biological Research Laboratory and Cebu Biological Research Laboratory, to the Bureau of Health;

( c ) The anti-rabic treatment service now being performed by the Bureau of Science, to the Philippine General Hospital;

( d ) The manufacture of tiki-tiki extract, to the College of Pharmacy of the University of the Philippines. This transfer should be effected as soon as proper arrangements can be conveniently made for the installation of the tiki-tiki plant in the College of Pharmacy; and

( e ) The Home Economics Division, to the Bureau of Plant Industry and Education, as the Budget Commission may find appropriate.

2. The appropriations, personnel, books, records, equipment, supplies, lands, building and other used for the manufacture of tiki-tiki extract, and other property pertaining to the functions mentioned above, as may be determined by the Budget Commission, shall likewise be transferred to the respective entities designated herein.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirtieth of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1936). Executive Order No. 43. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 819-820.