MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 327

REGULATING BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS, AND BOWLING ALLEYS

By virtue of the powers vested in me under Commonwealth Act Numbered Six hundred and one, entitled “An act to regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of places of amusement in chartered cities, municipalities-and municipal districts,” the following rules and regulations governing billiard and pool halls, and bowling alleys, are hereby promulgated:

1. No person shall conduct or operate a billiard or pool hall, or a bowling alley, where persons are permitted to play on a compensation or hire basis, without first securing license for such purposes from the City or Municipal Treasurer of the locality where the billiard or pool hall, or bowling alley is established.

2. No billiard or pool hall, or bowling alley shall be allowed to be maintained or operated within a radius of two hundred lineal meters from any city hall or municipal building, provincial capitol building, national capitol building, public plaza, public school, church, hospital, athletic stadium, public park, or any institution of learning or of charity.

3. No billiard or pool hall, or bowling alley shall be open to the public, and no billiard, pool, or bowling games shall be allowed therein, except during the hours from 8 o’clock a.m. to 12 o’clock midnight daily; Provided, however, That on Christmas eve and New Year’s eve and on Saturdays and days preceding official holidays and town fiestas, billiard or pool hall, or bowling alleys may be open until 2 o’clock in the morning of the following day: Provided, further, That any bowling alley located in any residential section of a chartered city, municipality, or municipal district shall not be permitted to operate after 11 o’clock in the evening.

4. No person conducting or operating a billiard or pool hall shall admit minors less than eighteen years of age to participate in any game therein; and in the case of alley minors under twelve years of age shall not be allowed to participate in any game therein.

5. No intoxicating liquor of any kind shall be sold within the premises of any billiard or pool hall, or bowling alley; neither shall any firearm or any deadly weapon be permitted to be carried within the premises thereof, except by peace officers in the due performance of official duties.

6. Any person who believes that a billiard or pool hall, or a bowling alley is established or located in any place not authorized by this Order may file a protest with the Secretary of the Interior who is hereby authorized after proper investigation to decide the case or cancel the license.

7. It shall be the duty of the operator or concessionaire of any billiard or pool hall or bowling alley to see that these rules and regulations are properly observed, and that peace and order is maintained at all times within the premises thereof.

8. Any action of the City or Municipal Treasurer under the provisions of paragraph one of this Order may be appealed to the Secretary of the Interior whose decision shall be final.

9. The Secretary of the Interior shall revoke any permit or license granted under this Order upon satisfactory evidence that gambling or playing of any prohibited game has taken place within the premises of any billiard or pool hall, or bowling alley. Any violation of these rules and regulations shall likewise be sufficient cause for the revocation by the Secretary of the Interior of the permit granted and forfeiture of the license issued.

10. Billiard or pool halls, or bowling alleys shall pay a license fee of not less than ten pesos per billiard or pool table or per bowling alley annually or two pesos and fifty centavos quarterly: Provided, however , That existing ordinances prescribing higher fees than ten pesos per billiard or pool table or per bowling alley annually or two pesos and fifty centavos quarterly shall remain in force until otherwise provided for by the President: Provided, further , That a city municipal council desiring to impose a higher fee may do so upon approval of the President.

11. Billiard or pool halls, or bowling alleys in operation on January 1, 1941, that are within the prohibited zones or distances prescribed in paragraph two of this Order shall be given one year’s notice within which to close, transfer, or otherwise comply with the provisions hereof, but the Secretary of the Interior, with the approval of the President, may in special cases and for justifiable reasons, authorize their continuance in their present location.

Done at the City of Manila, this nineteenth day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 334]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.