MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 61

CREATING A NATIONAL RELIEF BOARD

For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of Commonwealth Act numbered Ninety, approved October twenty-sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty six, entitled “An Act to appropriate the sum of one million five hundred thousand pesos for relief and rehabilitation work in the different provinces devastated by typhoons, floods, or other public calamities,” there is hereby created a National Relief Board to be composed of the Secretary of the Interior, as Chairman, the Director of the Budget, the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army, the Director of Public Welfare, the Director of Public Works, the Director of Health, the Director of Public Works, the Director of Health, the Director of Education, and the Director of Plant Industry, as members. In the absence of any of the members, the Department Head concerned may designate another officer to take his place in the Board. The Director of the Budget shall be the Executive Officer of the Board. The Board may employ such personnel as the President may authorize. This Board shall investigate the extent of the damages caused by the typhoons, floods, and other public calamities in the different provinces, determine the amounts needed for relief and rehabilitation work, and, subject to the approval of the President, allot the necessary funds therefore from the appropriation made under Commonwealth Act Numbered Ninety for expenditure through such government agencies or charitable institutions as it may designate.

All officers and employees of the different departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the National Government and those of the provinces, cities, municipalities, and other political subdivisions as well as those of the institutions receiving financial aid from the Government, are hereby enjoined to cooperate with the Board in the performance of its functions and, with the approval of the corresponding Head of Department, shall, when necessary, render such service as the Board or any of its members may assign to them.

All expenses which may be incurred by the Board to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order, including traveling and other incidental expenses of any of its members and of the officers and employees rendering relief work under the said Board, shall be a proper charge against the appropriation authorized by Commonwealth Act Numbered Ninety.

To assist the National Relief Board in its work, there is hereby created in each province a provincial relief board to be composed of the provincial governor, as chairman, the provincial treasurer, the district engineer, the district health officer, the division superintendent of schools and the military provincial commander, as members, whose duty it shall be to conduct on the field a preliminary investigation of the extent of the damages caused by the typhoons, floods, and other public calamities, make an appraisal of the extent of such damages, and recommend to the National Relief Board the nature of the needed relief and rehabilitation work and the amount of funds necessary to carry out such work.

Done at the City of Manila, this third day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 61. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 878-879.