MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 232

EXTENDING THE AREA OF THE CUSTOMS ZONE IN MANILA

Whereas it appears desirable that the premises adjoining the piers and wharves of the National Government in the South Port Area, Manila, be placed under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Customs for the purpose of more effective administration and control of the customs service at the Port of Manila;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by section one thousand one hundred forty-four of the Revised Administrative Code, do hereby extend the territory of the Customs Zone in Manila in order to include, beginning January first, nineteen hundred and forty, that part of the South Port Area hereunder described as follows:

Beginning at point 1, the northwest corner of block No. 77, thence southward along the east boundary by Muelle San Francisco to point 2, the southwest corner of block No. 77; thence eastward along the north boundary of Street No. 22 to point 3, the southeast corner of block No. 77; thence northward along the west boundary of Boston Street to point 4, being the southeast corner of block No. 49; thence 44.00 meters westward along the north boundary of 14th Street to point 5, being the eastern part of the Derham Building to be excluded from the Customs Zone herein described; thence northward at 90°, following, the existing partition through said Derham Building, to point 6, being on the north boundary of 13th Street; thence eastward 44.00 meters along the said north boundary of 13th Street to point 7, being the southeast corner of block No. 48; thence northward following the west boundary of Boston Street to point 8, being the southeast corner of block No. 41; thence westward along the north boundary of 12th Street to point 9, being the southwest corner of block No. 41; thence northward along the east boundary of Muelle San Francisco 20.00 meters to point 10; thence westward at 90° to the said east boundary of Muelle San Francisco to point 11, the intersection of said line with the established building line north of the entrance to pier No. 3; thence southward along said building line or west boundary of Muelle San Francisco to point 12, which is the intersection of the prolongation of the south boundary of Street No. 21 with said building line; thence eastward across Muelle San Francisco to point 1, the point of beginning.

The construction of such fences, gates, and appurtenances as are necessary for the proper control of said additional area by the customs service shall be carried out as soon as practicable.

Done at the City of Manila, this eighth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 232. Messages of the President, 5 (1), pp. 1013-1014.