MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 324

PRESCRIBING REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS FOR VACATION AND SICK LEAVE OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE GOVERNMENT

In order to expedite action on applications for vacation and sick leave under the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 220, as amended, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, acting upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of Civil Service, do hereby prescribe the following regulations governing the approval of applications for leave of absence for the information and guidance of all concerned:

1. Each chief of bureau or office of the National Government, the provincial government and the government of a chartered city may approve after the words, “By authority of the Department Secretary,” all applications for leave of permanently appointed officers and employees under said chief of bureau or office, provided their services can be spared without detriment to the interests of the public service.

2. Where some question is involved requiring determination by the Chief Executive or Department Head, or where the application for leave is denied on account of the exigencies of the service, the application shall be forwarded thru the Commissioner of Civil Service for final executive action.

3. Leave without pay shall not be granted whenever the employee concerned has leave with pay to his credit. Temporary employees may be granted such leave without pay as is not incompatible with the needs of the service

4. Where officers and employees are facing administrative charges or administrative proceedings are being instituted against them, no leave of absence with pay shall be granted the respondents for the time being.

5. In order that a uniform practice may be observed throughout the service, computation of leave shall be made on the basis of one day’s vacation leave and one day’s sick leave for every twenty-four days of actual service. The term “actual service” refers to the period of continuous service since the permanent appointment of the officer or employee concerned including the period or periods covered by any previous leave with pay granted. Leave of absence without pay for any reason other than illness shall not be counted as part of the actual service rendered.

6. In case of separation from the service of an officer or employee, no payment of any money due the resigning employee (whether in the form of salary, leave or otherwise) shall be made until after notice has been received from the Bureau of Civil Service that he did not enjoy any leave with pay in excess of that allowable for service rendered. All the necessary data relating to unreported absences and undertime should be furnished the Bureau of Civil Service for the proper and final computation of the leave allowable.

7. Applications for leave of absence chargeable to accrued leave earned for service prior to November 29, 1936, the date of the approval of Commonwealth Act No. 220, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Civil Service for action as heretofore.

8. Under the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 490, the granting of leave of absence to municipal officers or employees is discretional with the chief of office in the municipality concerned. Applications for leave of such officers and employees need not, therefore, be forwarded to the Bureau of Civil Service except in cases involving questions which require determination by the Chief Executive or Department Head concerned as provided in paragraph 2 hereof.

9. When the officers or employees who are transferred to other bureaus or offices file their first applications for leave with the offices they are transferred, the Commissioner of Civil Service shall provide the respective chiefs of bureaus or offices of the National Government and the provincial and the city treasurers of provinces and chartered cities with certified statements of the balance of the vacation and sick leave to the credit of the officers or employees concerned for the information and record to enable them to act intelligently on possible future applications. A copy of each of such statements shall be furnished simultaneously the auditor of the bureau, office, province or city concerned.

10. Applications for vacation or sick leave now pending action by the Commissioner of Civil Service shall be returned to the corresponding bureaus and offices of the National Government, the provincial government, the government of chartered cities and to the municipalities for approval of the officials concerned under the provisions of this Executive Order.

Done at the City of Manila, this eleventh day of February. in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 301-326]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.