MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 248

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 233, DATED NOVEMBER 8, 1939, ENTITLED “FIXING THE MAXIMUM SELLING PRICES OF CERTAIN ARTICLES OF PRIME NECESSITY”

I. The attached Tables 148, 149 and 150 fixing the maximum prices for “Emperador”, “Sea Gull”, “Champion”, “Alta Mar”, “El Campo”, “Veribest”, “Luneta” sardines; and “Luneta” pilchards are hereby appended to and made integral parts of Executive Order No. 233.

2. The maximum prices fixed in Executive Order No. 233 and amendment thereto, for “Apollo”, “Bethlehem”, “Republic”, “Youngstown”, “Globe”, “Atlas” and “Zodiac” galvanized iron; for plain galvanized wire, 35-lb. coil; for American steel bars; for European steel bars; for common wire nails; for “Number One” sardines and pilchards; for “Mayon” and “El Asahi” sardines; for “Libby’s”, “Dutch Baby”, “Frisian Flag” and “Farm” evaporated milk; for “Train” condensed milk; and for “Hereford” corned beef are hereby revised as shown in the attached Tables Nos. 113-147; 150, 151, 152, and 153.

3. The maximum selling prices per tin for “Cock”, “Carabao”, “Tractora”, “Rizal” and “Mabuhay” petroleum, in Bontoc, Mountain Province, Iloilo, Davao, and Cebu cities; and in Bogo, Cebu, are hereby revised as follows:

The “Gold Cross” and “Falcon” brands of flour shall also be included in the list of first-class flour given in Table 108 of Executive Order No. 237.

4. All retail store owners throughout the Philippines who handle articles for which prices have been fixed in Executive Orders Nos. 233 and 237, in this Order, and in subsequent ones, are hereby required to post in a conspicuous place at the entrance of their stores a complete list of such articles as they may be selling to the public, together with the respective maximum prices for the same.

5. The maximum prices fixed under authority of Commonwealth Act No. 498 shall not apply to purchases made by the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines or by any of its subdivisions, agencies, and instrumentalities, or by the Government of the United States or any of its agencies and instrumentalities.

6. This Executive Order shall take effect in the manner and form provided under paragraph 6 of Executive Order No. 233.

Done at the City of Manila, this 2nd day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Executive Orders Nos. : 248 – 399]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.