MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 22

CONSTITUTING A COMMITTEE ON PENSIONS AND APPOINTING THE MEMBERS THEREOF

WHEREAS, reports have been received of the insolvent condition of the several pension systems of the Government, necessitating that step be taken immediately to place these systems on a sound financial basis;

WHEREAS, from time to time legislation providing for retirement, gratuity, and pension payments has been approved without discriminate regard for length of service rendered, for age of retirement and for the amounts of benefit to be paid; and

WHEREAS, it is now deemed necessary to make provision for a general retirement law to relieve superannuation in the positions of the public service with due regard to the interests of the Government and the beneficiaries;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, resolve to constitute, as I hereby constitute, a Committee on Pensions to be composed of the following:

Mr. Salvador Lagdameo, Chairman; Mr. Antonio Ramos, member; Mr. Celedonio Salvador, member; Dr. Leoncio Lopez-Rizal, member; Maj. Hipolito Garma, member; Dr. Emeterio B. Roa, member; Dr. Luis R. Salvosa, member and Secretary;

to make a survey of existing retirement, gratuity, and pension systems in effect in the Philippines, and to study the advisability of continuing, modifying, amending, or abolishing any or all of the several pension systems with due respect of the established rights of the beneficiaries, or to recommend the adoption of a general retirement plan to cover the entire public service.

The Committee is likewise authorized to call upon any Government office or agency for such information or assistance as it may deem necessary and shall submit its report not later than May fifteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty six.

Done at the City of Manila, this seventeenth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) LEON G. GUINTO Under Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 22. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 809-810.