MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 314

TRANSFERRING POWERS, FUNCTIONS, DUTIES, APPROPRIATIONS PROPERTY, AND RECORDS FROM VARIOUS STATISTICAL AGENCIES TO THE BUREAU OF THE CENSUS AND STATISTICS

The public interest so requiring, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by Commonwealth Act Numbered Five hundred and ninety-one, entitled “An Act to Create a Bureau of the Census and Statistics to Consolidate Statistical Activities of the Government therein,” do ordain and promulgate the following:

1. The functions of the Division of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor and of the Section of Vital Statistics of the Bureau of Health, Department of Public Instruction, are hereby transferred to the Bureau of the Census and Statistics.

2. The following positions and employees from the Division of Statistics and Agriculture and Commerce, the Statistical Division of the Bureau of Customs, the General Civil Registry Division of the National Library, the Division of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor, and the Section of Vital Statistics of the Bureau of Health are transferred to the Bureau of Census and Statistics, effective January 1, 1941:

From the Division of Statistics Department of Agriculture and Commerce [Pages 145 and 146, Commonwealth Act No. 555]

From the Division of Labor Statistics Department of Labor [Page 343, Commonwealth Act No. 555]

From the Section of Vital Statistics Bureau of Health [Page 278, Commonwealth Act No. 555]

From the Statistical Division Bureau of Customs [Page 50, Commonwealth Act No. 555]

From the General Civil Registry Division National Library [Page 322, Commonwealth Act No. 555]

3. The following positions from the Division of Statistics of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce and the Statistical Division of the Bureau of Customs, are hereby transferred to the Bureau of Census and Statistics, effective February 1, 1941:

From the Division of Statistics Department of Agriculture and Commerce [Pages 145 and 146, Commonwealth Act No. 555]

From the Statistical Division Bureau of Customs [Page 50, Commonwealth Act No. 555]

4. All the equipment and other property assigned to the employees and/or positions so transferred to the Bureau of the Census and Statistics together with other property and records pertaining to the activities of the Division of Statistics of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce, the Statistical Division of the Bureau of Customs, the General Civil Registry Division of the National Library, the Division of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor, and the Section of Vital Statistics of the Bureau of Health transferred to the Bureau of the Census and Statistics, as well as the unexpended balances of the appropriations of the said activities transferred to the Bureau of the Census and Statistics including the appropriation under Item 10 of Sundry Expenses (Commonwealth Act No. 555 page 77) of the Department of Finance for the rental of two electric machines and for the purchase of supplies therefor, shall be transferred to the said Bureau, effective January 1, 1941; provided, however, that the Commissioner of the Budget shall, within a period of thirty days from the promulgation of this Order, determine and submit to this Office lists of the equipment, property, records and unexpended balances of the appropriations of the positions and activities which shall be transferred to the Bureau of Census and Statisics

5. Effective January 1, 1941, the functions, equipment, appropriations, records, documents, supplies, property and such personnel of the Commission of the Census as the Director of the Census and Statistics may recommend are hereby transferred to the Bureau of the Census and Statistics.

Done at the City of Manila, this 24th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Executive Order Nos. : 248 – 399]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.