MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 108

AUTHORIZING THE REPURCHASE OF LANDS LEVIED AND SOLD ON EXECUTION FOR FAILURE TO PAY IRRIGATION CHARGES

Pursuant to the provisions of section three of Commonwealth Act Numbered Eighty-seven, I, hereby authorize the owners of those parcels of lands, which have been levied and sold on execution for failure to pay irrigation charges and which have not yet been disposed of by the Government, to repurchased their lands at a price, which shall not be less than the total of all the unpaid irrigation charges, and penalties due on the land on the date of repurchase, an the costs of judicial proceedings, with interest at the rate of four per centum per annum, as certified by the Director of Public Works: Provided, That application for the repurchase shall be made within one year from the date of the promulgation of this Order, and that at least ten per centum of the repurchase price shall be paid within thirty days after notice for the payment thereof. The balance of the repurchase price shall be paid in cash or in not more than two annual installments. All installments due and payable shall draw interest at four per centum per annum: Provided, however, That failure on the part of the repurchaser to pay any installment within the period of six months from the time it is due, shall ipso facto forfeit to the Government all amounts previously paid by the repurchaser and the sale shall stand cancelled, null, and void. All lands repurchased under this Order shall be subject to irrigation charges and ordinary taxes, which shall be paid beginning with the year in which the repurchase has been made. The lands not repurchased in the manner and within the period allowed in this Order shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Act Numbered Thirty hundred and thirty-eight. The Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce shall be charged with the carrying out of the provisions of this Order through the Director of Lands who shall prepare such deeds or documents as may be deemed necessary.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 108. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 643-644.