MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 114

In order to minimize misunderstanding regarding jurisdiction originating from undefined or uncertain boundaries of political divisions and subdivisions, it is directed that the offices having to do with the creation of new political divisions or subdivisions see to it that before any proposition to organize any community into such political division or subdivision is submitted to the Office of the President for action, pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the petition therefore is accompanied with accurate descriptions of the boundaries of the proposed political division or subdivision. It must be shown in the description of the boundaries of the proposed political division or subdivision that the principal corners of said division or subdivision are properly defined by placing thereon concrete monuments of standard size at the expense of the interested party and in the presence of the officials concerned or their duly authorized representatives. The said monuments should be tied also to at least three permanent landmarks, as witness corners to insure permanency.

The Director of Public Works and the Director of Lands are hereby directed to lend their assistance and cooperation to the proper local authorities to enable the latter to state and define with accuracy lines of every community to be organized into a new political division or subdivision. It is further directed that to simplify the description of the boundary lines and facilitate the location thereof on the ground, every such line should be made to follow, as far as practicable, the course of a stream or of a straight line to be drawn from one permanent visible point to another permanent visible point.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirty-first day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 114. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 655.