MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 230

ORGANIZING THE DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE

Pursuant to the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred thirty, and by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby order the organization of the Department of National Defense effective November first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine.

The Department of National Defense shall be charged with the duty of supervising the national defense program of the country, and shall have executive supervision over the Philippine Army, the Bureau of Aëronautics, the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Philippine Nautical School, and over the establishment and operation of all radio stations (receiving, transmitting, or broadcasting) other than those maintained by the Bureau of Posts.

The transfer to the Department of National Defense of the Bureaus, offices, and services enumerated in the second paragraph hereof shall be effected on November first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, or as soon thereafter as practicable, but not later than December thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine.

The necessary fund for the organization and establishment of the Office of the Secretary of National Defense and for its maintenance until the next fiscal year shall be taken from the forced savings in salaries and wages and sundry expenses of the Bureaus and offices of the Office of the President, and shall be expended in accordance with a budget to be approved by the President.

The unexpended balances of funds or appropriations and the personnel, equipment, materials, records, and other properties pertaining to the Bureaus, offices, and services enumerated in the second paragraph hereof are hereby transferred to the Department of National Defense. The Auditor General and the Commissioner of the Budget shall make the necessary adjustments of the appropriations affected thereby.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirty-first day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 230. Messages of the President, 5 (1), pp. 1009-1010.