MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 354

PROMULGATING CERTAIN EMERGENCY RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ELECTRICAL COMMUNICATION AND RADIO INSTALLATION AND SALE OR REPAIR OF RADIO APPARATUS OR PARTS THEREOF

Upon the recommendation of the National Emergency Administration, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, acting under and by virtue of the powers vested in me by Commonwealth Act Numbered Six hundred, as amended by Commonwealth Act Numbered Six hundred and twenty, do hereby issue and promulgate the following rules and regulations:

I. General Provisions

1. Any person possessing knowledge or information concerning any unlicensed radio transmitter installation shall immediately report such fact to the municipal mayor who shall without delay transmit such report directly to the Secretary of the National Defense, giving the name and address of the owner and the location of the installation.

2. The Insular Collector of Customs shall reports to the Department of National Defense any radio set or radio apparatus, or parts thereof, which may be imported into the Philippines or brought therein as personal baggage, excepting those consigned to bona fide radio dealers or to regularly established communication companies. The report shall contain the name and address of the owner or importer concerned, the date of importation, and the particulars of the articles so imported.

3. No person, firm, or corporation dealing in the sale or repair of radio apparatus, either in complete units or in parts, shall sell transmitters or parts of radio receivers to, nor, repair radio transmitters or parts thereof for, any person or entity not possessing a radio construction permit or a radio station license issued by the Department of National Defense, or a certificate of registration issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue in case of radio receivers.

4. Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of telecommunication, or in the sale or repair business of telecommunication apparatus or accessories thereof, shall report immediately to the Department of National Defense the names and duties of all aliens now in their employ and those that may hereafter be employed, giving their respective addresses.

5. (a) “Flash” or warming message which may be filed by accredited personnel of the United States Army and Navy, the Philippine Army, the Philippine Constabulary, and such other agencies as may subsequently be authorized to file such kind of messages by the proper authorities, shall be accorded free transmission over the Bureau of Posts electrical communication systems and over the telephone systems owned and operated by chartered cities, provinces, and municipalities.

(b) “Flash” or warning messages shall be given priority over all other kinds of messages.

6. The exchange of private messages between parties purporting to endanger the integrity or safety of the Philippines is hereby prohibited, end no such messages shall be transmitted over any telecommunication systems therein.

II. Amateur Radio Station

7. No amateur radio station licensee in the Philippines shall exchange or allow the exchange through his station of communication with any station located in foreign countries, nor broadcast or allow the broadcast of any information intended for foreign countries.

8. No amateur radio station licensee shall allow the use of his station by any third party for any purpose whatsoever.

III. Ship and Aircraft Radio Stations

9. No new radio station shall be established and/or operated on board pleasure yatchs and vessels of Philippine register or aircraft not compulsorily required by law to carry such radio installation. Exception, however, shall be made of vessels or aircraft used primarily for carrying passengers and for salvage work, or for any other service wherein the use of radio communication is indispensable.

10. No inter-island or foreign vessel while located within the territorial waters of the Philippines, shall exchange communication with any other vessel located outside such territorial limits, except in case of distress, nor with any foreign coastal stations, except those located in the United States.

IV. Penalties

11. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of Commonwealth Act No. 600, violations of the foregoing rules and regulations are punishable by imprisonment of not more than ten years or by a fine of not more than then thousand pesos, or by both.

V. Effectivity

12. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done at the City of Manila, this 1st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.