MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 55

WHEREAS, the Constitution of the Philippines prescribes that the State may, in the interest of national welfare and defense, establish and operate means of transportation and communications; and

WHEREAS, the planning and operation of communication facilities, including telegraph, telephone, and radio services, should be so coordinated as to insure the utmost economy of public expenditures consistent with efficiency and national interest and thus avoid unnecessary duplication of such facilities;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby constitute and create a National Electrical-Communication Board consisting of—

(1)   The Under Secretary of Public Works and Communications, as Chairman; and

(2)   A representative from the Philippine Army;

(3)   A representative of the Bureau of Posts;

(4)   A representative of the Bureau of Public Works; and

(5)   A representative of the Government-owned corporations, as members,

to be designated by the President of the Philippines from time to time.

This Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Government, its branches, subdivisions, and agencies in connection with the following matters:

(a)    The study of measures for the coordination and improvement of electrical communications;

(b)    The investigation and adjudication of conflicts that may arise in the operation of electrical communications; and

(c)    The investigation of other matters pertaining to electrical communications that may be referred to it from time to time.

The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairman and shall submit reports covering its findings or recommendations to the Government entities concerned through appropriate channels.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fifth day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 55. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 870-871.