MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 19

CREATING A NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATION TO ADVISE THE GOVERNMENT ON EDUCATIONAL POLICIES AND NECESSARY REFORMS IN THE EXISTING SYSTEM OF EDUCATION.

WHEREAS the Constitution of the Philippines prescribes certain definite educational objectives to be accomplished through the medium of the schools;

WHEREAS the present system of public instruction was devised under a political status and social conditions different from those which now exist or which will arise in the near future as a result of political and economic changes;

WHEREAS with the settlement of the question of Philippine independence, the political future of the Philippines has been determined, making possible a more definite orientation of educational aims;

WHEREAS an educational system can only render permanent social benefits when it is in keeping with the economic conditions and opportunities obtaining in each epoch;

WHEREAS for a proper recasting of our educational system it is necessary to make available to the Government the wisdom and experience of men who have been engaged in the study of education in its varied aspects and have the ability to envision the qualities in character, learning and vocational aptitudes which should be possessed by Filipino citizens in order that they may be reared in civic efficiency and trained to serve the nation;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L.Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Public Instruction, hereby constitute and create a National Council of Education to consist of such members as may be appointed by the President of the Philippines, from time to time,whose duties shall be to study and make recommendation concerning reforms in the present system of public and private education in the Philippines, to advise the Government on basic educational policies, and to report on such other matters related to education as may from time to time be submitted to its consideration by the Secretary of Public Instruction. For administrative purposes this Council shall be under the Department of Public Instruction and shall have authority, with the approval of the corresponding Head of Department, to obtain the assistance of officers and employees of any department, bureau, or office of the Government which may be considered necessary for the proper performance of its duties.

Done at the City of Manila, this nineteenth day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 20. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 806.