MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 147

AUTHORIZING THE COMMISSIONER OF THE BUDGET TO TAKE PART IN THE DELIBERATIONS OF THE CABINET IN CERTAIN MATTERS

Whereas, the Commissioner of the Budget is the official of the Government who is entrusted by the President, in the performance of his constitutional duty, with the task of preparing the budget of the receipts and expenditures of the National Government;

Whereas, for the proper and effective performance of this duty, it is necessary that constant supervision and control be exercised over the expenditures of the Government, in general, and, in particular, over appointments of new personnel, increases in the salaries of personnel already existing and requisitions and orders for furniture, equipment, and supplies;

Now, therefore, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution and the laws, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do ordain and promulgate as follows:

The Commissioner of the Budget shall sit and take part in the deliberations of the Cabinet wherein matters involving the expenditure of public funds and appointments of employees for the different departments, bureaus, and offices of the Government, including the offices under the President, are considered. In all cases submitted to the Cabinet where the Commissioner of the Budget and the Head of the Department concerned should have a difference of opinion on the expenditure of funds entailed by any proposed new appointment, increase in salary, purchase of furniture or equipment, new activity or project, or expansion of any existing service, the decision of the Cabinet on such proposal shall be subject to the approval of the President.

Done at the City of Manila, this eight day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Executive Order No. 147. Messages of the President, 4 (1), pp. 1310.