MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 173

CHANGING THE DATE OF GATHERING AND COMPILING STATISTICAL DATA ON REAL PROPERTY FROM MARCH 31, 1937, AS PROVIDED IN EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 81, DATED JANUARY 20, 1937, TO CENSUS DAY, JANUARY 1, 1939

Whereas Executive Order Numbered Eighty-four, dated January twentieth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, requires that complete classified data relating to real property ownership, improvements, and assessments in the Philippines, be gathered and compiled as of March thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven; while Proclamation Numbered Three hundred thirty, dated October eleventh, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, has postponed Census Day for January first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine;

Whereas it is desirable that the statistical data for the Census of the Philippines be gathered as of Census Day and include all transactions and changes affecting real property ownership, improvements, and assessments during the period from April first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, to December thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight; Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred seventy, do hereby order that the gathering and compiling of complete classified data relating to real property ownership, improvements, and assessments, by the city and provincial treasurers and assessors, as provided in Executive Order Numbered Eighty-four above referred to, shall be made as of Census Day January first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, instead of March, thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and that the designation of all city and provincial treasurers and assessors as Census officers to assist in the work is hereby extended until said work is completed. All city and provincial treasurers and assessors shall bring said data on real property, currently, up to and including- December thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, in such manner and form as the Commissioner of the Census shall prescribe.

Done at the City of Manila, this seventh day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Executive Order No. 173. Messages of the President, 4 (1), 1367-1368.