MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 158

ORGANIZING THE BARRIO OF ANGONO, MUNICIPALITY OF BINANGONAN, PROVINCE OF RIZAL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF ANGONO

Whereas, the inhabitants of the former municipality of Angono have petitioned that the same be separated from the municipality of Binangonan, Province of Rizal, and organized into an independent municipality;

Now, therefore, upon recommendation of the provincial board of Rizal and the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the twenty-seven municipalities of the Province of Rizal, as established by section thirty-eight of the said Code and Executive Order Numbered One hundred and eight, series of nineteen hundred and seventeen, are hereby increased to twenty-eight by separating the barrio of Angono from the municipality of Binangonan and organizing the same into an independent municipality under the name of Angono, with the seat of government in the barrio of the same name.

The municipality of Binangonan shall consist of its present territory less the territory comprised in the former municipality of Angono.

The organization herein made shall take effect on January first, nineteen hundred thirty-nine, provided that prior thereto the Secretary of the Interior shall have certified that the sites for the presidencia, plaza, market, and cemetery have acquired and the Secretary of Finance shall have certified as to the financial ability of the new political subdivision to shoulder the expenses of an independent municipality.

Done at the City of Manila, this nineteenth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Executive Order No. 158. Messages of the President, 4 (1), pp. 1335.