MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 20

CREATING A COMMISSION TO STUDY AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE WAYS AND MEANS TO INCREASE THE PRODUCTION OF PALAY, CORN AND OTHER FOOD CROPS

WHEREAS, this country is not self-sufficient in rice, corn and other food crops, thereby necessitating heavy annual importation of these foodstuffs from abroad;

WHEREAS, in the Philippines there are vast tracts of fertile lands, both private and public, still undeveloped and untouched, capable of producing all of our requirements in the above food crops;

WHEREAS, the development and settlement of these lands would provide productive employment for the surplus population in the congested farm areas;

WHEREAS, the present system of cultivation for the production of rice and corn is antiquated and wasteful, calling for the introduction of better scientific methods and the utilization of modern farm machinery and equipment;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create and constitute a Rice and Corn Production Commission which shall be composed of the following:

It shall be the duty of this Commission to recommend areas of public and private lands suitable for immediate development; to submit plans to bring these areas into immediate cultivation for the production of rice, corn and other food crops; and to recommend means and methods for the speedy mechanization of Philippine rice and corn culture.

Each member of the Commission who is not in the Government service shall receive a per diem to be fixed by the President.

The Commission shall submit to the President of the Philippines its report and recommendations not later than December 15, 1946.

The Commission is hereby empowered and authorized to call upon any Department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such information as it may require in the performance of its functions, and for the purpose of securing such information, it shall have access to and shall have the right to examine any books, documents, papers, or records of such departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government.

Done at the City of Manila, this 3rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 50]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 20, December 3, 1946