MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 41

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COMMITTEE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

WHEREAS, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, of which the Philippines is a member, has signified its willingness to maintain close contact with the Member nations; and

WHEREAS, the FAO has suggested the creation of a national liaison Food and Agriculture Committee as a means of securing quick exchange of information between this intergovernmental organization and the national body;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine Committee of Food and agriculture which shall act as the national liaison to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, promote measures for raising the levels of nutrition and standards of living, particularly of the rural populations, coordinate the efforts toward improving the efficiency of agricultural production and of the distribution of food and agricultural products, and to recommend appropriate measures pertaining to food and agriculture in the Philippines.

The Philippine Committee of Food and Agriculture shall be composed of a Chairman and an Executive Secretary, to be appointed by the President; a representative each on crop production, livestock production, forestry, and fisheries, to be designated by the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce; a representative each on food utilization, animal nutrition, and economics of agriculture, to be designated by the President of the University of the Philippines; a representative on human nutrition, to be designated by the Secretary of Health and Public Welfare; and two representatives of the Philippine Farmers Association.

The Chairman is hereby authorized to call upon any officer or employee of any department, bureau, or agency of the Government for such assistance as may be needed by the Philippine Committee of Food and Agriculture for the proper discharge of its functions hereunder.

Done at the City of Manila, this 17th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-W – 44]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 41, June 17, 1946