MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 39

CREATING COMMITTEES TO INVESTIGATE THE BUSINESS AFFAIRS OF GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS AND OTHER AGENCIES OF THE GOVERNMENT

Committees are hereby created to investigate the business affairs and the operations of the National Development Company, the Philippine Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, the Emergency Control Administration, the Government Procurement Commission, and the Petroleum Products Control Administration. Said investigation shall cover transactions and acts of said entities or of their officers and employees from the date of their organization or reorganization after the liberation of the Philippines, with a view of determining specifically whether or not:

a. Said entities have been operated in a manner best conducive to serve the ends for which they were created;

b. Any of their officers or employees have violated the trust reposed in them;

c. Any violation of law or the charters of said entities has been committed in the course of their business or operation; and

d. Proper accounts have been kept and proper auditing has been made of such accounts.

The Committees shall be composed of the following:

For the National Development Company:

Mr. Sixto de la Costa, Chairman Mr. Higinio Macadaeg, Member Mr. Conrado Sevilla, Member

For the Philippine Relief and Rehabilitation Administration and the Emergency Control Administration:

Mr. Pedro Tuazon, Chairman Mr. Alfredo Jacinto, Member Mr. Pio Joven, Member

For the Government Procurement Commission and the Petroleum Products Control Administration:

Mr. Pastor Endencia, Chairman Mr. Roberto A. Gianzon, Member Mr. Gregorio S. Licaros, Member

For the purposes of this investigation, the Committees are hereby granted all the powers of an Investigating Committee under Sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code, including the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, and take testimony or evidence relevant to the investigation. The Committees are hereby empowered and authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such information as they may require in the performance of their functions, and for the purpose of securing such information, they shall have access to and shall have the right to examine any books, documents, papers, or records of such departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government.

Each Investigating Committee shall submit to the President of the Philippines its report and recommendations not later than June 30, 1946.

Members of the Committees who are not in the government service shall be paid such compensation as may be fixed by the President.

Done at the City of Manila this 4th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-W – 44]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 39, June 4, 1946