MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 14

CREATING A REORGANIZATION COMMITTEE TO ASSIST THE PRESIDENT IN THE REORGANIZATION OF THE DIFFERENT EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES, AGENCIES, AND OTHER INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE GOVERNMENT, INCLUDING THE CORPORATIONS OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY IT, PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 51

WHEREAS, under the provisions of Republic Act No. 51, the President has been authorized to reorganize within one year the different executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and other instrumentalities of the Government, including the corporations owned or controlled by it; and

WHEREAS, it is urgently necessary for the purpose of promoting simplicity, economy and efficiency in the operation of the Government that the reorganization contemplated in said Act be carried out as  expeditiously as possible;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Reorganization Committee which shall be composed of the following:

Within the limits of the total authorized appropriation for the fiscal year 1947, the Committee, after making a factual survey of the organizational set-up of the Government, shall recommend such reforms and changes in the different executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and other instrumentalities of the Government, including the corporations owned or controlled by the Government, as may be deemed necessary, and for this purpose, the Committee may submit recommendations to diminish, add to or abolish those existing and create new ones; consolidate related undertakings; transfer functions, appropriations, equipment, property, records, and personnel from one department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality to another; eliminate duplicated services or authorize new ones not provided for; classify, combine, split or abolish positions, standardize salaries, and do whatever is necessary and desirable to effect economy and promote efficiency in the government service.

To facilitate the work of the Committee, the Head of Department shall immediately create a reorganization sub-committee in his department. There shall also be sub-committees for the reorganization of the corporations owned or controlled by the Government to be appointed by the respective boards of said corporations.

In the performance of its work, the Committee may secure the services of such officers and employees of any department, bureau, office, agency and other instrumentality of the Government, including the corporations owned or controlled by the Government, whose assistance it may require.

The Committee or its duly authorized representatives shall, for the purpose of securing needed data and information, have access to, and have the right to examine any books, documents, papers, or records of the executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and other instrumentalities of the Government, including the corporations owned or controlled by it.

In order to expedite the reorganization of the Government as contemplated in Republic Act No. 51, the Committee shall submit its report and recommendation not later than December 15, 1946, and the subcommittees for the different departments and for the corporations owned or controlled by the government shall submit their reports to the Committee not later than November 20, 1946.

Done at the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 50]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 14, October 18, 1946