MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 7

CREATING THE CIVIL AERONAUTICS COMMISSION

WHEREAS, in order to promote efficient and coordinated development of civilian air transportation in the Philippines, there is need of establishing an agency to study and make recommendations on matters relative to the issuance of permits and licenses and designation and establishment of civil airways or routes;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers  vested in me by law, do hereby create the Civil Aeronautics Commission to study and make recommendations to the Government on applications for, or other matters concerning, the issuance of permits and licenses and the designation and establishment of civil air routes. The Commission shall be composed of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, as Chairman, and Messrs. Sotero Baluyot, Jose Paez, the Public Service Commissioner and the Director of Aeronautics, as members.

The Commission is hereby authorized to hold hearings on application and other matters in connection with the issuance of permits and licenses and the designation and establishment of civil air routes, and, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code, it shall have the power to summon witnesses, issue subpoena, administer oaths and take testimony in connection with its work.

All applications for, or other matters concerning, the issuance of permits and licenses and the designation and establishment of civil air routes, shall be prepared on a form to be prescribed by the Commission and filed with it. Its reports and recommendations shall be submitted by it to the President, through the Secretary of National Defense.

Members of the Commission who are not in the government service shall be paid such compensation as may be fixed by the President.

Done at the City of Manila, this 30th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 50]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 7, July 30, 1946