MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 28

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 7, DATED JULY 30, 1946, ENTITLED “CREATING THE CIVIL AERONAUTICS COMMISSION” AS AMENDED BY ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 10, DATED AUGUST 24, 1946

Administrative Order No. 7, dated July 30, 1946, entitled “Creating the Civil Aeronautics Commission” as amended by Administrative Order No. 10, dated August 24, 1946, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“WHEREAS, in order to promote efficient and coordinated development of civilian air transportation in the Philippines, there is need of establishing an agency to study and make recommendations on matters relative to the issuance of permits and licenses and/or designation and establishment of civil airways or routes, and to advise the Government on applications of foreign companies to establish air lines to the Philippines;

“NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Civil Aeronautics Commission to study and make recommendations to the Government on applications for, or other matters concerning, the issuance of permits and licenses and the designation and establishment of civil air routes, and to advise the Government on applications of foreign companies to establish air lines to the Philippines. The Commission shall be composed of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, as Chairman, and Mr. Sotero Baluyot, Mr. Jose Paez, the Public Service Commissioner, and the Director of Aeronautics, as members. In case of the absence of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, the Public Service Commissioner or the Director of Aeronautics, the Undersecretary of Public Works and Communications, the Deputy Public Service Commissioner and the Assistant Director of Aeronautics, respectively, shall sit in their places.

“The Commission is hereby authorized to hold hearings on applications and other matters in connection with the issuance of permits and licenses and the designation and establishment of civil air routes and on applications of foreign companies to establish air lines to the Philippines. Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code, the Commission shall have the power to summon witnesses, issue subpoena, administer oaths and take testimony in connection with its work.

“All applications for, or other matters concerning, the issuance of permits and licenses and the designation and establishment of civil air routes, including applications of foreign companies to establish air lines to the Philippines, shall be prepared on forms to be prescribed by the Commission and filed with it. Its reports and recommendations on interinsular aviation shall be submitted by it to the President, through the Secretary of National Defense, and those on international aviation, through the Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

“The Commission is hereby authorized to charge such fees as it may determine for the filing of applications but not exceeding Two Hundred Pesos (P200.00) for each application and may by resolution provide for the payment of a per diem not exceeding Twenty Pesos (P20) for each member for each meeting attended by him, subject to the approval of the President.

Done at the City of Manila, this 5th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1947). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 50]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 28, March 5, 1947