MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 65

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS TO CELEBRATE THE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY ON 12 JUNE 1999 AND CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, there is need for the Filipino people to commemorate the heroism and self-sacrifice of our forefathers in the struggle for Philippine Independence;

WHEREAS, this year, we are celebrating the 101 st Anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence and the centenary of major events of the Malolos Republic; and,

WHEREAS, there is need to properly coordinate all activities leading to the said celebration.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The government shall take the lead in the celebration of Philippine Independence with the theme, “ Kalayaan Tungo sa Kaginhawaan “, emphasizing that the ultimate goal of the struggle for independence is the improvement in the quality of life and well-being of all Filipinos.

Sec. 2. All Departments, Bureaus, Offices, National Government Agencies, and Government Owned and Controlled Corporations are hereby directed to participate in the Philippine Independence Day in a fitting manner consistent with their respective public service functions.

Activities specifically directed for the poor and the disadvantaged sectors shall be given priority attention. Such activities shall include, among others, medical missions, job fairs, trade fairs, and special programs and activities in government cultural facilities.

Said agencies are further enjoined to encourage the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations to help make the 1999 Independence Day Celebration a momentous occasion.

Sec. 3. The Celebration shall stress the participation of Filipinos in all regions of the country in the struggle for independence.

Towards this end, Local Government Units are enjoined to participate in the celebration by organizing independence day activities in their respective localities.

Sec. 4. A National Committee is hereby created to coordinate the following major events, in coordination with local government units and/or other agencies involved:

a. Flag Raising and Wreath Laying at Rizal Park; Aguinaldo Shrine at Kawit, Cavite; Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan; and Bonifacio Monument in Kalookan City.

The same activities shall also be conducted simultaneously in selected locations in the Cordilleras, Bicol, Visayas, and Mindanao.

b. Independence Day Program and Civic-Military Parade at the Quirino Grandstand, Rizal Park which shall be modest in scale but meaningful.

Sec. 5. The National Committee shall be composed of the following:

Sec. 6. To assist the National Committee, an Executive Committee is hereby created consisting of the Chairman and the Co-Chairman of the National Committee, the Secretaries of Finance, Budget and Management, and Public Works and Highways, and such other members as the Chairman may designate.

Sec. 7. The National Committee Chairman is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations and local government units, to extend all necessary assistance to the National and Executive Committees.

Sec. 8. In support of the 1999 Independence Day Celebration, all concerned government agencies and local government units are authorized to allocate such amount as may be necessary to defray expenditures for the 1999 Independence Day Celebration.

Sec. 9. The funds necessary for the implementation of the programs/activities identified in Section 4 hereof, shall come from funds of the Office of the President allocated for the purpose in the 1999 GAA and from the unobligated funds for cultural and historical activities released to the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (Office of the Secretary) and the National Historical Institute from the 1998 GAA.

Fund augmentation thereon, as may be necessary, shall be sourced from any of the regular items in the 1999 GAA, or from such other sources as may be determined by DBM.

Sec. 10. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th of April in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.

Administrative Order No. 65, April 29, 1999