MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 137

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE ON THE PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS, TO BE CALLED “TASK FORCE TIBAY BAGA”, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution provides that the State shall promote and protect the general well-being of the citizenry;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 mandated for the devolution of the delivery of the health services and facilities as one of the basic functions and responsibilities of all local government units (LGUs) at all levels;

WHEREAS, surveys say that sixteen (16) million Filipinos are infected with tuberculosis (TB) and six hundred thousand TB cases are actively spreading the disease;

WHEREAS, the Philippines ranks third (3 rd ) in the Western Pacific Region and ninth (9 th ) worldwide in relation to the prevalence of TB cases, and is one of the twenty-two (22) countries, which belongs to the World Health Organization (WHO) watchlist;

WHEREAS, this government envisions the Philippines as a tuberculosis-free country by the year 2004;

WHEREAS, this vision will only be realized through a comprehensive and integrated strategy in detecting, treating and preventing the said disease;

NOW THEREFORE, I JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue vested in me by the Constitution and the laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Declaration of Policy. It is the policy of the State that full and integrated delivery and development of health care services throughout the country must be promoted, encouraged and ensured, especially for the poor and marginalized sectors of society. Towards this end, the State shall provide for the participation and active involvement and collaboration of all local government units (LGUs) together with the stakeholders, particularly with the Department of Health (DOH) and the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) with the main objective of eradicating tuberculosis by the year 2004.

Section 2. Organization of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Prevention of Tuberculosis. The Inter-Agency Task Force on the Prevention of Tuberculosis, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force Tibay Baga, is hereby constituted to serve as the overall coordinating body to oversee and ensure adherence by all LGUs and stakeholders concerned to appropriate guiding principles in the implementation of a comprehensive and coordinative approach in eradicating TB.

Section 3. Composition of Task Force Tibay Baga. Within thirty (30) days after the approval of this Administrative Order, the Task Force Tibay Baga shall be convened and composed of the following:

A Secretariat shall be organized to provide support to the Task Force Tibay Baga. The LMP National President and the DOH Secretary shall designate or appoint the head of the Secretariat. The members of the secretariat shall be composed of the following: Official representatives from the LMP, DOH, DILG, DECS, PCSO and PAGCOR, LPP, LCP, LnB, and NGOs concerned.

Section 4. Functions of Task Force Tibay Baga. Aside from the responsibilities mentioned under Section 2 hereof, Task Force Tibay Baga is likewise expected to perform the following specific functions:

1. Support and promote policies, programs and projects on health consistent with the Health Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA) that enhance local autonomy participation in eradicating tuberculosis;

2. Formulate partnership mechanisms among all the local government units (LGUs), National Government Agencies (NGAs), private sector, Non-Government Organization (NGOs) and civic groups to support the project Oplan: Tibay Baga;

3. Ensure that all LGUs shall give priority to Oplan: Tibay Baga in addition to the LGU identified minimum basic needs and ensure the allocation of funds for TB control;

4. Ensure that the integration of TB control activities in all local health plans are contained in the respective annual work and financial plans of the LGUs concerned following the National Health Objectives’ standards and to assure the implementation and sustainability of the project;

5. Submit a semi-annual and year-end report to the Office of the President;

6. Organize a Project Evaluation Team to monitor and assess the project implementation; and

7. Perform other functions that may be delegated by the President or as may be deemed necessary by the Chairmen of the Task Force.

Section 5. Funding. The Office of the President shall provide Two Million Pesos (PhP2 Million) as an initial fund for the technical and administrative operations of the Secretariat of the Oplan: Tibay Baga. The National Government Agencies and other stakeholders concerned shall likewise provide funding assistance for the said project.

Section 6. Inter-Agency Coordination. All national government agencies concerned and attached agencies, LGUs, GOCCs and other instrumentalities of the government are hereby directed to cooperate and give their full support to the project.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29 th day of September Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-144] . Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.