MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 53

CREATING AN AD-HOC AND INDEPENDENT CITIZENS’ COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE ALL THE FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING PHILIPPINE CENTENNIAL PROJECTS, INCLUDING ITS COMPONENT ACTIVITIES

WHEREAS , to enhance the confidence of the people in its pursuit of good government, the present administration is committed to resolve with firmness and finality any complaint or impropriety that affects public interest;

WHEREAS , serious questions have been raised regarding the prosecution of the Philippine Centennial Projects and its component projects and activities, including the Expo Pilipino Project in Angeles City, particularly in the use of public resources and the award and prosecution of public works contracts, which now compel an exhaustive investigation;

WHEREAS , to insure impartiality and fairness, there is an urgent need to create an independent fact-finding body to conduct a thorough investigation of all the facts and circumstances surrounding the Project.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby constituted an Ad-Hoc and Independent Citizens’ Committee to look into and investigate all the facts and circumstances surrounding the Philippine Centennial Project.

The Committee shall be composed of five members, only one of whom shall be a government representative.

SEC. 2. The Committee is hereby granted the powers of an investigating body under Section 37, Chapter 9, Book I of the Administrative Code of 1987, including the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony or evidence relevant to the investigation, and to issue compulsory processes to produce documents, books, records and such other matters, in the performance of its functions.

Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to appear upon summons issued under the authority of the preceding paragraph or who, appearing before the Committee, refuses to take oath, give testimony or produce documents for inspection, when lawfully required, shall be subject to discipline as in the case of contempt of court upon application of the Committee before the proper court, in the manner provided for under existing law.

SEC. 3. The Committee shall, upon termination of the fact-finding investigation, forward to the President, through the Executive Secretary, its findings and recommendations, together with the following:

a) the complete records fully identifying the public and private individuals and entities involved — and those not involved, directly or indirectly — in the questionable transactions and the nature and extent of their participation; and

b) draft resolutions or orders or corrective measures to immediately implement its findings and recommendations for approval of the President, including the filing of appropriate criminal and civil cases or disciplinary actions, as the case may be, against the erring public and/or private individuals and entities.

SEC. 4. The Committee is hereby authorized to engage the services of resource persons, professionals and other personnel which may be necessary to carry out its functions, and to authorize, subject to existing compensation laws and/or issuances, the payment of remuneration, honoraria and/or allowances to said personnel.

SEC. 5. The Office of the President shall establish a Special Secretariat for the technical and staff support of the Committee. For this purpose, the Executive Secretary is hereby authorized to detail any personnel from any government office to assist the Committee.

SEC. 6. The Committee is hereby authorized to deputize any law enforcing agency to assist in the performance of its functions.

SEC. 7. The departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities, including government owned and/or controlled corporations are hereby directed to extend such assistance and cooperation as the Committee may need in the discharge of its functions.

SEC. 8. The Office of the President shall provide the necessary funds for the operations of the Committee.

SEC. 9. The Committee shall complete its work on or before June 30, 1999.

SEC. 10. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of FEBRUARY, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.