MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 106

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE FOURTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FEBRUARY 22–25, 1986 EDSA PEOPLE POWER REVOLUTION

WHEREAS, there is a need to safeguard the truth of history of the martial law years, and a need to remember the struggle for freedom and democracy during this period;

WHEREAS, our national spirit was forged through a ceaseless struggle for freedom of Filipinos who rose against colonial masters to become a nation of our own aspiration and creation, molded and formed by our national and collective history as a people, with our own culture, values, ethos, political identity and national psyche;

WHEREAS, the February 22–25, 1986 EDSA Revolution restored democratic institutions and ushered meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country serves as an inspiration as we continue to chart our collective course as a nation and a people;

WHEREAS, the triumph of this revolution was anchored upon people power, the ultimate demonstration of the citizens’ solidarity in seeking to transform Philippine society, and to chart a new course for the country’s history by linking arms and courageously asserting our democratic rights;

WHEREAS, the Filipinos astounded the world with feats of valor during the four historic days of the EDSA People Power Revolution on February 22–25, 1986 showing other captive people the way towards a peaceful political revolution of our time, thereby winning the respect and admiration of the world;

WHEREAS, by virtue of Executive Order No. 82, the EDSA People Power Commission was established, and as per section 2 under its Functions it is mandated to plan, organize and implement the yearly commemoration of the February 22–25, 1986 EDSA Revolution every 25th of February;

WHEREAS, this year marks the celebration of the fourteenth anniversary of the EDSA People Power Revolution;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Constitution of the Organizing Committee. There is hereby constituted an Organizing Committee for the Commemoration of the 14 th Anniversary of the February 22–25, 1986 EDSA Revolution which shall be chaired by the Chairman of the EDSA People Power Commission, Mr. Antonio A. Lopa, representing the private sector, and Co-Chaired by Secretary of the Department of Finance, Hon. Jose T. Pardo. The Secretary of the Department of National Defense, Hon. Orlando Mercado and the Secretary of the Department of Interior and Local Government, Hon. Alfredo S. Lim are hereby designated as Vice-Chairpersons.

The Organizing Committee shall have the 25 EDSA People Power Commissioners as members together with the following from the government sector:

1. Secretary, Department of Agrarian Reform

2. Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways

3. Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs

4. Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry

5. Secretary, Department of Budget and Management

6. Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment

7. Secretary, Department of Education, Culture and Sports

8. Chairman, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority

9. Chairman, Commission on Higher Education

10. Executive Officer for Regional Development – National Capital Region

11. Chairperson, National Youth Commission

12. Secretary, Presidential Management Staff

13. Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines

14. Chairperson, National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women

15. Director-General, Philippine Information Agency

16. Administrator, Philippine Overseas Employment Administration

17. Administrator, Overseas Workers Welfare Administration

18. Director-General, Technical Education and Skills Development Authority

19. Director, National Historical Institute

20. President, League of Provinces of the Philippines

21. President, League of Cities of the Philippines

22. President, League of Municipalities of the Philippines

The Department of Interior and Local Government is hereby designated as lead-coordinator to support and assist the EDSA People Power Commission Organizing Committee for the Fourteenth Anniversary of the February 22–25, 1986 EDSA Revolution.

SECTION 2. Functions . The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Formulate and implement a comprehensive plan for the nationwide commemoration of the 14 th Anniversary of the February 22–25, 1986 EDSA Revolution and coordinate with all sectors concerned in the implementation of the same, taking into consideration austerity measures and the spirit of volunteerism;

2. Create such working committees and designate the respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors, as may be necessary, to ensure the success of the celebration, and

3. Invite or enjoin and mobilize all sectors to participate in the celebration and call upon government instrumentality to render the necessary assistance therefore.

SECTION 3. Staff Support. The Department of Interior and Local Government and the Department of National Defense shall provide technical and secretarial support to the EDSA People Power Commission. The heads of departments, agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are directed to give full support to the Organizing Committee and its various working committees and to actively participate in the celebrations.

SECTION 4. Guidelines. The Organizing Committee shall pattern this year’s celebration after the celebration plan of the 13th Anniversary of the EDSA Revolution.

SECTION 5. Funding . The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of THREE MILLION PESOS (P3,000,000) to support this activity. The EDSA People Power Commission may allocate such amount as may be necessary to defray the expenditures that may be incurred from participation in the EDSA Anniversary. The government agencies involved as part of the Organizing Committee are to allocate their respective funds to defray the costs in their support of the activity.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.