MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 5

CONSTITUTING THE AD-HOC COMMITTEE ON THE UTILIZATION AND DISPOSITION OF REAL PROPERTIES OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT LOCATED LOCALLY AND ABROAD

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, through its departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned-and-controlled corporations, owns various real properties throughout the country and abroad;

WHEREAS, a Committee on the Disposition of the Real Properties of the Republic of the Philippines Located Abroad was constituted under the Office of the President (OP) pursuant to Administrative Order (AO) No. 8 (dated 11 September 1992) to advise the President on the disposition of real properties owned by the Philippine Government located abroad;

WHEREAS, an Ad-Hoc Committee on the Disposition of Idle Properties of the Philippine Government Located in the Philippines was likewise created under OP by virtue of AO No. 9 (dated 11 September 1992) to recommend to the President the development and disposition of these properties;

WHEREAS, the above Ad-Hoc Committee was amended by AO No. 210 (dated 11 August 1995), transferring the chairmanship of the Ad-Hoc Committee from the Office of the President to the Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

WHEREAS, there is a need to centralize in the Office of the President the inventory and review of government-owned real properties located both locally and abroad, so that government can prepare and pursue an optimum utilization and/or disposition plan for the same to generate resources for its pro-poor programs and projects;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987 grants the President of the Philippines a continuing authority to reorganize the Office of the President by, among others, transferring any agency or function of any executive department to the Office of the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Constituting the “Ad-Hoc Committee on the Utilization and Disposition of Real Properties of the Philippine Government Located Locally and Abroad” . There is hereby constituted under the Office of the President, an “Ad-Hoc Committee on the Utilization and Disposition of Real Properties of the Philippine Government Located Locally and Abroad”, referred hereafter as the “Committee”.

This Committee shall replace the “Ad-Hoc Committee on the Disposition of Idle Properties of the Philippine Government Located in the Philippines” created under AO No. 9 (s. 1992) and the “Committee on the Disposition of the Real Properties of the Republic of the Philippines Located Abroad” created under AO No. 8 (s. 1992), both of which are hereby abolished.

SECTION 2. Composition . The Committee shall be composed of the following members:

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions . The Committee shall perform the following duties and functions:

a. Conduct an inventory of all real properties (land and all its improvements) of the Philippine Government located in the Philippines and abroad;

b. Evaluate the studies prepared by the “Ad-Hoc Committee on the Disposition of Idle Properties of the Philippine Government Located in the Philippines” and by the “Committee on the Disposition of the Real Properties of the Republic of the Philippines Located Abroad”;

c. Review options on the utilization or disposition of the Government’s real properties; and

d. Recommend to the President action plans for the optimum utilization/disposition of the same.

SECTION 4. Technical/Secretariat Support . The Presidential Management Staff shall provide technical and secretariat support to the Committee, with the assistance of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the Department of Foreign Affairs.

The Philippine Ambassador or the Chief of Mission and concerned staff shall likewise extend technical support to the Committee when the real property/ies located in their post of assignment shall be affected by the Committee’s study and planned disposition.

SECTION 5. Reporting Requirements . The Committee shall submit quarterly reports to the President on the status of its activities.

SECTION 6. Assistance from Other Government Agencies . All other government agencies are directed to extend full support and assistance to the Committee on the discharge of its functions.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause . AO No. 8 (s. 1992), AO No. 9 (s. 1992) and AO No. 210 (s. 1995) are hereby repealed. All other issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are not consistent with any of the provisions of this Administrative Order, are also hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 20 th day of July in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-144] . Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.