MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 109

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF AND RATIONALIZING THE SYSTEMS AND ACCOUNTABILITIES IN THE LINE AND STAFF OFFICES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, the Office of the President is the seat of power of government in the country and the Office where policies and decisions affecting the entire nation emanate;

WHEREAS, in view of the critical nature of the Office of the President, there is a need to ensure that all internal policies, systems, procedures and activities are coordinated and responsive to the requirements of the Presidency to enable him to perform his functions effectively;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a mechanism that will coordinate the activities, operations, systems and processes directly affecting the Presidency, to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of staff support services to the President;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of Executive Order No. 292, series of 1987, otherwise known as the “Administrative Code of 1987,” provides the President continuing authority to reorganize his Office.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Office of the Chief of Staff . There is hereby created in the Office of the President a support staff called the Office of the Chief of Staff (OCS). It shall assist the President in the management of his day-to-day activities and requirements, and provide inputs in the President’s decision-making. As support staff to the President, the OCS shall have the primary function of supervising and ensuring an efficient and responsive day-to-day operational support to the Presidency to enable the President to focus on more important national concerns. This includes:

1. Managing the day-to-day schedule of the President. The OCS shall determine and recommend to the President the activities which shall be personally attended by the President. Relatedly, it shall coordinate with all concerned offices and agencies and ensure adequate preparation, both substantive and administrative, in the conduct of presidential activities;

2. Providing the President a strategic planning function;

3. Providing coordination of the policy formulation process at the President’s level;

4. Ensuring the monitoring and evaluation of programs and projects being undertaken by the Government; and

5. Providing secretariat services to the Economic Coordinating Council and its activities.

SEC. 2. Organizational Set-up and Staff Complement . The OCS shall be under the direct supervision of the President. It shall be headed by the Chief of Staff, who will be a Member of the Cabinet, who shall be assisted by three (3) Deputy Chiefs of Staff.

The OCS shall directly supervise the Appointments Office, the Documents Management Group and the Correspondence Office. The staff of these offices shall provide technical and administrative support to the Chief of Staff and the three (3) Deputy Chiefs of Staff.

SEC. 3. Attached Agency . The Philippine Institute for Development Studies (PIDS) shall be attached to the OCS for policy and program coordination.

SEC. 4. Coordinating Mechanism in the Office of the President . The following Offices shall exercise their respective mandates, as provided by law, and shall closely collaborate among themselves to ensure the provision of effective and efficient support to the President as well as the smooth operations of the Office of the President:

1. The Executive Secretary shall continue to carry out the functions as provided in Section 27, Chapter 9-B, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, among others, which include the following:

a. Directly assist the President in the management of the affairs pertaining to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines;

b. Implement presidential directives, orders and decisions;

c. Exercise supervision and control over the various units in the Office of the President Proper and over the various agencies under the Office of the President;

d. Exercise primary authority to sign papers “By authority of the President”, attest executive orders and other presidential issuances;

e. Assist the President in the performance of functions pertaining to legislation and in the administration of special projects.

The Executive Secretary shall also continue to supervise the Presidential Assistants, particularly the Presidential Assistants for Regional Concerns.

2. The Chief of Staff shall perform the functions and roles as provided in Sections 1 and 2 of this Administrative Order.

3. The Presidential Management Staff (PMS) shall continue to serve as the government agency responsible to the President for providing substantive staff assistance in the presidential exercise of overall management of the development process, pursuant to Executive Order No. 130, series of 1987, and related issuances.

To ensure close coordination, the PMS shall furnish the OCS copies of the outputs submitted to the President. On a case-to-case basis, the output of PMS shall be submitted to the President through the OCS.

SEC. 5. Funding Support . The funds to support the operations of the Office of the Chief of Staff shall be sourced from the existing budget of the Office of the President.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause . All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.