MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 77

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES TO CELEBRATE THE ADVENT OF THE NEW MILLENNIUM AND CREATING A NATIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE TO PREPARE FOR THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, the advent of the new millennium in the year 2000 has generated global preparatory celebrations;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has deemed it proper to mark this event by undertaking thematic activities and programs which will highlight the Estrada Administration’s vision for the nation;

WHEREAS, the Estrada Administration has given priority to the modernization of agriculture by transforming the agriculture sector into a dynamic, technologically advanced and globally competitive sector to realize its goals to attain food security and eradicate rural poverty;

WHEREAS, the advent of the new millennium will provide new avenues to further harness the potentials of science and technology towards the attainment of our vision;

WHEREAS, the activities to mark the advent of the new millennium will focus international recognition and goodwill to the country;

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure a coordinated and synchronized nationwide celebration of the advent of the new millennium among government agencies and the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a National Organizing Committee. There is hereby created a National Organizing Committee (NOC), hereinafter referred to as the NOC to take charge in the organization and implementation of programs and activities to celebrate the advent of the new millennium.

SECTION 2. Composition. The NOC shall be chaired by the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and co-chaired by the Secretary of Trade and Industry and the Secretary of Science and Technology. The NOC shall identify and recommend to the President other government sector representatives and three (3) private sector representatives as members to be designated or appointed by the President.

SECTION 3. Functions. The NOC shall have the following functions:

(a) Initiate and take the lead in the implementation of programs and activities for the celebration of the advent of the new millennium;

(b) Formulate a comprehensive preparatory plan for the nationwide celebration of the advent of the new millennium starting on 31 December 1999, including consolidation of all millennium-related projects of the government and the private sector;

(c) Coordinate with all sectors concerned in the implementation of the same;

(d) Create technical working groups and designate their respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors, as may be necessary to ensure the success of the celebration; and

(e) Perform such other functions as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of the NOC.

SECTION 4. Staff Support. The Department of Agriculture shall provide technical and secretariat support to the NOC.

SECTION 5. Institutional Support. The NOC Chairperson and Co-Chairperson are hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations to extend all necessary assistance to the NOC and its working committees.

SECTION 6. Funding. The Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) is hereby directed to allocate the amount of Ten Million Pesos (P10,000,000.00) to be sourced from available sources to support this activity and release said amount to the Department of Agriculture subject to the submission of the Work and Financial Plan of the NOC to the DBM.

Concerned agencies are hereby authorized to allocate from their respective funds any amount which they may deem necessary to defray the expenditures that may be incurred from participation in this celebration, subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SECTION 7. Submission of Reports. The NOC shall submit monthly reports to the Office of the President and a terminal report one month after the last activity thereof.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Administrative Orders Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.

Administrative Order No. 77, July 22, 1999