MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 111

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 109, SERIES OF 2000, ENTITLED “CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF AND RATIONALIZING THE SYSTEMS AND ACCOUNTABILITIES IN THE LINE AND STAFF OFFICES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT”

WHEREAS, under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize His Office.

WHEREAS, there is a need to further streamline and improve the functions of the various offices under the Office of the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Section 1 of Administrative Order (A.O.) 109, series of 2000, entitled “Creating the Office of the Chief of Staff and Rationalizing the Systems and Accountabilities in the Line and Staff Offices in the Office of the President”, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 1. Creation of the Office of the Chief of Staff . There is hereby created in the Office of the President a support staff called the Office of the Chief of Staff (OCS). It shall assist the President in the performance of his development management functions, in the management of his day-to-day activities and requirements, and provide inputs in the President’s decision-making. As support staff to the President, the OCS shall have the primary function of supervising and ensuring efficient and responsive day-to-day operational support to the Presidency as well as the provision of substantive staff support in the presidential exercise of overall management of the nation’s development process. This includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1. Providing the President with strategic planning functions;

2. Providing coordination of the policy formulation process at the President’s level;

3. Ensuring the monitoring and evaluation of programs and projects being undertaken by the Government;

4. Managing the day-to-day schedule of the President. The OCS shall determine and recommend to the President the activities which shall be personally attended by the President. Relatedly, it shall coordinate with all concerned offices and agencies and ensure adequate preparation, both substantive and administrative, in the conduct of presidential activities; and

5. Coordinating presidential trips and visits.”

Sec. 2. Section 2 of the same issuance shall read as follows:

“Sec. 2. Organizational Set-up and Staff Complement . The OCS shall be headed by a Chief of Staff, who shall have Cabinet rank with all the rights and privileges appurtenant thereto.

The OCS shall coordinate and supervise the following offices, without diminution of their respective powers and functions: (a) the Appointments Office; (b) the Documents Management Group; (c) the Office of the Presidential Assistant for Socials; (d) the Office of the Chief of the Protocol Affairs, and (e) the Correspondence Office.”

The OCS shall have direct control and supervision over the Presidential Management Staff which shall be responsible for providing substantive staff support to the President.

Sec. 3. Section 3 of A.O. No. 109 is hereby deleted.

Sec. 4. Except for subsection 3 which has been accordingly modified, Section 4 of A.O. 109 remains in full force and effect.

Sec. 5. Repealing Clause. All executive orders, administrative orders, other presidential issuances, and implementing rules and regulations, or parts thereof that are in conflict with this A.O. are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Sec. 6. Effectivity. This A.O. shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 7th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.