MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 32

INSTITUTIONALIZING THE “LINIS BAYAN” PROGRAM

Whereas , in order to address the effects of the La Nina phenomenon, a national clean-up day called “Brigada Kontra Baha, Kiti-Kiti, Basura, Atbp. National Clean-Up Day” was held on 17 October 1998;

Whereas , there is need to continue and institutionalize the clean-up activities to control flooding and the outbreak of water borne diseases during this period; and

Whereas , there is need to mobilize all sectors of the society, with the government sector as the lead, to promote the clean-up campaign.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

Section 1 . There is hereby implemented a “Linis Bayan” Program effective 7 November 1998, a nationwide clean-up campaign to encourage the promotion and practice of cleanliness in all government offices, schools, communities and homes.

Sec. 2 . All government agencies, offices, government owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), including local government units (LGUs) are hereby directed to actively support and participate in the program.

In this regard, all government agencies/offices, GOCCs and LGUs shall formulate their respective action plans toward ensuring clean surroundings, enhancing healthy environment, and instilling the values of cleanliness among their respective constituents.

The private sector and all households are also encouraged to actively participate in the program.

Sec. 3 . The National Disaster Coordinating Council (NDCC) shall coordinate, orchestrate and monitor all activities related thereto.

The NDCC is empowered to call upon any department, agency, office and instrumentality for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

The NDCC shall provide the President regular reports on the status and accomplishments of the program.

Sec. 4 . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3 rd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-144] . Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.