A commitment to better health care services

My wife, the First Lady, and I are grateful for your warm welcome. I congratulate the management of the Philippine General Hospital, led by your diligent Director, Dr. Napoleon Apolinario, on your health projects, especially those for the poor. I am very pleased with the acquisition of new equipment here at PGH.

A common problem of Government Hospitals is the lack of rooms and modern equipment. PGH greatly helps address the problem of our poor countrymen who cannot afford to seek treatment in private hospitals. Now, with its new equipment, PGH can help our poor sick countrymen even more.

Among the new equipment of PGH are a small waiting building for patient watchers; an Emergency Room Complex for the OB-Gyne Department; a CT Scan for the quick and accurate diagnosis of illnesses; an expansion of the Pharmacy; an Intensive Care Unit for victims of heart disease; an Ecology Center and Waste Management Unit to prevent the spread of diseases; and the Botika ng Masa.

I am pleased because despite the difficulties and lack of funds of our government, you have undertaken projects and acquired equipment like these.

I am also pleased because today, free surgery at PGH by cancer surgeons from New York will also begin. Even if they are only here for a few days, they will be a great help to our countrymen with cancer who need surgery.

We would like to express our gratitude to the cancer surgeons of the New York University Medical Center, headed by Dr. Steven R. Hofstetter. I am glad that in spite of your busy schedule, you have found time to visit our country, perform free surgery on indigent cancer patients, and conduct lectures about the latest techniques in cancer treatment to our general surgeons and surgical residents.

I understand that about so indigent cancer patients will benefit from this surgical mission.

To our doctors, I hope that your knowledge will increase so that you can further improve your treatment of our patients with cancer.

I have made my commitment to champion the cause of the masses. In line with this, we have formulated policies and implemented programs aimed at providing the basic needs of our people, such as food, housing and health care.

Health is one of administration’s top priorities. I have always believed that “a healthy people is a productive people.” That is why we have launched projects that will improve the health conditions of our people especially the poor.

Aside from “ Botika ng Masa ,” which we launched nationwide last month, we have also started the mobile clinic project as part of the First Lady’s “ Serbisyong Pangkalusugan at Paggamutan Para sa mga Mahihirap.”

Through the National Economic and Development Authority, I have endorsed a $15-million loan from the Government of Spain to be used to improve the facilities in the emergency room of PGH.

You can count on me and the First Lady to continue to seek and find ways to further help our poor countrymen. But please help us address many of our health problems by cleaning our surroundings and suppressing the causes of various diseases.

Let us all come together and work together to take care of our own health and the health of our countrymen. Let us not wait for a member of our family to get sick before we act.

We should also not rely on the government to treat everyone who is ill. Our funds and the capacity of our hospitals are limited, so even if we want to, we cannot give proper attention to everyone if many people get sick at the same time.

It is fortunate that there is a mission like that of New York University Medical Center dedicated to providing free assistance. But let us not wait until we need their help. The best thing we can do is take care of our bodies and our environment to prevent the occurrence of various illnesses.

The government will continue to help PGH so that it may serve as a good example of our desire to serve our impoverished countrymen who are getting sick. And I also hope that the people of PGH and other hospitals and health centers across the country will serve faithfully all citizens, even those who do not have enough money to pay, and especially in times of need.

Long live UP-PGH.

Long live the Surgical Mission of New York University Medical Center.

Thank you very much.

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library