AFFIRMING OUR ROLE IN THE ASIAN REGION

My dear countrymen:

I am leaving for Singapore to participate in the 4th ASEAN Informal Summit, which will begin tomorrow and last until the day after tomorrow this week.

This is a good opportunity for us to reconnect with our allies here in Asia. In these meetings, we will discuss several important topics related to the general progress and peace of our region.

Last year, our country was the host of the 3rd ASEAN Informal Summit, which was also attended by China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.

It was a successful meeting that resulted in the acceleration to the year 2010 of the realization of zero tariffs, the enhancement of the public-private sector partnership in information technology and electronic commerce, the establishment of the ASEAN Troika to address regional problems, and — with the encouraging support of our three Northeast Asian partners — the birth of a stronger East Asia community through a new regional cooperation framework.

Under Singapore’s chairmanship this year, ASEAN leaders will seek to build on their achievements in Manila. I expect a lively and frank exchange of opinions on political, economic and development issues.

First, we will consider how best to maintain the economic competitiveness of ASEAN member countries amidst the challenge of globalization, and explore potentials for the further deepening of regional economic integration.

Two agreements will be signed during the Singapore Summit. First will be the protocol regarding the implementation of the Common Effective Preferential Tariff (CEPT) scheme temporal exclusion list which lays down a mechanism for relief for member countries facing real difficulties in relation to certain manufactured products under the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA). Repeatedly mistaken as a step backward for the AFTA process, this mechanism is actually an indication of the maturity that has been achieved in the regional integration process.

The other agreement that will be signed on this occasion is the E-ASEAN Framework Agreement. Developed with the help of the E-ASEAN Task Force, the e-agreement will require member countries to develop a regional information infrastructure, cultivate an environment conducive to electronic commerce, pave the way for the free flow of I.T. goods, services and investments within the region, address social concerns related to the digital divide, and promote e-governance. l will articulate the need for member countries to narrow — and eventually bridge — the digital divide with the active partnership of the private sector.

Second, to highlight the need for stronger political cohesion in ASEAN, I will call on my fellow ASEAN leaders to be proactive in addressing concerns of a regional nature vis-a-vis the observance of ASEAN principles and existing regional mechanisms. Much of the action required to correct the misperception of ASEAN as a sunset organization lies within the realm of innovation and openness in addressing regional issues among ourselves.

Third, we will confront the region’s pressing social challenges like HIV/AIDS, poverty, illicit drugs, and trafficking in women and children. I will support the proposal to convene a high-level discussion among ASEAN leaders on the topic of HIV/AIDS in Brunei Darussalam next year. I will also call for more effective regional measures and institutions to deal with poverty alleviation, and combating transnational crimes.

As with the last three summits, the event in Singapore will include the ASEAN+3 Summit and the individual summit meetings with China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.

Last year, the Philippines spearheaded the initiative to advance broader cooperation between ASEAN and China, Japan and the Republic of Korea through the adoption of the joint statement on East Asia cooperation. It is very encouraging that there have been positive developments in the implementation of the joint statement in the past year, especially through the efforts of the economic ministers, the finance ministers and the foreign ministers. Other sectors are set to follow in their footsteps. I will, thus, stress the need for the 13 partner countries to ensure more concrete results in their political interaction as a clear step towards building one East Asian community.

There are also opportunities to meet with China, Japan and the Republic of Korea individually to exchange views on their engagement in regional development, global economic dynamism, and the maintenance of peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region.

Ladies and gentlemen:

ASEAN summitry has contributed to deeper amity among the ASEAN leaders and with their northeast Asian counterparts, and helped strengthen their resolve in addressing regional problems and ensuring economic vitality in this part of the world.

Our participation in the Singapore summit is also a way to prove to our colleagues in Asia and other regions that despite some political problems we are currently facing, “it is business as usual” in our country. This is due to our strong belief and adherence to democratic processes, especially in resolving public issues.

I would like to assure you, my countrymen, that appropriate measures have been put in place to ensure that the government will continue to discharge its functions during my absence.

I am confident that this trip will yield productive results for the Philippines and affirm its role in the region.

Thank you very much and may we all live!

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library