Speech of Honorable Joseph Ejercito Estrada Senator of the Philippines Before the Filipino Community in the United States and in Canada

NATIONAL UNITY AND GENUINE RECONCILIATION: A CHALLENGE TO THE TROUBLED FILIPINO

A good day to all of you, my brothers and friends here in the United States of America. On behalf of our countrymen in the Philippines, I extend heartfelt greetings and the love of the Filipino nation. It is a great honor for me to be invited to speak to you today, and I am deeply grateful for your attendance at this dinner forum.

Ladies and gentlemen, our friends in America, it is my privilege and honor to speak before you today, knowing fully well that you share with us in the Philippines a common concern and vision for a country suffering today from the poverty of direction and ideals. The events unfolding in the Philippines today, no doubt, are disturbing; they offend our sensibilities as a people, for other than enduring the scars of an ugly colonial past, we are confronted today more than ever with the tensions of political and economic transition for which the options are getting narrower with each passing day.

The late Senator Benigno Aquino, Jr. once said that the Filipino is worth dying for. But sadly, today, it becomes disturbing to realize that it is the Filipino who is dying, and we ask: What for? why for? Certainly the Philippines is now a democracy, but as I look at the man in the street in the Philippines, at the little children begging at traffic light intersections, in the dumpsites, in the slums, in the countrysides, I begin to realize that the true meaning of democracy lies not only in having a constitution that guarantees the basic freedoms of speech, of expression, of association, but in guaranteeing the most basic and foremost freedom of all, the freedom from want and from need, the freedom from hunger. In here, we have failed because we have not united ourselves and our democracy has not addressed the predicament of our people. A true democracy begins to have meaning when the people unite behind it because it is founded on the aspirations of its people, when it is based on the popular will achieved through a process of consensus.

To begin with, this year the Filipino will have to make crucial decisions on many issues that have severe implications on his future and his destiny. Some of these have figured prominently in the policy debates of recent months. Issues on U.S. military installations in our country, or more importantly, the larger issue of evolving more viable R.P.-U.S. relations based on mutual respect are matters which the Filipino must deal with squarely. We are concerned with the specter of growing poverty, of unemployment, of economic dislocation, of habitual neglect of a massive number of our people; there is unrest in the countryside as well as in the cities; we are confronted with a formidable insurgency problem and a secessionist movement in the south. There is a breakdown in law and order that disrupts national life. Graft and corruption in government has become away of life. We face a staggering foreign debt for which an intelligent resolution must be reached within the decade. We live with threats of coup d’etat and civil unrest. And above all, we are shattered with a crisis in leadership in government, for it has become clearer now that they who promised the Filipino a better life after the historic EDSA revolution have betrayed us. I suppose, with these myriad problems, the Filipino today has become even more uncertain about his future.

Sadly, the history of our society is a story of our loss of dignity, a History that began with centuries of subservience to foreign domination. And today, we have the predicament of the troubled and vanishing Filipino.

What is the Filipino of today?

In the community of nations, we have been looked upon as a nation of cheaters. . . a nation filled with graft and corruption. . . a nation of prostitutes. . . a nation of domestic helpers. . . a nation of contract workers. . . a nation of mendicants.

When we apply for a visa to a foreign country they look at the Filipino with distrust. We see a long line of Filipinos in foreign embassies hoping to get out of the country and have a better life abroad. Parang wala na tayong maipagmamalaki pa. It is unfortunate that I have to say these, to wash our dirty linen in a foreign country, but we have to come to terms with these realities because it is only in understanding ourselves that we can change as a people.

I am sure that this is not the legacy which we want our future generations to inherit because we know that this is not the real Filipino but an impostor who has momentarily lost his consciousness and true identity, driven by his instincts for survival, and oppressed by the wretchedness of his past and his situation. For after all, the Filipino is an honorable person; it is only his circumstance that has been disfigured and tainted with dishonor.

You may be here in the United States, but I am certain that your longing and anguish for a better Philippines is as intense as ours in the country. For ultimately, you carry with us this stigma because deep in your hearts and souls, you are still Filipinos and our shame in the Philippines is your shame. Our curse is your curse, and our pride will be your pride, too. I am certain that you are one with me in bringing about a Filipino nation we can be proud of, because if we do not, perhaps in the coming decade the coming generations of Filipinos will ask: Do we really have a Filipino nation or are we but a cluttered race that professes citizenship and language but is devoid of consciousness and identity?

Somebody has said that a people must always defend their country. When right, it has to be kept right; and when wrong, to be put right. There are many matters which we must address today. In the spate of problems that come our way, we sometimes do not know where to start. But let me offer a beginning. For me, the agenda of the hour and the challenge for the Filipino is to forge national unity as a people and to have genuine reconciliation. Kahit ba may demokrasya ka, kung walang pagkakaisa, ito ay maaaring mauwi sa disgrasya. We can have the best laid-out plans for economic development, but if we are divided, this will fail. Our lack of unity as a people has been our major weakness because we have treated one another as adversaries, because we do not trust each other. The result is that we have been taken advantage of by those who want to exploit us. In our negotiations on the bases or on our foreign debt, we are forced to agree to terms that are against our national interests because we are not united in the bargaining table. It is said that even here in the United States, the Filipino community is sometimes divided. Regrettably, even our government, which must pave the way towards true and genuine reconciliation, has not shown the example.

Be that as it may, our disunity and the image that we have today is not the root but the result of our colonial past, especially during this century. When the Americans replaced the Spaniards in 1898, the Filipinos were divested of independence and self-rule. Half a century passed. When we were granted what the Americans labelled as independence in 1946, the conditions included the one-sided Military Bases Agreement and the unlimited right to exploit our natural resources and, with it, our minds and our pride. From 1946 to 1990, another half-century of inequality, we have unwillingly become a nation subservient to the interest of our ally, the United States.

Meanwhile, after the Hiroshima and Nagasaki horror, after the defeat of Japan, every Japanese child was told to see a vision of me new Japan. . . to work for Mitsubishi or Sony or Hitachi because Mitsubishi was Japan. . . Sony was Japan. . . Hitachi was Japan. . . and they were told that Japan would rise from the ashes and be a great country. Because they were united. Because they were gifted with the vision of being one and that oneness has given them a sense of community, a sense of national pride, a fervor for love of country and nationalism.

On the other hand, the Filipino child has been conditioned to work for his narrow interests and that of his family. If a parent advises his children, he tells them to work hard, study hard so that he will be rich, so that he can go to the States. The Filipino child is asked to work only for himself and his family, even if it means having to compromise the common good. We never hear a parent say, “Work hard for your country, be one with your people. Magsumikap ka, upang ang Pilipino ay maging dakila. ” The Filipino child grows up thinking only about himself and the comforts of his relatives. As a result, when he assumes a high position in government, whether appointed or elected, he values his own selfish interest to the point of stealing. He will cheat in an election because he has been trained to work for himself. If he engages in business, he proceeds to cheat the government of taxes because he works for himself and his family. In here, we see the breakdown of our moral fiber because the Filipino is not united with his community. And so we realize that we have brought forth a generation of Filipinos that lack a sense of patriotism and love of country, because he is not one with society but is so obsessed with his own selfish interests and that of his family.

Let me not further indict ourselves because I believe I have made my point clear. National unity and genuine reconciliation are the basic demands of a true democracy, of the nationalism of a people. Democracy becomes meaningful if we are united and reconciled with one another, for the entire Filipino nation must be seen as one big family for which everyone has a responsibility to the whole. I believe that the time has come for us to drop the rhetoric of unity and reconciliation and put more meaning to it. And in here, we can start with total amnesty, to call on all Filipinos, to abandon this legacy of hate and rancor and begin anew with a fresh start so that the Filipino can join hands and reach each other to promote the common good. Walang tutulong sa Pilipino, kundi ang kapwa niya Pilipino . And to fulfill this, we must be one as a people. And these today we are not able to do because we, including our leaders, argue and quarrel on every simple issue to gain attention at the galleries of public opinion. It is a sad reality that our people have already sacrificed so much, but still cannot get the life they deserve.

You may say, “I am here in America, what can I do?” We ask you, from your vantage position to help us work and forge for the unity of our people, to be one here and join us in a formidable adventure of evolving a truly genuine sovereign nation, based not on aid or loans but a people reconciled, sharing the aspiration of a better Philippines which is ever-conscious of her identity, of her independence. We ask you to defend the integrity of Philippine sovereignty in the United States and to be at the forefront of protecting our interest. We ask you to help us dismantle U.S. military facilities in the Philippines which today remain to be a symbol of our subservience to a foreign country and which deprives us of our honor and sovereignty. In the bases, our women are exploited; our people squat on their own lands, while the American Armed Forces enjoy some 30,000 hectares of our territory.

We ask you then to tell our American brothers that we in the Philippines do not hate the American people or the American way of life. We have respect for America as a great nation. We admire the American System of government. I can say this in all honesty and candor because I have a son studying in the United States; one of my brothers is an American citizen and I have a sister working in the World Bank. I am not at all anti-American, but I certainly object to the way we have been treated, to the manner in which American foreign policies in the Philippines have been formulated so as to exploit our weakness by sowing divisiveness and disunity among our people to promote narrow American interests. We ask you to tell the American government to refrain from intervening in our internal affairs because we are a sovereign nation deserving of respect in the international community. We ask you to tell our brother Americans to help us get out of the mire of poverty by providing us the climate with which we can reconcile and unite under a regime of justice, honor and democracy.

For what we need today is national unity and reconciliation which will evoke the nationalist spirit. It is the very foundation which supports nationalism and love of country. As the nationalist Claro M. Recto once said, “the Filipinos, like the Americans, have the right to love their country above all others. They have a right to cherish and protect their independence. They have the right to choose a government that will serve the best interests of the people; and only those who have designs against our independence, or who seek to advance their own interests at the expense of our people, can possibly have a motive to fear or distrust Filipino nationalism.”

I trust that you do not have such fears. Then we together can accept the challenge of the Filipino and confront the destiny of the Filipino because we are all Filipinos. This is the challenge to us of fate and of history.

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Senate of the Philippines. (1991). Speeches of the senators : a collection of speeches by the Senators of the Philippines . Manila : Senate.