EMPOWERING COMMUNITIES FOR POVERTY ALLEVIATION

I extend a warm and heartfelt greeting to everyone present at this important occasion, especially to the leaders of the sixteen municipalities we have honored as Best Comprehensive Integrated Delivery of Social Services or CIDSS Municipalities.

I am delighted to be with all of you because you are my true partners in lifting our countrymen out of poverty. You are my companions who believe in the reminder of our Almighty God that “whatever you do for the least of my brothers, you do for me.” You are my partners in heeding the words of God, which says that “what you do to the least of my brethren, you also do unto me.”

Moreover, I am no stranger to the struggles and opportunities that local chief executives face each day because I was once Municipal Mayor of San Juan in Metro Manila for seventeen years. My experiences during those years opened my eyes to such difficulties and challenges. Hence, I fully share your dream of achieving a better quality of life for your constituents. As the father of our nation, I have the same dream for the Filipino masses, and it is a dream that I will fulfil before my term ends, which by the way is in June 2004.

I, therefore, commend all the awardees for your exceptional performance as partners of the national government in promoting the growth and the welfare of this nation and our people. Rest assured that my administration, through the CIDSS, will continue to support the social and economic development of your respective municipalities.

Despite the noise and criticisms against me, I continue to act and find ways to lift many of our countrymen out of poverty. But I am only human, so I admit that I sometimes feel bad because my family is affected by the accusations against me.

We can be accused of many lies and we can bear them in silence but we will never tolerate being accused of exploiting the poor or ignoring their plight. We will never agree to what some quarters of our society say that this government has not done anything for the poor.

More in our government are those you do not hear on the streets, but they continue to help their fellowmen quietly. The best example of this are our social workers, led by our diligent DSWD Secretary Dulce Saguisag.

I know the tremendous pressure being exerted on Secretary Saguisag and our social workers. But, in spite of what they hear or read, they continue attending to the needs of the poor and the disadvantaged.

That is why I thought it was right that we made Secretary Saguisag the lead convenor of the National Anti-Poverty Commission. With the help of our social workers, they will surely be able to focus on efforts that will lift the poor from poverty. I have strong confidence in his ability and that of his colleagues at the DSWD. They are our secret weapons to ensure the success of the NAPC’s programs and projects.

They are the kind of public servants that any president can be proud of, and the CIDSS record speaks for their total commitment to their work.

In terms of municipalities covered, my administration has implemented CIDSS in 789 municipalities in just two years, compared to the 294 served by the previous administration in four years.

Of the 5th and 6th class municipalities in the country, only one – Kalayaan in Palawan, which is part of the disputed Spratly group of islands – remains CIDSS-less. That means 959 municipalities in the category covered from 1994 to the year 2000. The program is now penetrating the 3rd and 4th class municipalities progressively. As of today, we have served 124 towns in that classification.

For the same period of 1994 to 2000, CIDSS went to more than 3,200 barangays. Some 100 urban poor communities are also now benefiting from the program. More importantly, CIDSS has established and activated more than 18,000 people’s organizations nationwide.

The program has so far spent P1.8 billion, or about P3,100 average cost per family. This merely proves that it does not really take much money to enable the poor to help themselves.

From a low about P55 million in 1994, CIDSS obtained P500 million in 1999 and another P500 million this year. For 2001, the proposed budget for CIDSS is P781 million. As you can see, the marked increase in the budgetary allocation for the program under my administration is very obvious.

As to financial investments for CIDSS, we should also be thankful to the private sector, particularly the non-governmental organizations that contributed about p15 million for its projects as of 1998.

This goes to show that the government and the private sector can, indeed, combine their efforts to hasten the poverty alleviation in our country. That is why I ask our other countrymen, especially the rich, to hear the pleas of the poor. Their outcry for help should be more compelling than mouthing of slogans in the streets.

The secret behind the success of the CIDSS is plain and simple. We have committed ourselves to the program. We are closely monitoring, as they say, this program.

We have protected its budget and resources. We ensure that the funds needed by the program are not reduced. We have insured that its projects do not become the usual dole-outs that never succeeded afterwards.

More importantly, the people themselves decide what businesses the CIDSS will fund and develop in their towns.

The families funded by the CIDSS are not controlled by anyone in their area. No politician interferes with the desires of the poor and the operation of their businesses under the CIDSS.

This is precisely what I want: for the poor to empower themselves, for the poor to liberate themselves from the oppressions of poverty.

It is only sad to think that while we are busy implementing programs to lift our countrymen out of poverty, some sectors of our society continue to create chaos to topple our economy and political system.

Even before I reach the halfway point of my term of office, there are already those who want me to step down and seize the power of my office now. If they only used their time, energy, intellect, and resources to accelerate the progress of our country, they could have helped improve the lives of our citizens, especially the poor and the needy.

I became president to serve all our countrymen. Therefore, I will never abandon the promise I made to the Filipino people to lift them out of poverty. I will give my full strength and ability, as well as all the power of the office of the president, to improve the lives of all our countrymen. And I will do this until the end of my term as president in 2004.

However, I accept the current impeachment trial and am ready to face its outcome, as long as it is in accordance with our constitution. But I repeat here that I have not received a single centavo from any form of illegal gambling. My conscience is clear. I have nothing to hide from our countrymen. And I believe that, in the end, the whole truth will prevail.

I am confident that the truth will prevail in the end. I am convinced that I will be cleared of all issues that are unfairly being leveled against me. In the final analysis, those who have put their personal and political interests above the interests of their country will be proven wrong. This will restore the political and economic stability that my opponents wish to deny our country in the pursuit of their selfish desire to seize power away before my term ends in 2004.

Therefore, I appeal to those who are causing trouble now that it would be better if we focused on things that can solve the problems of our country. Let us listen to the voice of the people and not just the noise of a few.

Shouts and speeches are not enough to lift our countrymen out of poverty. What we need now is to work and act for the poor Filipinos.

We need to unite and work together to face the challenge of globalization and compete with other countries. If we continue to fight among ourselves and tear each other down, our neighboring countries will applaud because the foreign capital and tourists that should be coming to us are going to them. We need to unite and work together to accelerate our progress.

I remember when I went to Vietnam for a state visit last year, I saw their unity there, which is why even though they experienced more than twenty years of war, they are now the 3rd largest rice-exporting country in the world, while we are still importing rice to this day.

Therefore, I ask our countrymen to stop the backbiting and fighting. Instead, let us unite and help each other for the good of all citizens, especially the poor.

Now we have only one enemy, and that is poverty. We are doing everything to end poverty in our country, but I admit that, even as your president, I cannot fight poverty alone. I need your help and that of the entire Filipino people.

Instead of us fighting and tearing each other down, let us unite and help each other to fight poverty and build a stronger and more progressive Philippines. Let us prove to the whole world that we Filipinos can rise through our own efforts and cooperation.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library