THE OUTSTANDING YOUNG FILIPINOS AND THE SPIRIT OF ACHIEVEMENT

Good afternoon and greetings to our Philippine Junior Chamber of Commerce or Jaycees, along with all our distinguished guests. I extend my warm and enthusiastic greetings to all of you on the occasion of our awards for Outstanding Young Filipinos or TOYF for the current year.

This year, we celebrate the rich and vibrant tradition of the Philippine Jaycees in our country. We celebrate not only the fiftieth year of the Jaycees in the Philippines, but also the fortieth year of selecting and recognizing outstanding young Filipinos, which began in 1959 as Ten Outstanding Young Men or TOYM.

This is an honor that continues to provide vitality and serves as an inspiration to our country, especially to our youth. The awardees of this have become leaders and pillars of various sectors of our society – of our government, of commerce and industry, and of various professions.

The award and recognition for the outstanding young Filipinos conferred by the Philippine Jaycees have become an enduring and noble tradition. From its beginnings as the Ten Outstanding Young Men, it remains today to be one of the more powerful expression of recognition accorded to outstanding and achieving young men and women in our country. It has now become gender sensitive, perhaps, in keeping with our times, to become an award for outstanding young men and women who have excelled in various and diverse fields.

For that matter, the TOYF today is not just an award; it is a badge and stamp of honor and outstanding achievement and leadership; it has become a prestigious and credible institution in Philippine society, observed and celebrated annually by an equally prestigious and credible organization.

The renaming of the award from TOYM to TOYF was no doubt in keeping with the times for it to be more politically correct and gender sensitive. However, the Jaycees may consider reverting to the original name because it already has its own identity and it may lose the prestige and glamour which the earlier awardees have given to it.

I guess women would not mind being called TOYM awardees as this had been done in the past. Some may even deem it to be the highest tribute — for women to be in the same league with men.

I have a certain fondness for the Jaycees not because J.V. is now its national president, and certainly not simply because it conferred me the TOYM Award for Public Administration in 1972. Incidentally, I consider this award as one of the shining moments of my career which encouraged, motivated, and inspired me.

But my affinity with the Jaycees goes farther back from my career as a public servant. As I have mentioned before, the San Juan Jaycees was instrumental in encouraging me to serve our people and to run for public office as mayor. In this job, I found the meaning of the Jaycee goals of management skills, of community service, of brotherhood, of the development of individual talents, and of the importance of high and ethical business standards in the public service.

Because of my experiences as mayor of San Juan and the influence of the TOYM award, I developed a desire the help the people, not just of my town but of the entire nation. This is the reason why my administration is focused on helping the masses.

By now, you must have heard of the priorities of my government. Your group, because of its leadership qualities, can help me realize my vision of improving the living conditions of our people and bringing about the reforms that our society needs.

You can help our peace and order campaign by creating awareness among our communities to be vigilant against criminal activities. You can promote agricultural development and food security by engaging in businesses related to them and helping in bringing down the prices of essential commodities. You can help eradicate graft and corruption by bearing in mind that this involves not only the taker but also the giver.

These three major thrusts are close to the Jaycees and the TOYM awardees because their orientation, training and expertise have properly prepared them to advance these causes. For the awardees in particular to be truly deserving of their award, they must continue their work and aim to achieve more, even after having earned this prestigious citation.

I, I need to improve my work. I need to prove to everyone that you are worthy of this award. If you are a TOYM awardee, failure is not an option, applause is needed. This was my principle when I became a senator and vice-president. That is probably why we were fortunate enough to become president of the country because I paid attention to the principles represented by the Jaycees.

You will perhaps agree with me that we cannot consider the Outstanding Young Filipinos Award simply for what it is, but for what it has done, for what it has become, and for what it has fulfilled. We cannot simply look at it now as an honor society, where the celebrated and the celebrating converge to measure or define what achievement must be and should be.

No, we cannot simply view it as a ritual that glorifies time and again individual achievement. Instead, we must look at it as a system that seeks to accentuate and enhance our strengths that must be nourished positive energies and values.

In various ways, the TOYF proclaims the best in us, serving to inspire many generation of Filipinos who seek role models and shining examples of how challenges and opportunities in their lives can be conquered.

Many of them may not have the opportunity to come up in this stage to receive the ovation. But certainly, they will discover a feeling of pride, and perhaps, a sense of identity, of association, of fulfillment, in their search for a better road in the pursuit and management of their ambitions.

The TOYF has now become a symbol of Filipino capacity and talent. To my mind, it is an institution that we no longer can reserve exclusively for the 324 individuals who have received it. It belongs not just to the Jaycees, but to our countrymen who find in it a showcase and an exhibit of Filipino accomplishment, of Filipino achievement and of Filipino talent. It represents our claim and aspirations for excellence as Filipinos. It helps inculcate the dignity of responsibility and the habits of citizenship. I hope that I can serve here as an example.

Today, I take this opportunity to congratulate the Philippine Jaycees for propagating the noble spirit of achievement and its rewards into the consciousness of the Philippine society.

Our people share with you this spirit, for we have learned, crisis after crisis has come and gone. But we stood firm, because in our consciousness is that capacity to endure and to overcome. Deep in ourselves is that unwavering spirit to survive, and we survived because we have the capacity to achieve. This award has, in its forty years, nurtured that capacity by strengthening the morale of our people, and weaving the fabric of community service.

This afternoon, I also take this opportunity to congratulate our awardees composed of brilliant individuals in the fields of medicine, music, communication arts and education.

You are joining today a select and distinguished company who would demand from you a much higher standard not just of competence, but of a higher order of morality and of service. You represent what we see as the best in your field, a cut above the rest.

But I ask you not to simply dedicate your talents to your profession or your discipline, but to the ends and visions of our larger society. It is in this arena of serving our people where the real challenge lies. It is here where you will discover the true nature of accomplishment. It is here where the real meaning of achievement must and should be measured. This is where you must be ready to share your skills, because being outstanding is a celebration of your contributions to the future of our nation.

No one will help a Filipino except another Filipino.

Maraming salamat at mabuhay!

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library