RECOGNIZING OUR CLEAN AND GREEN COMMUNITIES

I extend a warm and heartfelt greeting to all who have attended this important occasion, especially to the leaders of the cleanest and greenest local government units whom we have honored this afternoon.

Today’s event marks the heightened recognition of our local governments as partners of the national government in the promotion of the growth and the welfare of our nation. Selected local government units were conferred this afternoon the much-coveted Gawad Pangulo sa Kapaligiran for their outstanding achievements in the promotion of clean and green communities.

Modernization and change have brought about some adverse effects to our environment, and preserving a well-balanced environment is becoming a seemingly impossible task. But the excellent performance that our local government units have shown toward preserving and improving the environment tends to disprove this view. And today’s occasion proves that we can indeed take care of our environment if we put together the best of our time and efforts for this purpose.

In our sincere desire to attain a cleaner and greener environment, I issued Executive Order No. 113 on June 18 last year, establishing the Gawad Pangulo sa Kapaligiran Award System.

This program is part of my administration’s overall efforts to create greater awareness and understanding of effective environmental management in support of the sustainable development agenda of the government. Its primary aim is to generate multi-sectoral advocacy and recognition of the need to nurture our environment, since we are but its trustees for the generations still to come.

This simply means that if we are to pursue sustainable development, we have to preserve and conserve our environment so that our children and our children’s children will have their share of the bounties of nature.

For the present generation, I have always believed that healthy environment helps ensure a healthy citizenry, and a healthy citizenry is one indicator of the country’s socio-economic growth. Our people will not fully enjoy the fruits of our development if our surroundings are not conducive to their health.

Let us remember that a polluted environment worsens our health problems, which largely affect the country’s poor. This is why my administration has consistently pursued pro-environmental policies and programs and has continuously encouraged all sectors of society to play vital roles in keeping our environment a healthy and pleasant place to live in. In effect, this is another way by which we are working to improve the lives of our people, especially the poor and disadvantaged.

That is why I am surprised to hear some quarters of our society say that this government has not done anything for the poor.

Only last Saturday, I personally handed out the Sentrong Sigla Awards in La Union to local government health facilities that have shown outstanding performance in the provision of quality health care. Sentrong Sigla is part of our health sector reform agenda that seeks to erase the notion that there can be two systems of health care – one for the rich and one for the poor.

Last June, we launched the health passport program, which complements Sentrong Sigla by ensuring that Filipinos, especially the poor, will have social health insurance. Through this program, the poor will now be able to receive quality health services because they can go to any hospital or health center, whether government or private, and have help paying for their expenses.

That is why I am surprised that there are those who say that my administration has done nothing for the poor. Despite our efforts to improve the condition of our citizens and our country, some sectors of our society have done nothing but criticize and destroy the good things we have started.

Even before I reach the halfway point of my term of office, there are already those who want me to resign and seize the power of my office now. If they only used their time, energy, mind, and money to accelerate the development of our country, they could have helped improve the lives of our citizens, especially the underprivileged and the poor.

As to the ongoing impeachment trial, I am confident that the truth will prevail in the end. I am convinced that I will be cleared of all issues that are unfairly being leveled against me. In the final analysis, those who have put their personal and political interests above the interests of our country will be proven wrong. This will restore the political and economic stability that my opponents wish to deny our country in the pursuit of their selfish desire to seize power way before my term ends in June 2004.

I repeat before you that I have not received a single centavo from any form of illegal gambling. My conscience is clear. I have nothing to hide from our countrymen. And I believe that, in the end, the whole truth will prevail.

Let me assure you, therefore, that these issues will never hamper me from performing my job as the president who was duly elected by a big majority of our people. Our constitution mandates that I perform the duties of the chief executive until the year 2004, and I have no intention of defying that mandate. I promised a much better life to our people – especially the poor – and I intend to keep that promise during the term that is mandated by our constitution.

But I must admit that I cannot do all of these without your help. That is why I urge all sectors of our society and all our communities to be involved in the cleaning and greening of our environment, not just to win in this contest but as a way of life.

Let me congratulate the 93 finalists and the seven (7) National Awardees of this Gawad Pangulo sa Kapaligiran for a job well done in keeping their communities a better place to live in.

Let us give another round of applause to our national awardees in the seven categories, as follows:

Province – Negros Occidental; Highly Urbanized City – Bacolod City; Component City – Laoag City; 1st-3rd Class Municipality – Calinog, Iloilo; 4th-6th Class Municipality – Solsona, Ilocos Norte; Inland Bodies of Water, River – Matutinao River, Baidan, Cebu; and Inland Bodies of Water, Lake – Barracuda Lake, Coron, Palawan.

Allow me to also congratulate all those who have dedicated their time and efforts to make this contest and awarding ceremonies a tremendous success.

To those local government units that did not make it this year, I challenge you to be more resolute in giving highest priority to the preservation of a healthy environment. I would like to mention in particular the local government units in Metro Manila, except Makati and Malabon which were selected finalists this year. I urge you to work harder with the national government in order to collectively mobilize and utilize our resources to attain our common goal of making metro manila the proud capital and crowning glory of our country.

There is still much to be done, and I hope that your accomplishments will continue to remind you and our other local government units of what all of you can do for your nation and the well-being of our people.

As we face the challenges of the new century, let us be more vigorous than ever in pursuing our desire to create a better Philippines. Let us no lose the momentum we have gained in spite of the political crisis we are facing today.

I urge all of you to participate in our efforts to improve our economy and move our country forward. Everything is possible if we are united in purpose and spirit to promote the growth and welfare of our nation. Let us work together and achieve the peace and prosperity that our country and people rightfully deserve.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you!

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library