SERVICE AND COMMITMENT FOR NATIONAL PROGRESS

I extend a warm and vibrant greeting to the officials, personnel, staff, and distinguished guests of our Armed Forces of the Philippines. I am very pleased to be with you again on this occasion of your sixty-fifth anniversary today.

This day is full of meaning and significance not only for you but for the country. Today, we observe the anniversary of one of our important institutions, the Armed Forces of the Philippines. We celebrate the achievements and distinguished history of this institution by paying tribute to our soldiers now and in the past. More significantly, today, you renew your unqualified allegiance to the constitution and your unwavering commitment to democracy in the service of God, country and people. I am proud, as your commander-in-chief, to join and lead you tonight in reaffirming this commitment.

As we call to mind 65 years of gallant history and heroism of the men and women of our Armed Forces of the Philippines. I cannot help but be touched by a deep sense of national pride.

In my opinion, our armed forces, as time goes on, become stronger and more stable.

Throughout your long years of service to the Filipino people, your commitment to defend our democracy and the rights and welfare of our country has never wavered. Your resilience in the many trials we have faced as a nation is admirable.

I am pleased that you have chosen “Freedom: Your right, our responsibility,” as the theme of your celebration this year. This is a theme that is most relevant because freedom is a right that must be defended, and it is our common responsibility to preserve and to protect it. This embodies the very principle, which Filipino soldiers have always stood for.

We observe today’s ceremonies at a time of great challenge for us to preserve and defend the integrity of the constitution and the fabric of our democratic framework which we have sworn to protect. I believe that your theme this year speaks of consistency and steadfastness, for it depicts an armed forces that remains committed and able to defend, protect and serve our country without compromising the basic rights of our people.

I give recognition to the fact that, despite the many challenges and political issues that confront us today, you have stood your ground – faithful to your sworn duty to uphold the constitution and its democratic processes, committed to accomplishing the nation’s defense objectives.

Before I appointed the current AFP Chief of Staff, General Angelo Reyes, I reminded him that his loyalty should be first and foremost, to the constitution and his country and his loyalty to his commander-in-chief should be subordinate to it. I told him that this should be the case because the Armed Forces of the Philippines is an organization that derives its mandate from the constitution.

Section 3, Article 2, of the constitution clearly states that (and I quote): “Civilian authority is, at all ties, supreme over the military. The Armed Forces of the Philippines is the protector of the people and the state. Its goal is to secure the sovereignty of the state and the integrity of the national territory.” (End of quote)

This means fighting all forces which seek to overthrow the government, impair the independence of the nation, or dismember any portion of its territory, because of this heavy responsibility, the military should never be involved in any political exercises as these may compromise their constitutional mandate. And I am happy to note that the AFP has consistently adhered to the principle of non-partisanship.

I did not make a mistake in choosing General Reyes. His concern for the AFP extends not only to his fellow generals but also to the lowest-ranking soldiers and enlisted personnel.

Your selfless devotion and dedication to duty have now gained for you the people’s trust and respect. They are assured that their armed forces can be relied upon because of its proven commitment to the duties it has been sworn to fulfill. You have earned the people’s trust and respect because you have made their lives more secure and more peaceful by the sacrifices and pains that you have to endure.

There is no denying that the Armed Forces of the Philippines has played a critical role in the development of our nation, most notably in the area of maintaining national security.

Leading this is your prompt and diligent response to the enormous challenge posed by rebel groups in Mindanao, such as the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the Abu Sayyaf Group.

Four months into our offensive against the MILF year you were able to capture their main headquarters, Camp Abubakar, followed by the fall of other camps and defensive positions. As a result, a large number of the MILF rebels have either surrendered to the government or simply laid down their arms. The same way was true for the Abu Sayyaf. Your effective and relentless campaign not only safely rescued most of their remaining hostages but also further demoralized the already-splintered group.

Because of your sacrifices, we succeeded against the MILF and Abu Sayyaf. Because of you, our national unity remained strong and the entire Filipino people are grateful to you.

I commend all our soldiers for your vigorous efforts to protect our nation’s integrity, I extend to you my wholehearted gratitude for ensuring that we have one sovereign republic, one flag, one territory, one constitution, and one armed forces.

You have shown not only your loyalty to the country but also your courage against the enemies of the nation. It was a great sacrifice with a great cost, but one that fully demonstrates our undivided stance and decisive action.

I urge you, therefore, to keep up the good work and continue to do your share to find a just and lasting solution to the problem in Mindanao.

On the international scene, the AFPs participation in the East Timor peacekeeping force has been of particular interest and a great source of pride for our country. Our troops there have performed very well in delivering our country’s commitment to help preserve peace in the region.

In other areas of concern, I am pleased that the AFP has been deeply involved in nation-building and socio-civic efforts.

Our armed forces are always at the forefront in responding to national emergencies, such as the tragedy that happened in Payatas. Hundreds of families were evacuated and our soldiers recovered more than three hundred bodies from under the collapsed garbage.

During the past super typhoons Reming and Senyang, you were also there to deliver relief goods and medical supplies to those affected by the storms, not only in Metro Manila but also in other parts of Luzon.

The AFP engineers have also been responsible for the construction of infrastructure projects worth more than one billion pesos, including both new and rehabilitated roads and bridges. These have opened up livelihood opportunities and access to basic services to our far-flung communities.

The AFP has also been contributing significantly to environmental protection. Through the planting of thousands of trees, combating illegal logging, and even declogging esteros in Metro Manila.

While responding to diverse challenges in its various areas of responsibility, the AFP has laid the groundwork for the evolution of a modern, credible and mission-effective organization. This is what we have long aspired to, so that the armed forces can fully address the challenges of our time. With the release this year of more than P5 billion to your modernization program, the AFP wasted no time in reviewing existing policies so as to jump-start the bidding and acquisition process.

I congratulate the defense department, under the leadership of Secretary Orlando Mercado, for having done pioneering work in the entire bureaucracy by establishing an information technology-based procurement system to ensure transparency in your transactions. Your unrelenting fight against graft and corruption will surely enhance your credibility.

I note that our defense secretary has implemented my instructions to empower our soldiers by giving them access to information. The retirement and separation benefits system, or RSBS has also been directed operations and other information pertaining to the administration of their pension fund contributions.

This is only the first step. By next year, each and every soldier must be given a mailbox so that every soldier can easily communicate with their headquarters and easily access the websites we have established for them and our public.

The AFP, indeed, has been very busy this year. You have more than credibly delivered on the demands of your service to our country and people. Let me speak for every Filipino as I congratulate you for a job well done.

Such a performance and commitment deserve more than commendation and gratitude. It is only fair that we give something in return for your noble deeds.

In accordance with my pronouncement to extend all possible assistance within our means to uplift the lives of our ordinary soldiers, I am proud to report that we have made significant progress in providing for their basic needs.

We have gone full stride with our housing projects through the AFP housing board’s on-base and off-base housing programs. Today there are nearly 7,000 military quarters nationwide allocated to some 2,300 officers and 4,500 enlisted personnel. This is a considerable improvement from the 4,400 available housing units in 1995.

In close coordination with the private sector, the DENR and the Bureau of Lands, portions of 14 military preservations throughout the country have been identified for housing purposes of AFP personnel. Three of these areas have already been approved: Camp Riego de Dios in Tanza, Cavite; Camp Aquino in San Miguel, Tarlac; and Camp Evangelista in Cagayan de Oro City. Through this program, we hope to address the lack of housing and quarters for many of our men in uniform.

Our soldiers’ dependents now receive more educational benefits through various scholarship grants. In addition, there are numerous other scholarships given by our friends in the private sector, we believe that by making these educational grants available, we can ease the burden of our soldiers in providing a secure future for their children.

Our support to our soldiers will not be complete without providing them proper medical attention and facilities. This is most important because of the very nature of the military profession. I learned that this problem has long been neglected in the past during my visit to the AFP medical center, which we consider as our foremost hospital for our soldiers.

In response to this urgent need, we have set up the Don Emilio Ejercito Diagnostic Center to house the hi-tech medical equipment for the hospital, and I personally inaugurated this yesterday. Moreover, the AFP through NEDA is currently pursuing a mixed credit scheme with the Government of Spain for the upgrading of the medical center’s equipment.

It will not be long before the military will enjoy first-class medical facilities comparable to that of big private hospitals. Again, this is one way of proving to our soldiers that their welfare is a paramount concern of my administration.

I firmly believe that no amount of money or material benefit can ever repay your dedication and heroic deeds for our country. But rest assured that our efforts will not stop here.

I wish to acknowledge the support of the private sector, especially non-government organizations, in helping answer the needs of our men in uniform. The assistance you have given to the military will go a long way is securing the country’s interests and contributing to the growth and development of the whole nation.

In celebrating the 65th anniversary of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, I urge everyone to contribute his share towards our national progress. Only through your strong commitment to the advancement of our defense that we can start looking forward to a more stable, peaceful and prosperous future.

We have already proven our capabilities in defending the territorial integrity of our country as demonstrated in our campaign in Mindanao. We made it because we had known all along that we owe it to the majority of the Filipino people to give them the peace that they deserve.

As we look forward to the year ahead, may our unity as a people prevail so we can face our challenges with greater confidence. I firmly believe that, as long as we devote our energies toward the preservation of peace and oneness, we will overcome those challenges and come out of them stronger and wiser.

To our brave personnel and staff of the armed forces, may you continue to remain faithful to your duty and be steadfast in facing the trials that will come to our country. You need to do this because your success is also the success of the entire Filipino people.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library