HEALTH AS A PRIORITY IN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Good day to all of you. Good day to everyone.

I extend a warm and heartfelt greeting to all those present who attended our Awarding Ceremonies of the Sentrong Sigla Movement. I extend a special greeting to all those who received the “Sentrong Sigla Awards” today.

I salute the Sentrong Sigla awardees who today join the growing list of health facilities that are recognized by the Department of Health for their excellence in service and outstanding performance in the provision of quality health care.

The awardees received cash incentives which will be used to help improve facilities and services for the provision of comprehensive health care for the family, including the reproductive health and family planning.

The awards consist of P1 million each for the Outstanding Rural Health Units, P5 million each for the Outstanding District Hospitals, and P3 million each for the Outstanding Provincial Hospitals. I was told that this year, the Department of Health has set aside P70 million for Outstanding Health Facilities under local government units.

These are not prizes for winners in a competition, because Sentrong Sigla is not a contest. Rather, Sentrong Sigla is a movement that seeks to provide financial support to outstanding local governments for performance to encourage them to improve the quality of their health services.

The Sentrong Sigla Movement is the first of its kind since the devolution of health services under the Local Government Code.

Under the previous administration, there was much hesitation about devolution, although the leadership then espoused support for decentralization, the financial support from the Department of Health for local government units was not there. Oftentimes, this lack of political will resulted in confusion and a deterioration in health care services that had been transferred to the LGU’S

Much has changed since then. Today, local government units have become active stakeholders in health and the Sentrong Sigla Movement shows that, given the proper motivation, our local government executives can manage health care systems and our government facilities can match or even surpass quality standards of private health facilities.

The Sentrong Sigla Movement, which started slowly and quietly in 1999, has gained momentum as a local government campaign for quality improvement. And I predict that, after all is said and done, this will be one of the success stories of my Administration, which by the way, ends in the year 2004.

I would like to acknowledge the strong leadership shown by our Secretary of Health, Dr. Alberto Romualdez Jr., in putting in place a broad framework for improving the access of the poor to quality health care services through the health sector reform agenda. It is this framework that has made the Sentrong Sigla Movement possible. I would also like to acknowledge Undersecretary Susan Pineda Mercado and the Sentrong Sigla Team that has been implementing the quality improvement program of the department of health.

There are many people who have worked with the Department of Health to help make the Sentrong Sigla Movement success. But I like to make special mention of our partners, the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and the United States Agency for International Development, or USAID.

Our Health Sector Reform Agenda is and will be the only solution to bridging the equity gap between the rich and the poor in health care services. It seeks to erase the notion that there can be two systems of health care – one for the rich and one for the poor – where the rich can choose quality care and the poor must settle for whatever government can provide. Through the health sector reform agenda which includes two major programs, quality improvement and universal health insurance coverage, the rich and the poor should have equal access to quality health care.

In the two-and-a-half years that I have been President, we have pursued reforms, through the Department of Health, that are necessary to improve the health of our people, especially the poor.

We have cleaned up the procurement system for drugs and medicines, which was once perceived to be one of the most graft-ridden systems in the government.

We have taken on the battle for cheaper prices of drugs and medicines through parallel importation. This has brought our DOH officials in direct confrontation with multinational drug companies which have taken them to court.

We have instituted reforms in the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation, which has become more efficient. Last June, we launched the health passport program, which complements Sentrong Sigla by ensuring that Filipinos, especially the poor, will have social health insurance.

Through the Health Passport Program, the poor will now receive quality health services because they can go to any hospital or health center, whether government or private, and there will be help to pay for the services they receive.

We have pursued the family planning program despite pressure from the Roman Catholic Church. In fact, only last Monday, the Philippines received the much coveted global media award for family planning, besting 21 other countries. This award was given by the world-renowned population institute, which is based in Washington, D.C.

And for all these accomplishments, I am surprised to hear some quarters of our society say that this government has not done anything for the poor.

That is why I am surprised by those who say that my administration has done nothing for the poor. Despite our efforts to improve the condition of our citizens and the country, some sectors of our society have done nothing but criticize and destroy our good beginnings.

Even before I have reached the halfway point of my term of office, there are already those who want me to resign and seize the power of my office now. If they only used their time, energy, mind and money to accelerate the development of our country, they could have helped to improve the lives of our citizens, especially the underprivileged and the poor.

As to the ongoing impeachment trial, I am confident that the truth will prevail in the end. I am convinced that I will be cleared of all issues that are unfairly being leveled against me. In the final analysis, those who have put their personal and political interests above the interests of our country will be proven wrong. This will restore the political and economic stability that my opponents wish to deny our country in the pursuit of their selfish desire to seize power way before my term ends in June 2004.

I reiterate before you that I have not received a single centavo from any form of illegal gambling. My conscience is clear. I have nothing to hide from our countrymen. And I believe that, in the end, the whole truth will prevail.

Let me assure you, therefore, that these issues will never hamper me from performing my job as the president who was duly elected by a big majority of our people. Our constitution mandates that I perform the duties of the chief executive until the year 2004, and I have no intention of defying that mandate. I promised a much better life to our people – especially the poor – and I intend to keep that promise during the term that is mandated by our Constitution.

I know we still have many things to do especially in the health sector, from the quality improvement of individual health facilities. Next year, we will go full blast in implementing the Health Passport Program. In this, we will need the partnership of our local government officials to achieve universal health insurance coverage among their constituents.

We also have to further improve and devolve the health care system and expand health care financing so that more people can afford health care.

To those who say that we have done nothing for the poor, maybe they think that the only way to help the poor is to give them dole-outs, welfare and charity. What we are saying through the health sector reform agenda and through the Sentrong Sigla Movement , in particular, is that the plight of the poor will not be improved by welfare alone. Reforms are needed in the government if we want to improve the delivery of services.

Reforms, however, cannot happen overnight. But if we are determined and if we are willing to work hard to undertake reforms, we can have the government that we want and the government that our people deserve.

I am proud that our Department of Health has instituted many reforms in our health system and has not stopped working for the poor. As proven by the recent global media award that our country received, the Department of Health is now recognized internationally, but many of our critics still refuse to acknowledge the progress we have made in many areas, including health.

But we are not in government to seek the recognition of our critics who never supported us in the first place. In spite of all the noise, protests and rallies that they make, we will just continue to do our work. In the end, we will prevail, and history will prove us right, that will be the greatest reward we can receive for all of our hard work and the best legacy we can leave to our people – that of having championed their cause and their well-being.

Thank you and a Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library