Speech of Honorable Joseph Ejercito Estrada Senator of the Philippines Before the Cebu Chamber of Commerce and Industry

THE PARTIDO NG MASANG PILIPINO: ITS VISION AND MISSION

Good afternoon to all of you!

Today, I am deeply honored to have been extended the opportunity to address this distinguished gathering of leaders and captains of business and industry in this premier city of the south. This honor, however, ultimately belongs to the common man, the unlettered and the underprivileged mass of our people, who have given me much of their trust and confidence, and without whom I will not be where I am today. On their behalf therefore, and on behalf of the Partido ng Masang Pilipino, I take pride this afternoon in addressing this select audience with the fervent hope that you are convinced as I am that the masses–the laborers, the farmers, the workers — are not adversaries, but the only true and real partners of business and industry in the development not only of this region but of the entire Philippine society.

I am grateful to the Cebu Chamber of Commerce and Industry for organizing this forum this afternoon. I am certain that our interaction today will be most instructive for me, aware that the business community here has been at the forefront of initiatives towards developing Cebu as an industrial and commercial center with a strong component of small and medium enterprises. Cebu has a strong potential as an economic and trading center of the Philippines and I believe this is an initiative that must be pursued

Your invitation has asked me to dwell on many areas, especially the program of government of our party and our position on various issues. I shall address major concerns, hopeful that the rest will be covered during the open forum. I hope that my English will pass your standards, and if it does not, then maybe you can add to your collection of Erap jokes.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Philippine society today is confronted not only with the crisis of economic poverty and deprivation but, more significantly, the poverty of mind, body and spirit. We are also faced with a poverty of direction and options as our people live marginal lives while our leaders continue squandering the remaining reservoir of endurance and fortitude that have characterized the Filipino for decades since colonial times. With each passing day, we feel the impatience of our people for economic deliverance.

Where are we now and what have we become? The answer, I think, you can find in the streets, in the slums, in the countrysides, in the blank and glassy eyes of children you find in the streets. Our population has increased to 60 million today and is expected to reach 75.2 million at the turn of the century. This rise in population has not been matched by a corresponding increase in productivity and output. About 60 percent of our people are considered poor. More than three million Filipinos are jobless. For every 100 employed Filipinos, about 36 need additional jobs to support themselves and their family with a decent life. One in every 50 of those employed is forced to work abroad. As of last year, we have about 600,000 overseas workers, not to include illegal migrants abroad. We see a long line of Filipinos, professionals and menial workers alike, applying for visas in foreign embassies, seeking opportunity in other countries which they cannot find here. About 75,000 children roam our streets peddling, begging and scavenging. At least 21 million Filipinos, or roughly 3.5 million families, are homeless. In Metro Manila alone, claimed to be the center of opportunity, one out of every five residents live in the slums. NEDA estimates show that the poorest 30 percent of our people had only 9.3 percent share of the national income from 1985 to 1988, while the richest 10 percent had 36 percent, an indication of the inequitable distribution of wealth in our society. Here in Central Visayas alone, which is reputed to be enjoying an economic boom in recent years, the richest 20 percent cornered 53.3 percent of the regional income, while the poorest 20 percent got only 4.8 percent from 1985 to 1988.

Sadly, we have a government that has mismanaged our meager resources. Delivery of basic services has been grossly inadequate. Graft and corruption have been widespread as it was in the past. Opportunities for a better and decent life have become inaccessible to small business and to majority of our people. Meanwhile, our government continues to be mired in foreign debt, even as we appropriate about 40 percent of our budget for servicing foreign loans, including those obtained fraudulently. As such, our people are deprived of basic services and opportunities because we have given priority to our foreign creditors instead of the needs of our people. And we continue to borrow so much, so that by 1992, when our debt obligations reach about 34 billion dollars, every Filipino — the young, the old, the poor and even those yet to be born — will be indebted by at least US$530 or about P15,000.

Certainly, this was not the promise of the EDSA Revolution which consecrated itself towards a better life for the Filipino. For today we realize that the dreams of EDSA have become a nightmare from which a dazed and suffering people must be roused and awakened that they may become the architects of their future, instead of a small elite of policy makers who have condemned our nation to serve foreign interests. This, ladies and gentlemen, is the vision of the Partido ng Masang Pilipino.

Where are we going and how must we proceed? The first agenda is to bring about stability in our political, economic and social life. We must engender political and social stability, first and foremost, by uniting a fragmented people to set aside petty rivalries and factionalism and have a fresh start. We have to declare a general amnesty for all, regardless of political persuasion, so that all would be given the opportunity to come back to the mainstream of society. After this, we have to implement the full force of the law. And in here, we have to instill law and order, and give priority in prosecuting the high and mighty who have made a mockery of our laws. We have to institute reforms in our judicial system so that all would be equal before the law. We have to reform bureaucracy, to contain graft and corruption and improve its capabilities to dispense basic services even to remote and far-flung areas. The need for local autonomy becomes imperative, for our experience shows that power, authority and resources concentrated at the national level have only deprived our people in the regions and in the countryside of basic services. As a former local official, I am committed to this aspiration for I know how it is to be chief executive of a town and be powerless to serve your constituents because of overconcentration of facilities and resources at the national level.

A second agenda is that of growth and economic productivity. If this nation is to move ahead, we must begin to stimulate economic development by marshalling our resources. We have to strengthen the economic participation of our people, so that they can be real partners in development and improve revenue generation. In Thailand, five million of its 55 million people comprise the tax base, while we have only about 2.5 million taxpayers out of a population of 60 million. This means that there are not enough of our people engaged in productive economic activities. Moreover, many also cheat the government by not paying the right taxes so that revenue generation is impaired. The common man can help support society if given the opportunity, as can be seen in our overseas contract workers, who bring some one billion dollars annually to our economy and therefore help our foreign reserves. Sadly, however, it is the rich and well-entrenched businessmen who bring out foreign currency through dollar salting or investments abroad. If we therefore equip our people with opportunities, whether in employment or in business, they can contribute much. We have to give small businesses the same incentives given to big firms which in 1989 alone enjoyed some 5.7 billion pesos by way of tariff and tax exemptions.

In the countryside, rural development has been largely equated with the productivity of land, instead of the productivity of individuals. The rural sector, where some 60 percent of our people can be found, remains to be poor. The inequality has grown over time. We must provide farmers with better irrigation facilities, mechanization of farming operations, installation of post-harvest marketing facilities, and better terms of rural credit.

But land alone cannot support a rapidly growing population. Our rural sector must be provided with alternative non-farm sources of income and employment. We must encourage small enterprises such as soap processing, brick making, handicrafts, food processing, canning of fruits and vegetables and similar initiatives. All these are intended to provide the farmer, the housewife and the landless with additional sources of income and alternative employment.

As we pursue these, there is also the need to invest in basic industries like steel. For how can we be productive and self-reliant if we cannot manufacture tools and equipment at reasonable prices to help us produce more goods and render more services? Our heavy dependence on imports of tools, equipment and raw materials is reflected by the structure of our manufacturing sector. This import dependence has taken its toll on our foreign exchange reserves. Our import bill reached P12 billion last year, or 16 percent higher than 1989. This rise in our import bill is attributed to the continued heavy reliance of our manufacturing sector on imported industrial inputs. Next to oil, machinery and base metal were the biggest import items in 1990.

The government must do its share in public investments in infrastructure, something which we have not done during the past five years because we have squandered our resources in honoring our foreign debt. Economic growth can be attained only if there is sufficient infrastructure facilities to make it easy and profitable for people to do business in the country. We need to build roads, bridges, improve our communication systems, expand our airports and ports, develop our energy sources and our transport capabilities.

During the last two decades, we have remained predominantly agricultural, while countries around us increased their share of manufacturing in their production of goods and services. We do not have an industrial policy to speak of. We have neglected industrialization and manufacturing because of our preoccupation with export-oriented agriculture and import liberalization, especially of luxuries and consumer goods.

You may ask, but where are we to get the capital to do this? My position is that we need to marshal our resources and use them wisely. We have so many wastages because of wrong priorities; it was reported recently by the Commission on Audit that close to P10 billion pesos went to waste in 1989 alone. We can only wonder how much we lose to inefficient management of resources, a poor tax collection system, to graft and corruption. We can realize the needed capital for investments if we improve revenue generation in government so as to finance our development projects on our own.

In the face of all these, we must confront the challenges of defending the integrity of our nationhood, to show that we are capable of an independent foreign policy, not subservient to America. This will also imply the need for self-reliance and weaning ourselves from dependency on foreign aid and loans. I believe that we have the capabilities, for we are a nation blessed with rich natural resources; our people have sufficient talent and skills, so much so that our workers are in demand overseas but not in their homeland. Unfortunately, other nations exploit both our natural and human resources and they enjoy the benefits.

Lastly, we must address the inequitable distribution of wealth in our society by giving economic opportunities to our people. We must intensify the delivery of basic services, particularly in protecting the welfare of the poor and the underprivileged. All the above aspirations will have to be premised from the perspective of how to alleviate poverty and involve our people in economic activity that they may have a decent livelihood.

We have a burgeoning agenda that will demand a good deal of action, political will, decisiveness and independence of mind. Certainly, we need to move and mobilize our society by deeds, not by words; by example, not by rhetoric. In this I stand by my track record and although some of you may say, a small town like San Juan cannot be compared to the entire country, my response is this: Experience is the best teacher and past performance is a respectable measure. A man must be judged not only on what he says he can do or what he plans to do, but on what he has done.

As I close today, I am reminded again of what Senator Recto had said, and I quote: “a nation’s political, economic and cultural life is of its people’s own making… we must accept, therefore, full responsibility for the backward condition of our economy, for our political immaturity and pompousness, for our opportunistic mentality, for our predilection for dramatizing minor issues to the neglect of long-range, basic questions, and for our confusions and indecisions that have delayed for decades the progress of the nation.” These words, said some 30 years ago, are as relevant today as it was in the past. I believe that the Filipino today must accept the responsibility, and proceed with the Filipino agenda of rebuilding our nation instead of the American or the IMF agenda. We must answer a basic question and that is: What are we doing for the Filipino? What are we doing for our country that deserves the respect and honor that befit our nationhood? I challenge you as a community of learned men wise to the ways of business, to help rebuild this nation that the Filipino nation may claim that destiny of greatness that has been denied our people in the past.

Thank you very much and long live!

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Senate of the Philippines. (1991). Speeches of the senators : a collection of speeches by the Senators of the Philippines . Manila : Senate.