Housing for the People as a Priority of the Government

I extend my heartfelt greetings to all our countrymen who are here today to witness the important occasion we are holding today.

The Memorandum of Agreement or agreement signed today between the Holy Family of San Andres Bukid Association, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila, and the Home Development Mutual Fund or Pag-Ibig Fund is a historic step in the implementation of our housing program. I am deeply grateful to the leadership of our Roman Catholic Church for their participation and assistance to my administration in promoting our housing program for the poor.

Since I assumed the Presidency more than two years ago, it has been my commitment to see to it that more Filipinos – especially the poor – are provided roofs over their heads and assured of tenure over their lands. This is the reason why I made housing as the centerpiece program of my administration.

Housing for the masses is what we continue to promote to fulfill the dream of many of our countrymen to have their own homes. When I assumed the presidency, approximately three million families were in need of housing nationwide.

Here in Metro Manila, where houses are already crowded, there are still those who live in dangerous areas, such as the banks of rivers and creeks, or even under bridges. Formerly, squatters were only found in Metro Manila. But now, they can also be found in almost all major cities in our country, such as Cebu, Davao, Cagayan de Oro, and Zamboanga, so we need to speed up the construction of more houses so that the shortage does not increase.

The true objective of our housing program is what is called Security of Tenure. This is to give assurance to the urban poor that the land and house where they live will become their property. With the help of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council, led by Secretary Lenny de Jesus, the government is promoting programs towards Security of Tenure.

I have also ordered that no demolition of squatter areas will be carried out until there is a relocation site where the residents can be transferred. If possible, we will also ensure that there are jobs waiting for them so that they are not tempted to return to the crowded city.

Currently, our policies regarding informal settlers are clear. We will prioritize providing housing to those in dangerous areas, such as the esteros along the Pasig River. And those located in the right-of-way of large-scale infrastructure projects of the government.

Furthermore, government-owned lands that are unused and neglected will all be utilized for our housing program for the poor. I believe the church can help us in this endeavor, as they also own large tracts of land in the country.

This is one possible area of cooperation between the government and the Catholic Church amidst the ongoing political crisis that has engulfed the whole nation. If we can do this, we will prove to everyone that not only can the church and state work together towards the same goal but also follow god’s words to help the least of his brethren by responding to the housing needs of the poor.

That is why I am pleased that through the agreement signed today, the dream of our countrymen in the parish of Holy Family in San Andres to have their own homes will finally be realized.

According to this Memorandum of Agreement, the Pag-Ibig Fund will provide a Funding Commitment Line including a letter of credit in the name of the association for approximately one hundred eighty million pesos (P180m). This amount will be used for the construction of six medium-rise buildings with six hundred ninety (690) housing units.

Under this agreement, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila will also transfer the rights and ownership of the land to the association, which will then select the contractor to continue land development and construct the medium-rise buildings.

I would like to thank the Pag-Ibig Fund for providing this assistance to fulfill the dream of the members of the Holy Family of San Andres Bukid Association to have their own homes.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate everyone at Pag-Ibig on their 20th anniversary yesterday. I thank them for their twenty years of continuous support for the housing program of our government.

I also thank the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila again for their cooperation with our housing program.

The acute housing need of our countrymen cannot be addressed by a single institution. We need to work together to solve this problem.

We are not promising that we can fulfill all the needs of our poor citizens at once. Our only promise for now is that we will continue to find ways to provide appropriate support to our programs. I just ask that you give me enough time because, as you know, we face a big problem in fitting the government's funds.

Perhaps you still remember that when I assumed the presidency, the national treasury was empty and many debts were left behind. So, even if we want to immediately implement programs that respond to the needs of the citizens, we cannot do it all. Nevertheless, we saved and accumulated funds while paying off our debts. And as we gradually accumulated, we began to implement our priorities, such as the food security program, mass housing, and the maintenance of peace and order in the country.

We aspire for food security because no Filipino should go hungry in his own country. To make this happen, we launched an agricultural modernization program that built more irrigation systems, farm-to-market roads, and post-harvest facilities. Because of this, our farmers had a good harvest and the agriculture sector grew by 3.5 percent this year.

In our housing program, we prioritize those I consider the heroes of our time – our teachers, police, soldiers, and Overseas Filipino Workers – so that before I step down from the presidency in 2004, they all have their own homes.

Criminality in Metro Manila has also decreased, where before, we almost read nothing in the newspapers every week but kidnappings, carnappings and bank robberies. We also succeeded in stopping the unrest in Mindanao caused by the MILF and Abu Sayyaf.

Now we have only one enemy left, and that is poverty. The government is doing everything to end poverty in our country, but I admit that even as president, I cannot fight poverty alone. I need your help and that of the entire Filipino people.

In this instance, it is clear that the Catholic Church is uniting with our aspiration to improve the living conditions of our impoverished and most needy brothers and sisters. And I expect that we will further strengthen this unity and cooperation in the coming times, for the sake of our poor countrymen.

As president and father of our country, I have no other desire now but to give our countrymen a better future. And I believe that the realization of this dream will be hastened through the cooperation of our church.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you!

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library