STATE OF THE FILIPINO CHILDREN REPORT 2000

I extend my warm and heartfelt sympathy to all of you on the occasion of our unity to promote and uphold the welfare of our youth. I hope that we will further strengthen this despite the problems we are currently facing.

We gather today to mark the culmination of our celebration of the National Children’s Month. We renew today our collective commitment of ensuring our children a better life, a safe and caring environment and a brighter future. They will inherit this nation and they deserve a society better than what we have today.

I stand before you today not only as President of the Philippines but as a father, and as father to our nation’s children.

We lead today a nation of young people. It is estimated that about 43 percent of our people or 33 million Filipinos are below 15 years old. This is a population that will determine the future of our society depending on how we chart our priorities today. As the populations of developed nations grow older, ours is becoming younger. In this sector, we invest our future and must plant the seeds of a better, more progressive nation. Here lies the challenge that confronts us today.

Ten years ago, the Philippines joined the United Nations Convention on the rights of the child. The Philippines was likewise a participant to the 1990 World Summit for Children, which set forth a vision of a “first call for children” and formulated global goals for children.

Without question, the Philippines is committed to work for the attainment of these goals. The government is determined to ensure the rights of Filipino children to survival, protection, development and participation.

We are thus committed to nurture, educate, defend, protect and empower every Filipino child. This is not only because it is the youth of today who will shape this country’s future, but because this is well within every child’s right.

We take stock today of what we have achieved in terms of the goals set in 1990. Our country has achieved modest but important strides for our children’s survival, development and protection. Our agenda for our children remain to be staggering.

But we can note that a marked improvement in this general health and well-being of our children’s population has been realized during the past few years.

Since 1990, more babies have lived to see their first birthday, more children under five have survived. Our infant mortality rates, as well as under five child mortality rates, have been significantly reduced to levels that exceed the targets for the year 2000.

Malnutrition incidence declined in 1996. Unfortunately, this improvement was slightly compromised in 1998 because of the Asian financial crisis and compounded by the El Niño phenomenon. Malnutrition thus remains a threat to the Filipino child’s survival. But we will not rest and continue to fight this war.

We have also taken steps to guarantee and ensure the education of every child as a fundamental right.

Access to basic education has however expanded through the establishment of schools and multi-grade classes in remote areas. Enrollment in elementary schools has increased and the rate of completion of primary education has risen.

But while the country’s child care and development goal has been set at 90 percent coverage of all children aged 0-6, there is still a low access to day care and pre-school programs. We must therefore work for the establishment of a day care center in every barangay to ensure access to a pre-school education among our disadvantaged children.

The importance of early childhood care and development must be emphasized perhaps, the period from birth to age six is the most critical in the child’s development. What happens during these first six years affects the child’s health, learning capacity and behavior.

The country’s education target of 98 percent participation rate and 80 percent cohort survival rates will most probably not be achieved by the end of the decade unless we undertake innovative approaches that go beyond traditional delivery systems, to my mind, is a step in the right direction.

We must likewise exert efforts to draw into the fold of our educational system child workers, the streetchildren, the special children, the neglected or abused, the children of indigenous peoples, juvenile delinquents and those caught in armed conflict.

At the same time, we must continue to look after gifted children by to give them better opportunities to develop their skills.

It is estimated that there are 3.7 million children aged 5 trapped in the worst forms of child labor – deep sea fishing, mining, quarrying, and even prostitution, to cite a few examples.

Sixteen percent of households surveyed in 1993 have children below 12 years old who are left without adult supervision. A recent study reported at least 43,600 streetchildren in the country in 1998, the DSWD alone responded to 2,700 cases of physically abused children. NGOs have placed the number of sexually exploited or prostituted children at 60,000 to 75,000 nationwide. Many of these children suffered incest and sexual abuse before being initiated into prostitution.

In 1996, the DSWD reported 7,057 youthful criminal offenders, most of whom are boys. Moreover, there are approximately 1.5 million youth believed to be drug users. The experiences of these children throughout their encounter with the juvenile justice system indicate neglect and insensitivity to their situation by the enforcers of the system. It is part of the vision of this government to establish separate detention centers for children in conflict with the law.

Children with disabilities totaled 158,302 according to the 1995 census. In addition, one out of five children in the 0-6 age-group have some form of disability or impairment.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines estimates the number of children who have been recruited by armed groups at 13 percent of the total rebel population. Thousands more have become victims of war, displaced from their homes, deprived of basic social services and exposed to physical danger and disease.

At the U.N. Millenium Summit in New York last month, I signed an optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child, banning the involvement of children in armed conflict. I deemed it timely. Considering the current situation in Mindanao, which critically affects the children in the are, the signing is an expression of my concern.

There are also some 2.5 million children from indigenous cultural communities in the country. Their areas are often affected by armed conflict over and above the fact that they are usually neglected in the delivery of basic services, are highly vulnerable to communicable diseases and malnutrition and are discriminated against.

Girls are also often most vulnerable to child abuse.

The Philippine government recognizes these children to be in need of special protection and government response is demonstrated in the focused attention given to them under child 21. Today, I reaffirm child 21 through an executive order. Child 21 represents our dreams and visions for the future. It embodies our promise to every Filipino children that we will do our best to safeguard their rights and well-being.

It is in this spirit that this administration created the Office of the Presidential Adviser for Children’s Affairs, a first in this country. This office is tasked to serve the Filipino child by acting as the link to my office. It also helps coordinate matters affecting children with all other agencies concerned, particularly those involving legislation.

But while government action is necessary, it is not sufficient. The family, school, community, civil society, local government, media and national government are key players who must commit themselves to realizing children’s rights and welfare.

I urge government and the private sector to work hand in hand and invest heavily in the children of the present so that we can have productive citizens for the future. We must expand and deepen our partnerships.

At this point, let me acknowledge the support and contribution of the UNICEF in extending help to our present and future actions for children when UNICEF Executive Director Carol Bellamy was here. We talked about the Philippines taking the lead in Southeast Asia on children’s issues. I promised her that this administration is very much committed to the development, protection, survival and participation of children. This summit is in fulfillment of that promise. This summit will give children a voice. It is high time that we listen to our children, marami tayong matututunan sa pakikinig sa mga bata.

I also wish to congratulate the organizers of this event, chaired by our Presidential Adviser for Children’s Affairs, Sec. Jamby Madrigal. I wish to thank the Department of Social Welfare and Development under Secretary Dulce Saguisag, the Council for the Welfare of Children chaired by USec. Felicidad Villareal, the National Economic Development Authority, the National Anti-poverty Commissions Children Basic Sector, the UNICEF through its country representative Dr. Terrel Hill, and all other government and non-government agencies, and especially the children, for putting up this successful summit. I urge you all to continue to work hand in hand to make our visions for our children a reality.

As president, I am personally committed to a policy of “children first.” Let this summit not be an end but the beginning of our continued resolve to institute more projects and programs for the protection, well-being and development of the Filipino child.

We dream of a nation where children are nurtured and allowed to grow into adulthood in a safe, healthy and supportive environment wherein all children can develop to their full potential, protected from threats to their well-being.

We aspire for a society where a good quality basic education for all children is paramount, whose children are free to express themselves, are empowered and can participate in the decisions that affect them.

I promise our youth that we will further strengthen our programs for the youth. You must grow up properly – healthy, peaceful, and capable of developing yourselves and our country.

In all my decisions as your president, you will always be in my mind. Your welfare will serve as my inspiration and strength. Whatever they say, I will not stop serving you so that every Filipino child can be assured of a good future.

Thank you very much and long live the children!

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library