THE REMARKABLE WORK OF FILIPINOS IN VIETNAM

Good evening to all of you, our beloved countrymen here in Hanoi. I thank you for your warm welcome and reception of me, the First Lady, and my companions. I am very happy to be with all of you tonight. I extend to all of you a warm greeting from your loved ones and fellow countrymen in the Philippines, especially this Christmas season.

In recent months, I have had the opportunity to be with our countrymen in Singapore and Malaysia. This is the third time I have visited a foreign country and of course, Erap will not forget being with our countrymen here in Vietnam.

I have noticed that, wherever we are, our trademark of being a vibrant and happy people is very apparent. Surely, a people with such life and spirit can surmount any problems and difficulties that will come their way.

I am informed that most of you here are professionals involved in highly skilled occupations. This makes the Filipino community here, which may be small in number in comparison to other countries, as an influential sector in Vietnamese society. You are providing very important services that are critical in the economic development of Vietnam. I hope that you will continue to serve as our Ambassadors of Goodwill who will help strengthen the relations between our two countries.

I take this opportunity to extend my best wishes and to congratulate our Filipino community in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam for the contributions you have been making to the development of this country. You represent the pride of our people as Filipino expatriates who provide technical and managerial expertise to our fellow ASEAN citizens in Vietnam.

I am proud of you because our people are now known in other countries not only as being efficient and hard-working, but as leaders and experts here in Vietnam. This is our trademark and it is this quality that earns for us the respect and admiration of other countries.

Your achievements here will be the pride of our people. But your shame will be ours too, and I ask you of protect and preserve the dignity and integrity of our country at all times.

At this point, allow me to give you an update of the Philippine situation today, with emphasis on my agenda of governance.

My Administration is over 150 days old. I take this opportunity to report to you that, among the members of ASEAN, our country is the only one projected to have a positive growth this year. Our inflation rate for the last eight months is at a low 8.4 percent, and we hope to end the year within our inflation rate target.

Our currency is slowly stabilizing while foreign investments are gradually coming back. Our banking system remains stable and is one of the best capitalized in the region. By next year, we are optimistic that more fresh capital will be coming in. This is an optimism that is shared by both Government and the private sector.

We are now pursuing an agenda that will enable us to cope and deal with the challenges of the coming century. We are now addressing the problems brought about by the Asian financial crisis on our economy, with the hope of containing its impact on the marginalized sector of our society.

The pro-poor agenda of my Administration is now being implemented by all agencies of Government. We will transform the agricultural sector into a dynamic and competitive sector since the majority of our poor population are dependent on agriculture for employment and income. The modernization of this sector will be an effective strategy towards the attainment of food security and the reduction of rural poverty.

Indeed, we see better times ahead. We also see opportunities for stronger economic ties between the Philippines and the rest of the world – especially with our neighbors in ASEAN. And that includes Vietnam.

The role of those of you who work abroad is also important because overseas Filipino workers are one of the main sectors that support and sustain our livelihood in the Philippines. In the crisis we are currently experiencing here in Asia, you and our other workers abroad are helping to save our economy.

Your help to our government is truly great in improving the lives of our countrymen, especially the poor.

You have worked hard and have made enduring contributions not only to your host country here but to the Philippines as well. In recognition of your dedication, our Government has adopted policies and has implemented programs and projects that seek to promote the welfare and well-being of our Filipinos living or working abroad.

I would like you to also know that we remain to be attentive of the needs of our countrymen in other countries. We seek to promote their welfare, because no matter where they are, no matter what the job, no matter what the English, they remain to be Filipinos.

To ensure that the needs of our migrant workers are being taken care of, we have designated an Undersecretary for Legal Assistance for migrant workers in the Department of Foreign Affairs. We also now have an Assistant Secretary for Overseas Workers in the Department of Labor. I have appointed them so that we can further ensure that your welfare is protected.

For overseas Filipino workers who dream of owning a home upon returning to the Philippines, I have directed the National Housing Authority to intensify their Operation Pabahay Program to include OFWs in this program. A PAG-IBIG Housing Program for OFWs has also been launched.

We also now have hospitals for OFWs. Three tie-up clinics are already serving OFWs in Tokyo, Osaka, and Dubai. Ten more will be established before the end of this year.

Now that Christmas is near, I know many of you want to return to the Philippines. We now have express lanes at NAIA dedicated solely to OFWs.

During the awarding ceremonies for Filipino Individuals and Organizations Overseas last December 11, we launched the Migrant’s Advisory Information System or M.A.I.S. This system aims to provide migrants with the information they need regarding countries of their destination, the migrant support groups abroad, the Filipino overseas organizations, and the Philippine Embassies and Consulates. Vietnam is one of the countries included in the launching operation of the M.A.I.S.

M.A.I.S. is one of the programs launched by our government to address the lack of preparation and knowledge of those going abroad about their destination.

I will continue to listen to your concerns. Here in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, we shall seek, thru our Embassy, to support the activities of Filipino community organizations, we shall continue to make representations with employers, as well as with Government officials, to help protect the interests and welfare of our countrymen working here. We shall seek to actively seek to intervene towards improving working conditions and the terms of your contracts, as well as your compensation packages.

It is our commitment to identify programs and projects that will promote the well-being of our citizens overseas. You may be far from your homeland, but you remain to be Filipinos. We remain to be one and united, for this is how we will face the burdens and challenges that will confront our society in this and in the next century.

No one will help a Filipino except a fellow Filipino.

Merry Christmas and a Prosperous New Year to all of you!

Long live us all!

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library