PEACE AND UNDERSTANDING THROUGH DISCOURSE

Good evening and welcome!

It is with much pride that I join you tonight on the occasion of the Grand Finals of the 19th World Universities Debating Championship, which is also known as Worlds.

As an Atenean, I am proud that this year’s competition, which I understand is the first to be held in Asia, is being hosted in the Philippines by our Ateneo Debate Society.

It is also significant that Manila was chosen as a venue of this event of the first year of my presidency. It also serves as part of the centennial celebrations of Philippine Independence. We are deeply honored to bring together here tonight the biggest concentration of debating talents which represent leading universities in over 40 countries.

We hope that whatever awards or prizes you bring home from this competition, you will not lose the significance of this exercise. Our joining here together is not simply to win trophies or honors, but to win friends. You are all Ambassadors of Goodwill of your respective countries. And we seek to bring about a gentler and kinder world where all of us can live in peace and in prosperity. I am sure there can be no debate on that.

In due time, we shall enter and discover the challenges and opportunities of the 21st century.

It will be a century of information and knowledge that comes to us on the wings of a communication revolution like we have never seen before.

In this information society, human knowledge will be mankind’s greatest resource for it will be the biggest creator of peace and understanding among us. And peace and brotherhood, no doubt, can be won if we communicate.

No amount of technology will obscure or render obsolete the need to communicate and to convince, and, in the long run, the need, to persuade and to reason out. This is where your art becomes most important. We will need men and women who will be gifted with the facility to speak for the cause of peace, using the majesty and power of communication in favor of mindless violence.

Technological skill, no matter how important, must always remain at the service of reason. I trust that this distinguished company of remarkable young men and women will not hesitate to use their talents at the fullest service of their people and of mankind.

Life is an unending series of discourse. These decisions entail a process of discourse. They become more pronounced when we address questions involving human dignity and human life.

We ask questions as to how we shall pursue progress or how we shall solve the problems of poverty. We ask questions as to how we can improve the lives of the impoverished majority without causing dislocation in society. We ask how we can better pursue the ends of democracy and freedom, how we can alleviate the miseries of the poor, how we can have a better government.

In the long run, these all begin with debates which must resolve themselves into policies. Every discussion we have becomes enlightening. The debates we have today can only be bridges to the dreams we must fulfill. They make our convictions more settled and more informed.

As for the poor, these debates have become enduring. They may appear to have won the argument in paper, but they have little or nothing to show for it. And the communications revolution has all but underscored the gravity of their situation. Globalization and the new economic order, for all their proclaimed advantages, can create and swell the ranks of the poor. The enclaves of poverty can multiply, and we must seriously debate how we can stop that tide of deprivation and alienation now looming large and forbidding in our collective futures.

The challenge to us today – and in the next century – is to win the argument permanently in favor not just of freedom, democracy, justice, and peace, but of prosperity for all. We must resolve to use every opportunity within our means to win the day for the poor who continue to skin in deeper poverty even as national economies today report better opportunities.

I have promised myself and our people that I shall spare no effort to win the debate in favor of the poor, permanently. I am aware that this struggle cannot be won by one man alone. But if it does not begin in earnest with the Presidency, it will never begin in earnest, as a national undertaking at all.

The regional crisis has now spilled over to Russia and part of Latin America. This is why I have decided to pursue this commitment to the highest regional councils in Asia, such as last year’s APEC Leaders Summit in Kuala Lumpur, and the Sixth ASEAN Summit in Hanoi. I have high hopes that the region, and ultimately, the entire global community would consider the urgent needs of the poor not just as an agenda for debate, but as an agenda of economic and business priorities.

To my pleasant surprise, this call has met with ready support from ASEAN neighbors and the other leaders of the Asia-Pacific Region. In the Hanoi Declaration of 1998, the nine ASEAN heads of state and governments recognized “that the financial crisis has a social dimension, with the poor and vulnerable segments of our societies being the most adversely affected.”

I do not wish to impose these issues upon you tonight. But this is the debate of the next century. How we can ensure that “efforts to safeguard the interests of the poor form an integral part of overall reform efforts.”

To you who represent the future, I express this simple personal appeal. Join us in this adventure of fighting poverty in whatever society, in whatever form, in whatever race. Let the majority be the winners and beneficiaries of life’s greatest debate so that we can deliver a fair and just world. I take this advocacy because I am reminded that whatever color or creed we may be, we remain to be our brothers’ keepers.

Tonight, please accept our warm affection and the fraternal embrace of our people. We are convinced that in tonight’s events, we shall all be winners.

Thank you and good night.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library