RECOGNIZING VALOR OF OUR SOLDIERS

I am pleased to be with all of you in giving recognition to the true heroes of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and of the Filipino people.

On behalf of our countrymen, I extend my warm greetings to our brave soldiers who received medals and promotions today as recognition for the courage they have shown for the sake of our country.

You are considered by us as exceptional soldiers who are willing to sacrifice their lives and endure pain and hardship, for the sake of our beloved motherland.

Indeed, it is a great pride to recognize our soldiers who have fought valiantly to preserve the country’s peace, democracy and constitution.

On behalf of a grateful nation, I commend you for relentlessly pursuing those who have sown and continue to sow violence born out of misguided ideology and radical extremism; as well as those who were but plain bandits and criminals.

Today, it was my privilege to have shaken the hands and exchanged warm embrace with the soldiers who were willing to give everything in order to put down rebellions and criminality in our country. I stood close to the real-life heroes responsible for protecting our country’s freedom, sovereignty, and territorial integrity. Because of this, I am all the more proud and confident as your president and as a Filipino.

Let me also convey to you this thought: there is probably no harder decision to make; no issue that causes more anguish and sleepless nights, no situation that calls for the uttermost wisdom and willpower from a president, than the decision to command troops into war.

Since early on in my presidency, armed challenges and terrorist attacks had been launched against the government and innocent civilians, but these were all to no avail. This is because the Armed Forces of the Philippines has remained loyal and unswerving in its duty to protect and serve our country and our people. We have decisively dealt with the MILF, took over their camps, and turned them into confused stragglers. We have chased the Abu Sayaff, rescued and freed most of the hostages, and now await the final results of our mopping-up operations. You, our soldiers, have made these victories and triumphs possible.

But allow me to say that sending men and women into the field to engage a deadly enemy brought me no great pleasure, no matter how necessary and crucial that order might have been. For I know that, with every command of the president as the commander-in-chief of the AFP, by every order that I make, lives of soldiers are at stake.

It pains my heart as your president to see our soldiers wounded and risking their lives in danger. It is also bitter for me to see the suffering of their families and loved ones.

It was not an easy decision to send our soldiers to Mindanao and other parts of our country where they are needed. However, as president, like our soldiers, I have a sworn duty to defend our country and our citizens.

It is saddening to think that while you risk your lives to protect our freedom and Constitution, such as in Mindanao, there are some sectors of our society that continue to create chaos to topple our economy and political system.

The Mindanao situation, which has involved many of you, has affected our country because it threatened our national sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as embarrassed our government and tarnished our image abroad. This should have been a time for all or us to unite. In other countries, in times of great stress and when they are confronted with difficult problems, they set aside their differences and work together to protect the interests of the state. We should have done the same in our country.

Instead, there are forces in our society that are out to discredit my moral credibility to lead this nation. By their politically motivated attacks and baseless accusations, they are once more destroying our image abroad and scaring away the tourists and foreign investors from coming to the Philippines.

It all started with an accusation coming from a person who cannot be trusted. However, even before the investigation was finished, some of our countrymen already judged me. They didn't even give me a chance to explain, even though even a criminal accused is given a day in court.

I repeat: I did not receive even a single centavo from any form of illegal gambling. My conscience is clear. I have nothing to hide from our countrymen.

I am ready for the impeachment process that will be conducted by our congress. I am prepared to face prosecution by the senate, as long as it is in accordance with our constitution. And I believe that, in the end, the whole truth will prevail.

We cannot disregard the objectives of our Constitution.

It is the constitution which was meant to be the guiding spirit for our democracy. It is the same constitution that calls on you, our soldiers, to risk life and limbs in order to maintain peace and order throughout the land.

As mandated in Section 3, Article 2, of that Constitution, the Armed Forces of the Philippines is the protector of the people and the state, and its goal is to secure our national sovereignty and territorial integrity. This means fighting all forces which seek to overthrow the government, impair the independence of the nation, or dismember any portion of its territory.

It is a role that you and I, as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, have sworn to perform to the best of our abilities. It is a role that we are expected to fulfill in order that the rest of the citizenry may lead their lives safely and securely.

The constitution compels us to lay our lives on the line as a matter of duty. It is the same constitution that I now invoke to allow me to enjoy the right to disprove accusations of financial wrongdoings.

I had been elected as president until the year 2004 and I have sworn to fulfill this mandate given by our people. If my detractors think that they can distract me from my efforts to uplift the quality of life of the masses, they are making a big mistake. I have always worked for the benefit of the poor, and I will not back down now. It is the Filipino masses who gave me the mandate to govern, and I will never abandon them.

At this point, let me re-assure our gallant men and women in uniform that your president will support you in every way possible.

To insure that you will continue to extend valuable services to our country and people, we have constantly pushed for the immediate implementation of the AFP Modernization Law. We are trying our best to upgrade your equipment and facilities in order to improve your capabilities.

We are also doing our best to provide you and your families with more benefits. Since I assumed the presidency, this now includes increased food allowance, free housing, scholarship grants to soldiers and their dependents, and improved health care services.

As had been done before, aside from other forms of assistance, our soldiers with major injuries shall automatically receive P50,000, while those with minor injuries shall receive P20,000 – all of these from the president’s social fund. I am also allotting a special fund for the improvement of the facilities of the AFP Medical Center so that it will be able to provide better services to our soldiers and their families. A few weeks from now, we will inaugurate and begin operations at the Don Emilio Ejercito Diagnostic Center to augment our existing medical facilities.

I am certain that no amount of money can ever repay your heroic deeds in the fields of Mindanao and other sites of battle, but these benefits may suffice for now. I know that other and greater rewards await you sooner or later.

It is my wish that you recover at once for the sake of your families, for the sake of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and for the sake of our country. We still need all of you. That is why we pray for your speedy recovery so you may resume normal and productive lives.

Let me also extend my heartfelt appreciation to the officers and staff, the civilian personnel and the many benefactors of the AFP Medical Center for their tireless service, concern and substantial aid to our wounded soldiers and their dependents. I know that you shall continue giving your best for the welfare of our wounded personnel not only because they deserve it, but, most especially, because these soldiers have made our lives more safe and secure.

I once again thank you all for this opportunity to be with our brave soldiers and to give them honors, according to the tradition of our armed forces.

May they serve as an inspiration to us all to live with a great purpose. No matter our position or situation in life, each of us has a responsibility to promote and defend our country.

So, let us stop our bickering and mudslinging. Instead, let us unite and help each other to accelerate our progress.

Let us unite and work together to fight poverty in our country and build a stronger and more developed Philippines. Let us prove to the whole world that we Filipinos are capable of rising through our own efforts and cooperation.

Thank you very much and may we all live!

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library