MEDIA’S SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN FOSTERING THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

I would like to extend my warmest greetings to the men and women of the Office of the Press Secretary and the members of the Malacañang Press Corps as we inaugurate today the newly renovated OPS Briefing Room and Press Working Area.

I understand that, although the Presidential Press Office has been housed here since 1986, it is only now under the stewardship of Press Secretary Ricardo “Dong” Puno, Jr., that the briefing room and the press working area have been duly renovated.

With these improvements, maybe you will be inclined now to write more favorable stories about the Office of the President. By this, I simply mean your giving equal importance to the success stories of our many development programs and giving them prominence in your newspapers or broadcasts.

I know that even if our methods of helping our countrymen differ, our goal for them is one and the same. So I hope you will support everything our government is doing to help citizens, especially the poor, have a peaceful and prosperous life.

I cannot possible overstate the media’s important role as a catalyst for national development. Your role is very significant because you have the power to mold public opinion and influence the perceptions of the general public. But then again, in order for you to be a stimulus for development, you must fulfill the responsibility attached with the power commanded by your profession.

If our country is to move decisively forward, it will be largely because of your role and your willingness to help in the development of our country and to uphold the tenets of a democratic society.

We need a media that will mount a vigorous defense of the truth, using all available means of obtaining facts without violating the laws. We need a media that will continue the path of objectivity, seeking support and demanding to be heard so that they can hold my administration for the commitment we were sworn to fulfill.

In the past, I have been assailed by certain sectors as repressing members of the media. I have been wrongly perceived by some as an enemy of press freedom. Of course, up to this time, no member of the media has ever been arrested in the exercise of his duty or responsibility.

On the contrary, the heightened political exercises that have occupied the headlines for the past weeks only goes to show that our democracy remains very much alive and secure. I have often allowed myself to be “ambushed” by the press during presidential engagements, and I have been most tolerant of their queries, no matter how personal they could sometimes get.

Hence, I am sure that the members of the Malacañang Press Corps can attest to the fact that press freedom is very much alive and protected in our country today. The freedoms of the press and of expression are well guaranteed in this country and will always be so.

Although some of you can be very critical at times, i am nevertheless gratified by the fact that the Philippine press remains the envy of many other countries in Asia because of its independence and openness. The courage and the commitment to responsive and professional journalism, coupled with the passion for quality and excellence, have put you in the best position to face the challenges we now face as a nation.

This blessing and inauguration symbolize my administration’s fresh efforts to institutionalize our people’s constitutional right to know the truth about our country’s state of affairs.

We must emphasize to our people that their welfare has always been the central concern of my administration. It is our hope that everything that we are striving for – economic stability, industrial growth, increased production, improved services, peace and order – will ultimately lead to the betterment of the lives of the Filipino people, especially the poor.

The success of our development plans and programs, however, depends in large measure on the support of the media, and how effectively communication efforts are able to draw support from as many people as possible. We need a strong communication support to create in people. The knowledge to identify their needs and options, the eagerness and ability to act and take up the challenge of self-development in their own hands.

I believe that the media, by the nature of your profession, touch our lives at diverse levels, illuminate the social fabric of the nation, and provide the essential link in our political, economic and cultural life. Such roles invest you with a certain kind of power over society, but in enjoying such a privilege, you are also called upon to exercise responsibility, ethical and moral leadership in your day-to-day work.

In closing, let me remind you that, at no time in our history has the Filipino press greater opportunity than today to contribute meaningfully to the development and progress of our country. I appeal to all of you, therefore, to help us rally our people in meeting the challenges of the times through a collective and unified response. May your community serve as an effective instrument in disseminating valuable information to our people to keep them up-to-date with issues of utmost importance in order that they can actively participate and contribute their share in building our nation.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library