OWARDS THE GREATER DEVELOPMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE FILIPINO

I extend a warm greeting and gratitude to everyone present at this important occasion, especially to the courageous members of our Congress for passing the laws that I signed today.

It is the most auspicious that we should hold this Bill-Signing Ceremonies the day after the start of the impeachment trial now going in the Senate. More than anything else, this event signifies the continuing good working relationship between the Legislative and the Executive Branches of our Government. It is a clear signal to all our citizens and to the rest of the world that is “Business as Usual” in the Philippines. This is how it should be because we should not allow the deep divisions among our people brought about by recent political controversies to get in the way of our desire to improve the quality of life of the Filipino Masses.

The bills, which we have signed into law today, are necessary vehicles towards that goal since they aim to develop and modernize our communities nationwide and our human resources, from childhood to being professionals.

Three of our five new laws convert municipalities into cities. These new cities indicate not only the progress these towns have made but also a future increase in the delivery of services to their constituents since they are bound to become more progressive centers of commerce, trade and industry in their respective provinces. This further shows that we are achieving rapid urbanization nationwide since these three new cities are located in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao.

The remaining two new laws concern the development of the individual – from the care of the child to his becoming a professional in later life. This manifests the range of attention that we give the Filipino in order that he may be a productive member of our society and an important contributor to building our nation.

Truly, the road to national level development consists of improving our nation’s structures and institutions. We must strengthen the capability of our local government units to deliver basic services.

Just as we assist our human resources to realize their full potential. In this way, they can develop to the fullest and eventually become effective partners of government in the attainment of our national goals.

The three new laws on cityhood are: Republic Act No. 8983, creating the City of Bayawan in Negros Oriental, Republic Act No. 8984, creating the City of Balanga in Bataan; and Republic Act No. 8985, creating the City of Valencia in Bukidnon.

The transformation of these three towns into cities reflects the tremendous progress that they have achieved through the years. I, therefore, extend my congratulations to their local officials and citizenry for this milestone event. I would also like to commend the principal authors of these new law: Congressman Herminio Teves, Senate President Aquilino Pimentel and Senator Sergio Osmeña III for the City of Bayawan; Congressman Enrique Garcia Jr. and Senate President Pimentel for the City of Balanga, and Congressman Reginaldo Tilanducia, Senate President Pimentel, Senator Franklin Drilon, and senator Sergio Osmeña III for the City of Valencia.

The conversion of these towns to component cities means an increase in their annual internal revenue allotment. With this, I expect that the local officials concerned will use the powers of their New City Charters to intensify the development of their communities.

The essence of cityhood is not just the tearing down of old signs and the printing of new stationery. It also means creating more job opportunities for their people and enhancing the delivery of basic services since they can now formulate better development plans and programs from their greater share of resources.

These new cities will also maintain the balance in development between our metropolitan areas and the countryside. As it is, we now have a total of 91 cities nationwide. Seven of these were created under my administration, namely, the cities of San Jose Del Monte, Bulacan; Masbate; Maasin, Southern Leyte; Bislig, Surigao del Sur; Digos, Davao del Sur; Koronadal, South Cotabato; and Tacurong, Sulatan Kudarat. Three other new cities – the Science City of Muñoz, Nueva Ecija; Sorsogon; and Talisay, Cebu – are still to conduct their plebiscites on cityhood.

Republic Act No. 8980, otherwise known as Early Childhood Care and Development Act, mandates the establishment of Day Care Centers and the mechanisms that ensure the total development of children by defining the structures by which these mechanisms will work, from the national to the barangay level.

The first six years of a child are a critical, formative years. These early childhood years are crucial for human growth and development because this is the period when children develop faster. This new law works for the family’s and society’s advantage by ensuring that the needs of children at this critical stage are adequately met.

The Early Childhood Care and Development Act also mandates investments in health, nutrition and early education which would reduce infant and child mortality rates, incidence of malnutrition and other health-related problems, and school dropout rate. In this way, the new laws programs would result in sustained long term benefits to the economy and to our society.

Indeed, this Act affirms the commitment of the 41st congress to promote and protect the well-being of the Filipino family and its members. Thus, I would like to commend the legislators behind its passage: Senators Juan Flavier, Sergio Osmeña III, Anna Dominique Coseteng and Loren Legarda-Leviste on the part of the Senate; and twenty congressmen on the part of the House of Representatives.

Republic Act No. 8981, on the other hand, provides for the Modernization of the Professional Regulation Commission, which was created 27 years ago pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 223.

The signing of this bill into law intends to respond to the needs of our work force at present.

There are 1.8 million Filipino professionals whom we consider as our Elite Corps of highly skilled manpower. They are the reservoir of our technologies, knowledge and expertise. Their services are vital and strategic to our country’s development.

Today, these professionals are clamoring for a fighting chance in facing the rigors of globalization in the New Millennium. They are in need of help to effectively compete in a liberalized global market of services as mandated by the General Agreement on Trade in Services and the ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services.

We, in government can do no less to help them. We must put in place the “safety nets” that would not only ensure their survival but also protect their position in the global market. We need to upgrade their knowledge and skills to assure a high level of professional competence.

We cannot promote and protect the Filipino professionals on antiquated structures, technologies, and systems. We, therefore, have to modernize the agency responsible for their regulation and supervision – the Professional Regulation Commission.

This new law responds to that need as it provides for a comprehensive modernization of the organization in charge of Philippine Professional Regulation. I, therefore, wish to commend the sponsors of this act, led by Senators Franklin Drilon and Anna Dominique Coseteng, on the part of the Senate; and Congressmen Harlin Abayon, Herminio Teves and Manuel Roxas II, on the part of the House of Representatives.

As we can see, the Members of Congress who are behind these new laws represent the whole range of our political spectrum. This goes to show that, despite our differences in these troubled times, we can count on our distinguished legislators to help build our nation because this is the only way all of us can fulfill our sworn duty to our people.

As I once again extend our thanks to all members of congress for their dedication and hard work, as manifested in the new laws we signed today, I look forward to seeing you again for many more bill signing ceremonies that will realize our dream of a better life for the Filipino people.

Thank you very much and long live us all!

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library