…And I am certain that again, they will fail.

The accusations against me in recent days are baseless and come only from the words of a person you cannot trust. Nevertheless, the investigation is not yet finished, but some of our countrymen are already judging me, while we know that in a democracy, even an accused criminal is given a day in court. They condemned me solely based on the allegations of a confessed jueteng lord. His son also admits to being a jueteng lord, his brother is a jueteng lord, his cousin is a jueteng lord, so they are all children of jueteng.

Very surprisingly, without even hearing my side, they have already condemned me, surprisingly also these people take advantage of all the crisis facing our nation without giving me due process. We have our constitution which was forged during the time of President Corazon Aquino who restored our democracy. The constitution is supposed to be bible of our government and this is sacred and should be respected by all government officials and the citizenry. They are governed by the rule of law and not of men. So I feel that I be given due process, that I be given my day in court. I respect our constitutional processes, that's why I am not responding to the accusations against me now. I am just waiting for all the accusations to be completed and I will answer them at the proper time.

If it is proven that I accepted a single centavo from illegal gambling or took it from the national coffers, I will not stay in a single minute longer in my position as your president. That is why I know this misinformation campaign being fed into the domestic and international media, consider some of this ugly of false rumors being spread around. And they don't know that these people do not know that spreading all these false rumors are creating a bad image on your President, that affects the image of the country here and abroad. They feed everyday, disinformation to the people. Some said, three days ago that the First Lady have died of heart attack, and yesterday, my accuser sides was allegedly kidnapped by the military but it turned out yesterday that she is very much alive. They said my cabinet members have resigned. But none have resigned, even though I respect his opinion and he is not with us in the party.

And then, based on this report that we are also to impose martial rule or emergency rule in the country. All of that is being spread by our detractors. All of this is just to confuse the public. Let's add to that the allegation that my administration is involved in graft and corruption. That is why I challenge everyone to name a contract that was faced with anomaly in my government.

As I have said, all these contracts above 50 million pesos has to be reviewed by the President Management Staff and examined by our economic team consisting of NEDA, DBM and the Department of Finance before I sign it. Point out if you see a contract that I signed with anomalies. And perhaps right now, anyone who is a cabinet member, anyone who is responsible for that contract will surely resign from their position. All talk and no proof, no pointing to a contract with corruption.

Yes, they are accusing me that graft and corruption is rampant in the Office of the President. So to those saying that I should resign from the presidency, this is what I have to say; I will never do that, because I have a sworn duty, especially to the Filipino people. They are mistaken, you know your president, while being beaten, fights back even more, especially if what I am defending is the welfare of the poor and the oppressed.

If my opponents think that they can distract me from my efforts to uplift the quality of life of our people, they are mistaken. I have always work for the benefit of the poor and I will not back down now. It is the Filipino people who gave me that mandate to govern and I will not abandon my commitment. I became president with the help of the Filipino people, so as a sign of my gratitude to you, I am doing everything to fulfill the promise to lift our countrymen out of poverty.

I have great pride to uplift the living standards of our people, but I got so frustrated when I assumed office and found out that not only was the National Treasury empty but we also have some 105 billion pesos in debts to pay. What I mean is, when I took office, I was eager to deliver all my promises to our countrymen, but upon assuming office, when I spoke with our National Treasurer, the Department of Finance, and the Secretary of Budget, I almost fell off my chair when they told me that the previous administration left no money and left only debts amounting to 105 billion pesos.

So even if I wanted to immediately fulfill my promise to our people, I cannot do so. No matter how beautiful our development programs are, no matter how good our managers maybe, we cannot do anything without funds. That is what will happen. So after two years we have paid off this 105 Billion Pesos, we are gradually saving and gradually implementing projects, especially here in Mindanao.

We save and paid our debt until our economy was on its road to recovery and we started implementing our priorities. That is what I always say – food, food security, housing and housing. Our inflation rate has remained single digit in the last two years. And our GNP rose from negative to 4.6 percent last quarter. Then came all these accusations and our economy is gradually falling again.

In the face of all these, we continue to give highest priority to the development of Mindanao, as I have said, before I step down as President in the year 2004, we will see to it that we have transformed Mindanao from the land of promise to being the land of fulfillment. That is why I am bound to give Mindanao my fullest attention. In fact, I have called the Mindanao Coordinating Council to orchestrate the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the affected areas in Mindanao and eventually the entire island.

We will see to it that all socio-economic development projects here give the necessary funds and are quickly implemented. The national budget for the year 2001 fully supports this goal of … allocated a total of 100.7 billion pesos for Mindanao.

Throughout the history of our government and for the first time in our history, the budget for Mindanao is bigger than the budget for Luzon and the Visayas. This only proves my sincere desire and concern for the development of Mindanao. My administration has launched many projects as part of the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Mindanao.

Ang katotohanan niyan, even our engineering battalion almost all of them are here in Mindanao constructing roads, bridges, and helping rehabilitate and rebuild those houses that were damaged during the conflict.

Also we have seen this morning some of the results of these efforts. For example, we have allocated as the governor said, 8 billion pesos for the implementation of various projects such as the provincial of agricultural imputs like seeds and fertilizers, the construction and the infrastructures like a water system and mini-warehouse and solar dryers, various livelihood projects and the rehabilitation of the Manarapan-Langonan Road in Carmen.

We have also allocated 100 million pesos for the rehabilitation and cementing of Libuan-Calamada-Balisihan Road. Perhaps the Military Engineering, the army engineering will help again there. All the projects including the construction of… as shown to you earlier, the 48 million pesos Cabacan Bridge which should connect… this will connect the barangay in North Bacalan, President Roxas and Antipas Municipalities. This is a big thing for the people there.

Under the “Lingap para sa Mahihirap Program” the 100 poorest of the poor families identified from the most depressed barangays of Aracan and Alyosa in Cotabato Province were recipients of one housing unit each worth ten thousand pesos for a total amount of one million pesos as part of our administration’s response to a certain needs of those who were affected by the recent conflict. 52 Housing units were also constructed in Barangay Rajamuda in Pikit, Cotabato. Undersecretary Perry Villareal is here, he is the one managing that housing. He reported to me upon my arrival that out of 6,400 houses that were affected, 3,000 houses were already rebuilt. I have also released 80 million pesos for the construction of another 3,000 housing units in 23 municipalities of Central Mindanao. And I am happy that all of these… as our Undersecretary said, the 3,000 have already been completed.

The National Program for Unification and Development Council has developed and packaged a number of projects to help rebel returnees rejoin mainstream society and start a new role for themselves and for their families.

The Department of Agriculture headed by our Secretary Edgardo Angara has also urged and action plan for Central Mindanao to help develop Agro-Industrial ventures that will bring opportunities to our people in the affected areas.

The Department of Agriculture has also initiated various infrastructure projects like the Barucadong Small Water Impounding Project in Tigcawayan and the Lower Kusok Diversion Dam in Sultan Kudarat.

With the success of the Food Security Program and the construction of basic infrastructures here in Mindanao, we expect to be able to reduce poverty not only in the region but in the whole country. In this way, we will be able to speed up the development of Mindanao and the entire country. That is why we cannot afford to be divided especially in this age of globalization when the nature of competition has become extremely tight between nations. We need to unite and help each other to face the challenge of globalization and to be competitive with other countries. If we continue to fight among ourselves and tear each other down, our neighboring countries will applaud because the foreign capitalists and tourists who should have come to our country will go to them instead. Instead of tearing each other down, we need to unite and help each other to accelerate our development.

I know we can still do a lot if we work together. Let us forget politics for now because my term of office will end in June 2004 and I have no plans to change that. I repeat, my term ends in June 2004 and I have no plans to change it.

And your servant does not stop looking for solutions to our problems. I no longer care about the criticisms, the attacks of my opponents because what is more important to me is to continue the development of our people, especially those who are lacking, the poor and the needy.

Therefore, I once again appeal to the Filipino people – to our farmers, fishermen, to our urban poor, to the workers, to us teachers, students, and my colleagues in the government – let us further strengthen our cooperation and unity for the progress of our country.

Now, because as I said, I no longer understand our opponents because they have nowhere else to go, so now, we have only one enemy and that is poverty. We are doing everything to help our countrymen overcome poverty in our country. But I admit to you, even as your President, I cannot fight poverty alone, I need your help and that of the entire Filipino nation.

Our future lies in our hands. As the elders say, God provides mercy, and man provides the work. So our success lies in our unity. As I often say, no one will help Filipinos except fellow Filipinos. And I will use all the power for our poor countrymen. So I ask you, let us unite and together fight poverty and build a stronger and more progressive Philippines. Let us prove to the whole world that we Filipinos can rise through our own efforts and cooperation.

Thank you very much, and thank you very much and long live you all.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library