ONE BIG FIGHT — AGAINST POVERTY

I wish to thank the Ateneo Alumni Homecoming Association for bringin me back to where I have always belonged.

During my entire career as a movie actor, I was never invited to any Ateneo Alumni Homecoming. Nor was I invited here during my entire sixteen years as Mayor of San Juan. I became a Senator, and still, no invitation came.

Then, in 1992, after my election as Vice-President, I was finally asked to come. At that time, since I was not even part of the scheduled program, l had to give .an impromptu speech. As we all know, no speaker — not even the Pope — can keep an audience of Ateneans quiet during their homecoming. But the crowd fell into a hush when they saw I had no prepared speech. They were all waiting for me to make a blunder in my English, but I am sorry I disappointed them.

Now that I am President, I finally got an invitation to be your guest speaker. For those of you still expecting grammatical mistakes, I am afraid I will have to disappoint you again.

During the campaign, one of the issues against me was that I was not a college graduate. Normally, it would have been a valid issue. If you come from some other schools, you would probably need at least. A college degree to be considered qualified to be President. But if you come from the Ateneo, all you need is to have finished second year high school!

So now, for the first time in history, an Atenean has been elected President of our Republic. Other brilliant alumni — like Claro M. Recto, Raul Manglapus, and Emmanuel Pelaez — tried in the past but, unfortunately, were not successful. It took a drop-out Joseph Ejercito Estrada to bring home the trophy to the Ateneo.

Even after what the Ateneo did to Joseph Ejercito.

During the campaign, my critics called me a drop-out. That was a mistake. I did not drop out from the Ateneo, I was expelled! And not for academic reasons — my grades then were quite respectable, thank you — but for a disciplinary issue.

My offense was fighting a burly American classmate who was bullying another classmate much smaller than he. I told him to pick on someone his size, and he took up my challenge.

Who won the fight? Because I am now President, that must remain a state secret. But this much can now be said: had I not been expelled from the Ateneo, I probably would not have ended up as President of the Philippines!

But the Ateneo also paid a price for my expulsion. My Cabinet now is not all-Ateneo. While my Secretaries of Foreign Affairs and Energy are Blue Eagles, my Executive Secretary and my Trade and Industry Secretary come from — what’s the name of that school again?

I must say that I was proud to be expelled for a reason that would be a driving force not just in the movies I appeared in but throughout my political career. I was defending the underdog. And I will continue to do so, regardless of the consequences to me.

And so, I now say to the Ateneo: I forgive you! Obviously, you also want to forget what you did to me! Let me put it this way. The school was just doing its job, and I was doing mine.

I will not embarrass you by asking how many of you did not vote for me in the last elections. But I will now give you a chance to redeem yourselves by asking how many of you support me now.

Your applause shows that, contrary to rumors, Ateneans are human after all: they will support any winner after he has won!

I am pleased to inform you that the overriding theme of my Administration derives its inspiration from something I picked up at the Ateneo. When I was a young student, both at Padre Faura and here at Loyola Heights, our most memorable cheer was “one big fight!”

That is what my presidency has launched: one big fight — against poverty. This is the meaning of “ Erap para sa Mahirap .” It is the vision and mission of my Administration. It is also my personal, philosophical, and organizational driving force. It is the animating principle of my program of government.

The premise of “ Erap para sa Mahirap ” is that the overriding problem of our country is poverty. All other problems are subordinate to it. The central and dominant thrust of my Government is the elimination of poverty. All other issues are subordinate to it.

The very vocabulary we use concerning poverty shows the elitist bent of our mindsets. We talk merely of “alleviating” poverty when, in fact we should be eliminating it. We refer to the poor as “marginalized” when, in fact, they are the mainstream of Philippine society.

How can the poor be “marginal” when they are the largest single sector of our society? It is true that Jesus Christ said, “the poor you will always have with you.” But he did not say that they had to constitute the majority.

Under my presidency, the war on poverty will be the main business of the entire Government. My Administration will make the poor not the end-beneficiaries of the so-called “trickle-down” economics but the very starting point of development.

Contrary to some impressions, “ Erap para sa Mahirap ” is not just a slogan but a dynamic evolving program. It is based on the principle that widespread poverty is not just a moral shame but also bad economics. As resources, the poor are of low productivity. As markets, they are thin and narrow. My Presidency intends to convert them into highly-productive factors and into income-earning markets.

My Administration is pro-poor, pro-business and pro-market. There is no conflict among the three. They are in synergy with one another.

The vision calls for converting the poor into two things at once: productive human resources and a growing domestic market. To become productive, they will need food, homes, better education, and adequate health care. To constitute a market, they will need jobs and incomes.

My Government’s programs in food security, housing, education and health are aimed at enhancing their mental and productive skills. And our investment policies and programs will be re-designed to provide them with jobs and incomes. As we look abroad to encourage exports, we will also look towards the hinterlands to correct past neglect.

To provide more jobs, we will revamp the entire Investments Incentives System. We aim to promote more competitiveness, and a more leveled playing field. Our entire Investment Laws will be revamped to provide what we might call a “preferential option for jobs” to reinforce our “preferential option for the poor.” We look forward to the day when our countrymen working abroad will come to jobs within their own country.

We will modernize our agriculture to provide more food for our people. We will re-examine our Agrarian Reform Laws to gear them towards higher productivity.

Our health programs will focus on the creation and multiplication of primary health centers, and will concentrate more on general hospitals rather than specialized ones.

Our overall education program will aim to strengthen the quality of our primary levels, because these lay the foundation for improved secondary and college programs.

We are waging a relentless fight — in fact, I call it a personal war — against that monster that steals from the poor: graft and corruption. The money that should help create jobs, improve health, and provide textbooks and desks for the poor should not go into the pockets of corrupt traders conspiring with equally corrupt politicians and bureaucrats.

We are also waging a war on another front: crime. To the extent that it deters investments, it also robs the poor of opportunities for having incomes and jobs.

We will re-engineer the entire government machinery to eliminate waste and to make it a more efficient provider of public services.

Thus it can be said that my entire agenda is not “trickle-down” but heave-up economics. It will benefit the poor not at the expense of the rich but for the good of all. Trickle-down is too slow. And in the past, there was little trickle-down at all, but a continuing concentration of wealth and incomes at the top.

I like to believe that these thrusts and this vision are close to the hearts of Ateneans, who are trained to be- “men for others.” I, therefore, ask you to support me — your fellow Atenean — as I use the battleplans I have outlined to wage total war on poverty, with the kind military and missionary zeal that we learn from St. Ignatius Loyola.

Earlier, I said I forgive Ateneo and all of you for not inviting me in past homecomings. But my joining you tonight does not come without a price. You have to support me all the way during my entire term as penance for your sins!

I ask you that we all join together, as we used to at the bleachers in the past, to summon that old Ateneo spirit and confront the problems of our country with something that only Ateneans can muster: one big fight!

Thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library