RECOGNIZING OUR OUTSTANDING MEN IN UNIFORM

I extend my heartfelt greetings to all of you present at this important occasion. I extend a special greeting to the law enforcement officers we are honoring today, along with their families and relatives who are with us now.

There is a popular foreign saying which goes, “ if you wish to know what a man is, place him in authority .” Our policemen, with the full force of the law behind them, are given this special authority by the state to maintain peace and order in our country. The kind of men and women we want to see in our police force is embodied in these outstanding policemen whom we are honoring this afternoon.

For the record, let us once more acknowledge the Outstanding Policemen of the Philippines 2000.

For the National Capital Region – SPO4 Vicente Belaro and SPO4 Francisco Huesca;

From Luzon – SPO4 Venancio Maling and SPO1 Bobby Madamba;

From the Visayas – SPO4 Maria Cecilia Detablan and SPO3 Perfecto Codinera; and,

From Mindanao – SPO3 Rudy Abdulla Yusop and SPO4 Chito de Aro

The ninth awardee is the only commissioned officer in the group, Police Chief Inspector Ligaya Sim-Cabal. She has already won this award previously in 1997 and is the only person from the police force to have won the TOYM Award for Government Service in 1999.

Our people look up to all of you with pride, and your fellow police officers regard you as role models. I hope that after this ceremony, you will continue to shine even so you can help erase the tarnished image of our police force.

This occasion is a good opportunity for our law enforcement officers to better understand why we strive to improve the service of our Philippine National Police or PNP.

When I assumed the presidency in 1998, I was very much aware of my promise during the campaign that I would restore peace and order in the country. Today, I am happy to note that the situation has improved and urban crime has gone down considerably.

Criminality in Metro Manila has been reduced, where before we almost always read about kidnappings, carnappings, and bank robberies in the newspapers every week. We were also successful in stopping the unrest in Mindanao caused by the MILF and Abu Sayyaf. And we all know that the police assisted our armed forces in the operations we conducted against bandit groups in Sulu to rescue their hostages.

But we still have a long way to go before I can say I have truly fulfilled my campaign promise. Much work still remains to be done.

We need to unite and work together to achieve the peace and tranquility we desire. This is not just for me, not just for DILG Secretary Alfredo Lim and General Panfilo Lacson, but for our citizens and our country.

As I often say, I believe that our country cannot fully progress without peace and order. Without peace, we will have difficulty implementing programs to uplift our people from poverty.

Unless peace reigns in our land, we can never create a climate that is conducive to business and economic growth. Only in this way can we remove the fear of businessmen who are reluctant to invest capital in our country as long as there are kidnappings, robberies and killings happening around us.

I was told that our Philippine National Police Force currently consists of 110,000 enlisted commissioned and non-commissioned officers all over the country. Out of this number, 85 percent should be out in the streets to protect our citizenry. This is very necessary because the first thing we need to do is restore the trust of the people in our law enforcement officers. And we can do this quickly if the people always see the police wherever they go.

I still remember that when I was young, when it was said that the police were there, all respect and deference were given to him because people felt safe from any fear. But now, when it is said that the police are there, some people feel fear, if not step aside and do not know where to go. This is because there are police officers who are often involved in robberies, kidnappings and other types of crimes, and we should not allow that to happen again.

It is bad enough that some people are into crimes, but it is much worse when a policeman himself commits the crime.

The problem of peace and order has long affected the lives of our people. That is why I had made a commitment to run after misguided police elements, criminals and members of syndicates, and put them in jail where they rightly belong. I will continue to exert every effort in making the lives of our people more peaceful and more meaningful, just as I have promised to improve the lives of all Filipinos, especially of the poor.

That is why I am surprised that there are those who say that my administration has done nothing for our citizens, especially the poor. Despite our efforts to improve the condition of our citizens and our country, there are some sectors of our society that do nothing but criticize and destroy the good things we have started.

Even before I reach the halfway point of my term of office, there are already those who want me to resign and seize the power of my office now. If they only used their time, energy, mind, and money to accelerate the development of our country, they could have helped improve the lives of our citizens, especially the unfortunate and the poor.

As to the ongoing impeachment trial, I am confident that the truth will prevail in the end. I am convinced that I will be cleared of all issues that are unfairly being leveled against me. In the final analysis, those who have put their personal and political interests above the interests of our country will be proven wrong. This will restore the political and economic stability that my opponents wish to deny our country in the pursuit of their selfish desire to seize power way before my term ends in June 2004.

I reiterate before you that I have not received a single centavo from any form of illegal gambling. My conscience is clear. I have nothing to hide from our countrymen. And I believe that, in the end, the whole truth will prevail.

Let me assure you, therefore, that these issues will never hamper me from performing my job as the president who was duly elected by a big majority of our people. Our constitution mandates that I perform the duties of the chief executive until the year 2004, and I have no intention of defying that mandate. I promised a much better life to our people−especially the poor−and I intend to keep that promise during the term that is mandated by our constitution.

But I must admit that I cannot do all of these without your help. That is why I urge all sectors of our society to contribute their share in making our communities −and our country −a better place to live in.

It is people like these awardees whom we are honoring this afternoon who will make the government’s peace and order program succeed. By your admirable examples of gallantry and devotion to duty, your noble deeds have already inspired countless young police officers to emulate your character and dedication to your profession. I commend all of you for this noble achievement. I believe that this is a great honor not just for you and your family but also for the PNP and the nation as a whole.

I would also like to commend the efforts of the private sector, most especially the Philippine Jaycees and the Metrobank Foundation, for recognizing the achievements of today’s most outstanding policemen. I sincerely thank the Philippine Jaycees for honoring our outstanding policemen every year for the past years.

As long as I remain your president, I will wholeheartedly support your quest to recognize more of our outstanding law enforcers. I am also challenging the Philippine National Police and the Department of the Interior and Local Government to be involved and actively participate in ensuring the integrity of the search.

Amidst all these, I am very much aware that the attainment of genuine peace and order situation is a two-way process. Government cannot do it alone. We need the cooperation of everyone−the public in general− to make sure that our policemen do a good job in helping all of us sleep better at night.

Towards this end, I appeal to all of our countrymen to find ways to improve ourselves, rather than find fault with each other. Let us seek to correct, rather than condemn, our policemen. Let us not blame our police officers for everything. Instead, let us ask ourselves whether we have done our part in making our communities a better place to live in.

Freedom in a democracy may give rise to many voices, but they need not be discordant. The right to criticize is sacred, but truth and facts are paramount. Our policemen may not be perfect, but without your invaluable assistance, anarchy is certainly a worse option.

As ordinary citizens, you can very well do your share by not using our policemen to further your own selfish interests. You must avoid paying bribes or offering gifts to get away with the rules. You cannot be a party to situations where our policemen have to make a hard choice between enforcing the law, or turning a blind eye for an “extra” income. These are all sources of corruption and connivance that break down the institution of law enforcement in our country.

Let us all unite so that we can achieve peace and tranquility here in our country. Like the distinguished law enforcement officers we honored today, we can help in the development of our country if we work together and help each other.

Therefore, let us unite and work together for our long-held dream of peace and tranquility here in our country. This will also be the key to the success and progress of the Filipino people.

Once again, I personally congratulate the awardees as outstanding policemen this year: Police Chief Inspector Ligaya Lomuntad Sim-Cabal, SPO1 Bobby Amancio Madamba, SPO3 Rudy Abdulla Yusop, SPO4 Vicente Monsalve Belaro, SPO4 Maria Cecilia Robles Detablan, SPO4 Francisco Fragante Huesca, SPO4 Chito Togonon de Aro, SPO4 Venancio Neri Maling, and SPO3 Perfecto Silvederio Codinera.

I hope that you will further enhance and improve your service to our countrymen.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you!

Source : University of the Philippines Main Library