Speech of His Excellency Joseph Ejercito Estrada President of the Philippines At the courtesy call of KEPCO and conferment of Presidential Award for Meritorious Foreign Investment on KEPCO President Young Sik-Chang

[ Delivered at the Main Conference Room, Malacañang, December 7, 1998 ]

ANOTHER PROOF OF OUR ECONOMIC VIABILITY

At the outset, allow me to congratulate Mr. Young Sik-Chang — President and Chief Executive Officer of Korea Electric Power Corporation or KEPCO — for being the first recipient of the Presidential Award for Meritorious Foreign Investments.

His act of investing in the Philippines some 1.6 billion U.S. dollars in spite of the financial crisis also being experienced by his homeland, South Korea, is certainly worthy of our country’s recognition.

We are giving this award for the first time to a foreign investor that has firmly committed to invest at least 1 billion U.S. dollars in the Philippines on a long-term basis. Such investments must be in priority areas like agriculture, power and infrastructure, and should contribute substantially to the well-being of the masses.

KEPCO, I understand, is one of the top four largest electric companies in the world, with total assets of 33 billion U.S. dollars. Here in the Philippines, they have just completed — in record time — the rehabilitation of the 650-megawatt Malaya 1 and 2 Power Plants in Pililia, Rizal at a cost of 200 million U.S. dollars. Their other project is the 1,200-megawatt Ilijan Gas Power Plant in Batangas, which, when completed, will be the largest in Southeast Asia.

KEPCO’s presence in the local energy sector is the biggest Korean testimony to the economic strength and the viability of the Philippines as an investment hub in Southeast Asia. As South Korea’s biggest company, KEPCO tops the list of Korean corporate giants currently operating in the Philippines, which include LG Collins, Samsung, Kia, Hyundai and Kumho Tires, among others.

KEPCO’s continued presence here should encourage not only other Korean firms but also other foreign businesses to similarly set up shop in the Philippines.

While the Philippines is likewise facing difficulties just like our neighbors, we are confident that we can overcome the ongoing crisis. We are the only one in the region that expects a positive growth this year, as proven by our economic indicators.

We have outlined clear directions for our economic development, and we will stand by these thrusts. We will continue promoting a fair and free market economy based on global realities.

The mood is more business-friendly and, in particular, more foreign investor-friendly. The stance government is taking is more promotional than regulatory, and more supportive of exports, investments, industrial initiatives, and countryside development.

The general objective is to encourage more members of the private sector — both local and foreign — to participate in a greater number of activities that had been previously closed to them. As we continue to move forward in 1999, expect us to undertake more initiatives to attract greater investments from our overseas friends.

The strong points of the Philippines lie in its strategic location in Asia; its large domestic market dominated by a young population base; and its abundant supply of highly-trainable, highly- skilled, English-speaking manpower ideal for producing medium- and high-tech products.

One can also choose from a large number of economic zones and regional growth centers that are equipped with integrated infrastructure facilities needed by investors.

Likewise, we can boast of an improved peace and order situation under the present administration. We have moved decisively to calm the fears of our people about their personal safety and of companies to go about their business.

There has also been marked improvement in the overall industrial peace situation in the last few months. There were only 20 active strikes recorded from July to September this year, compared with 34 for the; same period last year.

In this era of the World Trade Organization, it is imperative for us to join hands in strengthening our collective position in the large, more competitive marketplace of East Asia, the Asia/Pacific, and the world during the remaining years of the 20th century.

I, therefore wish to express my heartfelt appreciation to KEPCO — and to Mr. Chang, in particular — for their trust and confidence in us. We look forward to a much more fruitful partnership with you and your company.

Thank you and good day.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library