Speech of His Excellency Joseph Ejercito Estrada President of the Philippines During the Signing of the 1999 General Appropriations Act

[ Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang Palace, Manila, December 30, 1998 ]

FURTHER ENHANCING DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES

I am happy to sign into Law Republic Act No. 8745, the General Appropriations Act for 1999, the first budget prepared under my administration. After months of intense study and deliberations, congress has given us, in record time, the authority to fully pursue our pro-poor yet market-friendly program for next year.

Considering that we submitted our budget proposal only in August, the availability today of a budget approved by congress for our signature indicates the speedy work that our colleagues in congress have made in reviewing our proposed budget so that we may have a new budget ready for execution by the first working day of 1999.

I am happy to note the close coordination made by congress with the executive branch to avoid deadlocks and facilitate budget review. We hope that this presages the kind of working relationship that we envision between our two branches of government in the crafting of important pieces of legislation and in expediting the implementation of expenditure reforms in the coming years. It also affirms a common vision of what needs to be done to pull our country early out of the Asian economic crisis.

I, therefore, wish to commend the House Committee on Appropriations, led by its dynamic chairman, Representative Gualberto Duavit, who played a pivotal role in shaping the substance of our 1999 Appropriations Authority.

I also thank the Senate Finance Committee, led by its chairman Senator John Osmeña, who displayed remarkable insights in the evaluation of the budget measure.

The early enactment into law of the 1999 budget measure is made more significant by the critical nature of the first half of the coming year. The first six months that we face will be a make-or-break period that will demand a more active government in the economy. A fiscal stimulus is necessary to enable our economy to register a real growth of 3 to 3.5 percent at the very least by the time we begin the next millennium. For this reason, we will strictly follow a disciplined and well-focused spending program. Nearly 68 percent of this budget is dedicated to key social services, the development of agriculture, and priority infrastructure for rural areas.

We were fortunate to have relatively withstood well the Asian economic crisis, compared to some of our friends in the ASEAN. With this expenditure program, we will be able to give our economy the push it needs to get out of the danger zone and set it firmly on the path of steady growth.

We are aware of the importance of releasing funds on time to expedite the delivery of essential public services. Accordingly, we are simplifying-the fund release procedures by the start of 1999.

We will use the General Appropriations Act as the expenditure authority for the regular programs and projects of government agencies. We will resort to special release orders only for special projects and lump-sum funds in the budget. No reserves will be imposed on agency budgets. We will uphold transparency and the principle of “what-you-see-is-what-you-get.”

We will release the notice of cash allocations quarterly instead of monthly. The resulting predictability and added flexibility in the use of cash reserves should improve government operations and enable us to better keep within our fiscal program.

Our commitment to make cash available when and where these are needed applies too for government’s indebtedness to contractors and suppliers for projects completed, or for supplies, equipment and materials that have already been delivered. If we strive for efficiency in the use of public resources, then the least that government can do is to practice efficiency in its own operations.

We are aware that many of those who do business with government have been greatly discouraged by government’s notoriety for delayed payments and even non-payments for services already rendered or outputs already delivered.

We will not only eliminate such tendencies under my administration but pursue a new payment process which cuts red tape. We will pay contractors and suppliers directly through government banks. We will harness the use of improved information systems technologies and keep the public posted of such releases through the internet. Through this, we will also substantially eliminate opportunities for corruption.

Unlike in previous years when the presidential veto power was heavily applied for congressional changes in the budget measure, I am exercising such veto power sparingly and only for a direct veto of the entire appropriations under Chapter 49, Debt Service-Interest Payments, including its special provisions found on page 1189, House Bill 4240. The Supreme Court has categorically ruled in the past that the servicing of public debt, whether foreign or domestic, is automatically in accordance with existing laws. Hence, appropriation for Debt Service-Interest Payment in the General Appropriations Act is no longer necessary and, therefore, requires my veto.

The short veto is, therefore, a result of the extraordinary cooperation and close coordination between the executive branch and the legislature in the crafting of the 1999 budget.

My friends and colleagues, I ask for your support in the execution of this budget measure that I have just signed into law.

Let us observe discipline now that it is a call of our times; prudence, now that resources are increasingly getting scarce and therefore precious; and judiciousness in the use of these resources, now that our people demand and deserve the most productive and beneficial services from us, their public servants.

As I have stated in my state of the nation address, “my solutions are obvious, my proposals may be commonplace, but they were never adopted before. In sum, they are to spend wisely and less. And, by austerity and hard work, generate the means to cover the shortfalls of the past, so we can have a smooth runway for a final take-off.”

Thank you and mabuhay!

Source : University of the Philippines Main Library