FILIPINO EXCELLENCE BEYOND OUR FRONTIERS

I extend my heartfelt congratulations to all those receiving awards today as outstanding Filipinos and organizations abroad. I also congratulate the Commission on Filipinos Overseas for giving these awards.

Our recognition of the talents, contributions and achievements of our overseas Filipinos and our partner organizations overseas could not have come at a more opportune time. As my Presidency nears the end of its first six months, I hope to be able to clearly send out a message to the world — that the well-being of Filipinos overseas is a deep concern and sincere interest of this administration.

A popular Filipino saying goes: “Ang hindi marunong lumingon sa pinanggalingan, hindi makararating sa paroroonan.” (He who does not know where he came from will not reach his destination.)

This saying reminds us to always remain humble and not lose sight of one’s beginnings amidst the success he has achieved. The Filipino migrant needs to maintain strong links with his roots and heritage, in order that he may find strength in his identity and character as a Filipino.

We cannot pretend to speak of our contributions to our country and community if we do not remember our origin or lose ties with our heritage.

Humility, kinship, humanity and strong links with one’s roots — these are the terms that best describe the virtues of our thirty awardees tonight. In these words lie the strength and character of nearly seven million Filipinos overseas and our partner organizations. It is in these terms that we find the essence of the Filipino spirit of “makabayan”.

Tonight, I join our people in paying tribute to twenty-two individuals and eight organizations from fourteen foreign countries who have shown exemplary achievements in their respective fields. Our “pagbati” on the observance of the month of overseas Filipinos is also a call upon other Filipinos abroad to help speed up the momentum of cooperation established by our distinguished awardees.

Even before globalization became a byword, our country has already been sharing its precious skilled human resources with other countries.

Migration has never been a stranger to Filipinos. It is a reality, borne not just out of the present world order, but anchored upon the people’s inherent desire to learn, discover, succeed, and, above all, survive.

Our awardees tonight and in the past years are people who have helped develop plans for international space programs, built palaces and museums, made breakthroughs in scientific discoveries, captivated people through their writings and paintings, steered and manned ships in the oceans of the world, managed international funds, cared for and sacrificed for children and parents not their own, and established educational programs to promote human understanding.

There are also others who, by their compassion, have been sharing their blessings with the underprivileged, the abandoned, the ethnic minorities. Still, there are those who tend to the needs of other migrants who have been neglected and are seldom served by the community and the world at large.

Many among those present today have pursued higher learning overseas and fulfilled their promise to return to help shape the course of our country’s destiny.

The modest recognition we have bestowed upon this year’s awardees are mere tokens of appreciation for their achievements. Their presence in other countries have helped make our world a better place to live in. Their work has given new meaning to the concepts of globalization and interdependence.

Time and again, Filipino migrants have been referred to as our “new heroes”. They have been called as such because they have provided our country’s economy with a safety net against financial collapse through their dollar remittances. From 1990 to 1997 alone, these amounted to more than twenty four billion dollars.

This view of their heroism, however, is rather simplistic. Heroism equated to remittances alone is heroism bought.

We find heroes among our migrants because they have made enduring sacrifices in the name of their country and people. They are heroes because of their selfless crusade for the betterment of others.

It is not my Administration’s policy to perpetuate the present levels of overseas employment. We have no intention of pursuing a position that would make us the dispenser of skills and labor to the world.

I do not argue with the fact that migration is propelled by the economic realities of our times. But it is my Administration’s wish to see that, one day, when options abound and choices are made, our people will decide to remain here, be with their families, and serve our country above any other.

My Administration’s burning desire is to lift our country’s poor to a level worthy of the dignity of man. My focus is on a dignified existence, not just economic survival. My commitment is to ensure that every Filipino will benefit from our country’s development.

I want the Filipino migrant to have a dignified co-existence with others in his or her adoptive community. But my ultimate goal is to see all of our migrants come home one day to share with us the excellence that they have unselfishly shared with others. It is in our country, the Philippines, where they have to make their greatest and most enduring contributions.

It is in this light that we have earmarked much of the country’s resources to health, social, educational, and agricultural services. We are vigorously promoting peace and order in our effort to bring back to every Filipino family the sense of security that has escaped them for some time.

The promotion of the well-being of overseas Filipinos remains as a strong pillar of our foreign policy. It is a responsibility that is firmly established in the programs and services of my Administration for overseas Filipinos and their families.

In addressing their problems, however, we see the need for a more pro-active approach in the development of solutions.

I, therefore, call upon our people to be more vigilant and responsible when they decide to migrate to foreign lands. Our Government shall provide the basis for such a decision.

It is for this reason that I take this opportunity to launch the Migrant’s Advisory Information System, or MAIS. This is Government’s response to our migrant’s lack of preparation for the realities overseas.

Through this system, Filipino migrants can access the information they need on their destination countries, migrant support groups, Filipino overseas organizations, and Philippine embassies and consulates.

To sustain this worthwhile effort, I hereby direct the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) and the Commission on Filipino Overseas (CFO) to coordinate with the concerned agencies to ensure that this initiative is expanded and disseminated in all regions.

The integration of the topic of migration in the school curriculum, which is currently being carried out by the CFO and the DECS in cooperation with the Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines, should be expanded and fully implemented to engage our people in a constructive process of education and reflection.

The long history of Filipino migration has also produced many children of Filipino migrants living in isolation from their roots and their cultural heritage. For many of these children, the Philippines remains an imaginary element in their consciousness.

To rectify this situation, I direct the Inter-agency Committee on Philippine Schools Abroad, which is co-chaired by the DFA and DECS with CFO as Secretariat, to vigorously expand its program to include currently unserved and underserved Filipino communities abroad. It is only by ensuring the development of the children of our overseas Filipinos that we can speak of full social integration.

I have included in my Administration’s legislative agenda bills that will suppress the trafficking of our women overseas, establish absentee voting privileges, and amend the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act.

Finally, I leave this question for our overseas Filipinos: “would you be willing to answer my call for new ideas, help us make the best choices, and carry them out for the sake of our children’s future?”

Tonight, I ask you to reflect upon this challenge. You have provided other nations skills and talents which helped them achieved prosperity. I hope you will find the time to do as much, if not more, for our country.

To all those we have honored today, may you further improve your endeavors.

To all of you, my beloved countrymen abroad, a happy greeting for the coming Christmas and New Year.

Long live Filipinos overseas!

Thank you very much and may we all live!

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library