I extend a merry Christmas to all our countrymen here in Navotas and Malabon, especially to those of you who are here today.

The true meaning of Christmas is giving. On that day, God showed His love for us when He gave the world His beloved Son to save us from our sins. That is why I am happy to be with all of you here for our gift-giving to our poor countrymen.

Our less fortunate countrymen hold a special place in my heart. This is why we hold this gift-giving event for them every year.

I made an effort to come here despite the heavy problem I am facing because I believe that it is more important for me to bring joy to our countrymen, especially this Christmas season. I would also like to thank you for your expression of support and trust in me, despite the attacks of my opponents in recent days.

As the father of our nation, I desire to give our countrymen a good and prosperous life, not only this Christmas but throughout the year and in the years to come. I became president with the help of the Filipino people, so as a sign of my gratitude to you, I am doing everything to fulfill my promise to lift our countrymen out of poverty, especially the less fortunate and the poor. And I will do this until the end of my term as president in 2004.

You voted for me to serve all of you. Now, I swear that I will never abandon the promise I made to you. I will continue to serve all of you until the last moment of my presidency.

Therefore, on this day, I want you to know that our efforts will not end with the giving of gifts. I, together with my cabinet members, will continue to do everything to meet the basic needs of all Filipino families so that they can live peacefully and prosperously.

One of these is housing for our poor countrymen, or mass housing, which I consider the centerpiece program of my administration.

We have already started some housing projects here in your area, such as the Malabon Socialized Medium-rise Housing. With the help of the local government of Malabon, the National Housing Authority and the Metropolitan Development Authority, we have begun constructing ten five-storey buildings in Barangay Baritan in Malabon. We will provide six hundred (600) housing units of this project to ordinary employees and other poor countrymen in said town.

As I mentioned during my visit to Malabon last May, I instructed the Housing and Urban Development Coordination Council to lead the resettlement component of the railway line rehabilitation project going north. Approximately seventeen thousand (17,000) families will be affected by this project. We are now coordinating the cooperation of various government agencies for the relocation of informal settlers from the right of way of the northrail.

I also ordered that no demolition of squatter areas will be carried out until they have a place to relocate to. Likewise, government-owned lands that are not being used and are neglected will all be used for our housing program for the poor.

We are not promising that we can fulfill all the needs of our poor citizens at the same time. Our only promise for now is that we will continue to find ways to provide appropriate support to our programs. I just ask that you give me enough time because, as you know, we face a big problem in fitting the government's funds.

You may remember that when I assumed the presidency, the national treasury was empty and many debts were left behind. So, even if we want to immediately implement programs that respond to the needs of the citizens, we cannot do it all. Nevertheless, we saved and accumulated funds while paying off debts. And as we gradually accumulated funds, we began to implement our priorities, such as the food security program, mass housing, and the maintenance of peace and order in the country.

We aspire for food security because no Filipino should go hungry in his own country. To make this happen, we launched the Agricultural Modernization Program which built more irrigation systems, farm-to-market roads, and post-harvest facilities. Because of this, our farmers had a good harvest and the agricultural sector grew by 3.5 percent this year.

Mass housing is something we continue to promote to fulfill the dream of many of our countrymen to have their own home. We are prioritizing those I consider the heroes of our time – teachers, police officers, soldiers, and overseas Filipino workers – so that before I step down from the presidency in 2004, they will all have their own homes.

Criminality in Metro Manila has also been reduced, where before, we almost read in the newspapers every week about kidnappings, carnappings and bank robberies. We also succeeded in stopping the unrest in Mindanao caused by the MILF and Abu Sayyaf.

We are also implementing various infrastructure projects that will bring relief to our countrymen. By the opening of the next year, the construction of the 3.9 billion pesos worth KAMANAVA Flood Control and Drainage System will begin to stop the frequent flooding in the cities it covers. This project includes the repair of the floodwalls of the Malabon-Navotas River and the Dampalit River Dikes. We will also begin the dredging of the Malabon-Navotas River and the Tullahan River.

Last May, we promised the rehabilitation of the Plaza Rodriguez Amphitheater in Malabon so that it can be used for large gatherings. I am pleased to tell you today that the construction of the said building has begun.

I would also like to take this opportunity to inform you that the proposal to make the town of Malabon a city is being studied in Congress, under the efforts of our beloved Senator Tessie Aquino-Oreta. We expect this to be passed as soon as possible.

These are just some of the programs and projects we are implementing to provide a more peaceful life for our countrymen. That is why I am surprised that there are those who say that my administration is doing nothing for our people, especially the poor.

Despite our efforts to improve the condition of our citizens and our country, there are some sectors of our society who do nothing but criticize and destroy the good things we have started. If they only used their time, effort, mind and money to speed up the development of our country, they could have helped improve the lives of our citizens.

However, I am ready to accept the outcome of the impeachment process in the senate, as long as it is in accordance with our Constitution. But I repeat before you that I have not received a single centavo from any kind of illegal gambling. My conscience is clear. I have nothing to hide from our countrymen. And I believe that, in the end, the whole truth will prevail.

Meanwhile, I appeal to those who are causing trouble now that it would be better if we focus on things that can solve the problems of our country. Let us listen to the voice of the people and not the noise of a few.

Shouts and speeches are not enough to lift our countrymen out of poverty. What we need now is to work and act for the poor Filipinos.

We need to unite and work together to face the challenge of globalization and compete with other countries. If we continue to fight among ourselves and tear each other down, our neighboring countries will applaud because the foreign capital and tourists that should be coming to us are going to them instead. We need to unite and work together to accelerate our progress.

I remember when I went to Vietnam for a state visit last year, I saw their unity there, which is why even though they experienced more than twenty years of war, they are now the 3rd largest rice-exporting country in the world, while we are still importing rice up to now.

Therefore, I ask our countrymen to stop tearing each other down and fighting. Instead, let us come together and work together for the good of all citizens, especially the poor.

Now we have only one enemy, and that is poverty. We are doing everything to end poverty in our country, but I admit that even as your president, I cannot fight poverty alone. I need your help and the help of the entire Filipino people.

And you can count on me to give my full strength and ability, as well as all the power of the office of the president, to improve the lives of our countrymen.

Therefore, I ask that we unite and work together to fight poverty and build a stronger and more progressive Philippines. Let us prove to the whole world that we Filipinos can rise through our own efforts and cooperation.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas again to all of you!

Source : University of the Philippines Main Library