Speech of His Excellency Joseph Ejercito Estrada President of the Philippines During the Turn-over Ceremony of MRT 3 from the Metro Rail Transit Corporation to the Department of Transportation and Communications

[ Delivered in Westin Philippine Plaza, July 20, 2000 ]

TOWARDS GREATER MOBILITY AND PROGRESS

I am very pleased to join you in this turn-over ceremony of the Metrostar Express System or MRT-3 from its builder, the Metro Rail Transit Corporation (MRTC), to its operator, the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC).

Let me congratulate and thank these two main players that have worked through the years to make the dream of a mass rail transit system on EDSA a reality.

To the builder, the MRTC, the nation salutes you for a job well done under the most challenging conditions. The successful construction of the $655-million Metrostar Express System, with nearly 17 kilometers of railroad tracks and 13 modern stations along Metro Manila’s strategic north-south corridor, is a testament to the vision of your company and the dedication of its officers and employees. What you have accomplished will facilitate not only the mobility of our people but also the growth of our economy and the protection of our environment. You should take pride in this accomplishment for it is well-deserved.

To the operator, the DOTC, on whose shoulders now fall the great responsibility of operating and managing the MRT-3, and which has been involved with its planning and implementation from the very beginning, I offer my warm congratulations for bringing the project to completion. Achieving excellence in operating the system will be a continuing challenge for the department, which I am confident the DOTC can meet.

The EDSA MRT-3 project has been a good example of what a partnership between government and the private sector can accomplish when they work together for the good of the whole nation.

There is no denying that mass transportation is an important factor in the progress of our country. All forms of economic and social activity suffer a setback from the effects of traffic on people’s ability to get around. Traffic congestion today is more than an inconvenience. It blocks our growth, decreases our productivity, and even wastes our increasingly expensive fuel resources.

The full operation of the MRT-3 will considerably lessen traffic and pollution along EDSA, which is a major highway in Metro Manila. Aside from reducing travel time, the MRT-3 will also reduce the dependence of the riding public on buses that ply the line. It is also expected to improve productivity because it will facilitate the flow of trade and commerce in the metropolitan area.

The electric-powered Metrostar Express System will certainly go a long way in providing the nearly two million daily commuters along EDSA with a safe, speedy, reliable and, most importantly, affordable alternative in getting to their destination. Its trains can handle up to 600,000 passengers daily or up to 185 million passengers annually.

Fares on this commuter railway will be among the lowest in the region. They are currently pegged from P 12 to P 20 for an end-to-end journey. But as I announced at the MRT-3 completion signing ceremony held last Saturday, for the next six months, riding the Metrostar Express shall only cost between P 9.50 and P 15.00, depending on the distance, and in celebration of the start of its full operations, the public may ride on the Metrostar Express, free of charge, starting at noon until ten in the evening today.

My administration is committed to provide our people with this type of modern mass transportation. That is why we are pursuing the development of several other urban rail transit systems to help our commuters, who must daily contend with hours-long journeys, especially during rainy weather.

Together with the existing LRT-1 along Taft Avenue, the Metrostar Express System leads the way forward to upgrading our mass transportation to modern standards. I am told that we can expect that, together, these systems can transport over a million people every day in air-conditioned comfort.

No one can underestimate the boost to productivity and the local economy that this can create. Efficient travel around a city like Manila can stimulate commerce in a powerful way since our people can have more time to devote to useful and productive undertakings.

As you all know, the ever-increasing prices of fuel, like gasoline and diesel, are putting tremendous pressure on the country. Of course, even electric-powered systems must use some fuel to generate electricity. But putting fuel in electric generators to power trains like those of the Metrostar Express is up to one hundred times more efficient, in terms of the number of people transported at a given distance, than putting fuel in cars or buses. Moreover, electric-powered trains can make full use of our abundant hydroelectric power resources, which, of course, motor vehicles cannot.

I should also point out the tremendous contribution that these mass transportation systems can make in cleaning up our environment by drastically reducing the load of air pollution created by internal combustion engines of motor vehicles. According to some international agencies, manila has one of the world’s worst problems in air quality.

This is a problem for which this project can be a major solution. You can just imagine the air pollution that is caused by moving one million people a day in cars, buses and jeepneys. All that can be cleaned up by the operation of our electric-powered mass rail systems. But the really big payoff comes in the reduction of our staggering health care costs, which steadily rise as environmental pollution afflicts our people with respiratory and skin diseases.

Again, I commend the Metro Rail Transit Corporation for what it has accomplished. I understand that over 6,000 employees and construction workers labored long and hard over the last five years in planning and building the Metrostar Express. I, therefore, wish to congratulate Chairman Robert John Sobrepena and his board of directors for leading and managing this massive effort.

I also wish to thank the foreign and local banks which provided the financial resources needed to build the Metrostar Express. Without their support, the project could not have been built.

Likewise, I extend my special gratitude to our foreign partners. Japanese contractors Sumitomo Corporation and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries built the civil works and train stations. The Czech Republic’s rail builder CKD Tatra supplied the rolling stock. And U.S.-based Kaiser Engineers undertook the engineering design.

As a result, there were hundreds of Japanese, Czechs, Americans, Australians, French and other expatriates who participated in building these public transport facilities, in addition to the thousands of Filipinos employed by the dozens of Philippine companies involved.

Last but not least, we must not forget the many government officials, employees and political leaders who have, in one way of another, assisted in building the Metrostar Express.

Setting up this system in the middle of EDSA had its advantages and disadvantages. Businesses, residents and local governments had to make some adjustments to accommodate such a massive undertaking in the middle of our capital’s busiest thoroughfare. The task of facilitating the solution to these problems fell on several national agencies, such as the Department of Transportation and Communications under Secretary Vicente Rivera; the Department of Public Works and Highways under Secretary Gregorio Vigilar; and the Metro Manila Development Authority under Chairman Jojo Binay, to name a few.

To all of the people who have contributed to building this monument to national progress, I wish to extend my personal thanks and congratulations for a job well done.

Thank you and Mabuhay!

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library