Speech of His Excellency Joseph Ejercito Estrada President of the Philippines During the World Economic Forum’s East Asia Economic Summit

[ Delivered at the Ballroom 2, Singapore International Convention & Exhibit Center, Singapore, October 13, 1998 ]

Thank you very much Professor Klaus Schwab, chairman, World Economic Forum, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen:

At the outset, let me thank the World Economic Forum for this important opportunity for economic and business leaders in the region to discuss the urgent issues facing us all. I also wish to thank our gracious hosts, the government and the people of Singapore, for providing us a most agreeable atmosphere for our discussion(s).

It is fitting that we meet in Singapore, an eminent symbol of a state that works, and a region that toils diligently to escape the clutches of poverty and hopelessness.

A quarter-century ago, our countries were poor. The region was a post-colonial backwater. It had little in the way of modern industry.

And danger stalked in the region in the 1960s and 1970s. East Asia suffered wars, civil strife, and internal instability.

Despite these handicaps, East Asia rose like a phoenix through reconstruction, industrialization, and integration with the larger global economy.

Through manufacturing and trade, East Asian economies strove hard to catch up with the industrialized world. Growth rates the region became among the highest and steadiest ever recorded.

From being the proverbial hewers of wood and drawers of water, we in the East Asia emerged as producers of goods and providers of services that matched the world’s best.

And while six out of ten East Asians lived in absolute poverty in 1975, roughly two in ten did in 1995.

In short, as we examine where we are today, and our current dilemmas, let us not forget how far we have traveled. What East Asia achieved in the past few decades had been spectacular. As our host, Prime Minister Goh, has reminded us: we did have a miracle in East Asia; it was no mirage.

Then, virtually overnight, the glow of East Asia’s miracle dimmed.

All of us today know that our societies and economies have been shaken in (by) the economic crisis.

As the region’s currencies plummeted, weaknesses in its financial systems cracked. As corporate debt skyrocketed out of control and credit dried up, production sagged and growth slowed.

The middle class is besieged. Families are being swallowed up again into the ranks of the poor. For the first time in two decades, the war against poverty is in danger of being lost in many parts of the region.

Economic chaos is straining social and political systems. The domestic consensus that had supported more open economies and societies in a growing number of countries is threatening to unravel.

We who have been tasked to lead cannot allow those who played by the rules to be pushed (punished). We cannot tell our people to lose hope and forget about expectations. It is imperative for elected leaders to provide inspiration and to deliver.

Each of our national governments has its own unique concerns and responsibilities, and it is not my role to tutor others.

But it is clear that we (all) will be more successful if we consult and learn from one another and move ahead in concert. Leaders before us understood and acted some 30 years ago to devise economic cooperation so our progress would be more than the sum of our single parts. We can learn from them by seeking to unite our economic efforts now.

The first step, in my view, is to acknowledge the deficit in openness — political as well as economic — in our societies. This is a painful subject and my country is not immune from these concerns. All of us will not develop political and economic institutions in the same way. East Asia is a big place marked by diversity in languages, cultures, and religions. These differences should be respected, even celebrated. But we have also have convergence of interest in certain areas, particularly in achieving economic prosperity.

Despite our differences, there is a compelling need for democratic means, for more transparent economic and banking practices, for more educational opportunities, for a chance to compete fair and square in a level-playing field to get ahead, and for more equitable distribution of economic wealth. These are the demands for market and political openness and transparency that we hear from simple people, from people frightened by economic forces beyond their control. It is striking to me that they are exactly the same prescriptions that we hear from economists and financiers. When Alan Greenspan and the common people have the same view, perhaps we should listen. It is a truism that the voice of the people reflects the voice of the almighty.

Now there have been many reasons offered by analysts — and politicians, too — for the problems we now face.

But let us remember a few home truths. Foreign capital played no small role in (the) Asian growth miracle. Foreign capital also is fickle: it chases profit, and abhors risk; and it is not captive to our wishes. If we want capital to return, we must make it worth the while of investors

A month ago, President Clinton called for urgent consultations to cope with what he rightly termed “the biggest financial challenge facing the world in a half-century.” And his call has been echoed by British Prime Minister Blair. Indeed, it is time for world economic leaders to deal with this crisis for what it truly is — not a superficial boil, not just an Asian flu, but a global convulsion.

As early as the APEC Summit in Vancouver last November, Prime Minister Goh has called our attention to the apparent need to adapt the global financial architecture to the new requirements of the times. I wholeheartedly agree. We are dealing with a new phenomenon, where massive amounts of capital move from country to country at electronic speed, bloating economies to fragile bubbles as they rush in, and shaking economies to their foundations as they take flight. These movements cause vast and systemic disruptions to the world economy.

But construction a new global financial architecture will take years, not months, not weeks. In the meantime, urgent action is required to stabilize the situation, stop the carnage of otherwise viable businesses, and ease the rising tide of human suffering.

The U.S. $30-billion fund for Asia that Japan has recently announced and the World Bank’s initiative to sharply increase funding for social safety nets in countries undertaking painful reform should be most welcomed.

We hope to see other concrete action soon. Bigger interest rate and tax cuts in the U.S. plus growth-enhancing measures in Europe will immensely help. So will a steadfast implementation of Japanese banking and financial reforms. Japan should stimulate consumer spending to help East Asian exports. Above all protectionism cannot be allowed to rear its ugly head.

Indeed, true action should be more eloquent than spoken words.

Fortunately, most East Asian countries are already taking remedial measures to stabilize and stimulate their economies. The gains made during the past decades are not all gone. The region still has abundant human skills, experience, entrepreneurship, and other strengths. From the wreckage of financial and corporate systems, there is plenty that can be salvaged, refitted and improved. The adherence to social responsibility and community values remains strong despite the economic recession.

However, the crisis is also an opportunity to do more than simple repair work. It focuses (forces) us to examine not just what went wrong, but to determine what we need to prepare ourselves for a new and more competitive global economy.

From this perspective, there are four priorities that I believe the region has to address, and these are: deeper reform, deeper innovation, deeper commitment to social justice and deeper interdependence.

Whatever outsiders might be blamed for, it was internal weakness, more than anything else, that exposed emerging East Asia to the worst effects of sudden massive shifts in global capital flows.

In the past, leaky financial and banking systems were not serious obstacles to economic development. Neither were certain uncompetitive practices our businessmen had acquired during the period of rapid growth.

Clearly, this will not be the case in the 21st century.

In the Philippines, we had learned this bitter lesson as a consequence of past crises and our sad experience with crony capitalism. Before the present crisis struck, we had completed key finance and banking reforms. The Philippine Central Bank now enjoys policy independence from government to objectively pursue its mandate of securing overall financial stability. Our banks now have an average capital adequacy ratio of 17.3 percent, one of the highest in the region, comparable to those in Hong Kong and Singapore, and well in excess of our statutory minimum of 10 percent. Our banking system is only moderately leveraged, with total loans as a percentage of GDP at less than 70 percent. The non-performing loan ration for all banks is manageable at 10.2 percent as of May 1998.

Privatization and deregulation of various economic sectors continue. A comprehensive tax reform package has been legislated. Trade and investment liberalization will continue, to ensure competitive efficiency. And agriculture — the long-neglected sector providing livelihood to the vast majority of our people — will receive high priority and full support from my government. Weather permitting, we expect to continue chalking positive growth this year, and by some three percent in 1999.

My government is pro-poor and pro-business. I believe that the way to help the poor is through job creation and through sustained economic growth.

The reforms now being undertaken throughout the region must be deeply institutionalized. Band-aid remedies will not do. Change is necessary in order to survive.

To stay at the forefront of the global economy in the next century, our region must use standards of accountability. Corporate behavior, and an early warning and surveillance device as components of a wide transparency effort. These are meant to keep our economies on the path to fiscal discipline and reform.

Alongside deeper reform, we need deeper innovation. East Asia has made tremendous strides in development. The first wave of industrialization brought us from old-fashioned production into modernized agro-industry and manufacturing.

And now we must launch a second industrialization wave where higher productivity, and not just more production, will become more important. We need to restructure our industries along vertical streams and horizontal linkages that support sustainable development.

This brings me to the third priority, namely, a deeper commitment to social justice.

Reforms will take care of the immediate emergency and mid-term adjustment. Innovation will strengthen our business and our trade. By themselves, however, reform and innovation cannot do the whole job of ensuring sustainable growth.

Economic activity does not occur in a vacuum. Business takes place in a social environment that may be healthy or decaying.

And our war against poverty is far from over. Our region is still one of stark contrasts between the rich and the poor. Against this backdrop, there can be no economic adjustment without extensive safety nets for the poor who will suffer most from change through no fault of their own.

Over the longer run, even after the crisis, those who have seen how precarious their livelihoods are will insist on more socially responsible governance. For if there are such things today as financial, economic, environmental and development sustainability, there will be such a thing tomorrow as social sustainability. The modern conscience will not tolerate exploitative and inhumane conditions that were ignored in the past while the region marched forward.

After the shock of the crisis, people will want both social improvement and security; and they will support those leaders who promise to give these to them. This will be the major political fact for most of East Asia in the next century.

In the future, popular demands for better living conditions will intensify. This is good news for the world investors, because it will mean that East Asia will want more investment in social infrastructure than it could possibly generate on its own.

Government budgets will not be able to cover these needs either. There will have to be greater private sector participation in infrastructure development.

And it is not only a question of bringing in funds. New systems for using those funds must be devised. The private demand for profit to offset risk will have to be balanced with social demands for access, equity and reasonable cost.

Another area with enormous political (potential) for foreign participation will be in the modernization of capital and bond markets and in the management of pension and social security funds. Pressure for change is coming not only from the need to mobilize capital for infrastructure but also to cope with increased societal aging.

Long-term growth calls for deeper interdependence, for more linkages, within East Asia and with the rest of the world.

The momentary collapse of East Asian demand has shown us that global trade strategies are critica. Demand from other regions is now crucial for our regional recovery, particularly with Japan’s sluggish growth.

Of course, East Asian economic integration will proceed. A vibrant regional economy is good for its members and for all other countries as well. AFTA targets should not only be maintained they must be accelerated. And at next month’s APEC leaders’ meeting in Kuala Lumpur, we will support reaffirmation of the Bogor objectives and targets. We will also seek enhanced implementation of APEC ecotech cooperation. We all need to actively participate in charting and enforcing fair trade rules.

Moving beyond trade, East Asia must also be part of the effort to create a global financial system for the 21st century. And all of us, not just a few economies, must contribute thinking and experience in the elaboration of the new architecture. And I feel strongly that the new architecture – even the current one – should incorporate elements of the 1997 Manila framework for restoring financial stability.

Even as we take care of our economy, we will have to manage the political and security dimensions of regional stability which we must preserve to sustain growth into the 21st century.

Let us not forget that our region was only recently a tinderbox of inter-ethnic tension, a cockpit of ideological rivalry, and a focal point of strategic competition by outside powers.

While there is no immediate danger of hostilities, it cannot denied that there are potential sources of instability in East Asia which could have implications on the economy.

There is still a constant search for permanent peace in the Korean peninsula. Tension could arise if territorial disputes in the South China Sea are not addressed peacefully and with restraint while the Taiwan straits could erupt as a flashpoint if allowed to boil over.

We are also witnessing the emergence of new transboundary threats to security, such as terrorism, piracy, illegal trafficking of drugs and even women and children, illegal trade in weapons, and transboundary pollution. These are issues that tear at the social fabric of our region.

Security has assumed a broad and comprehensive dimension. It must be addressed by the collective will of all concerned.

ASEAN, APEC and the ASEAN Regional Forum exist as mechanisms for consultation, dialogue, and cooperation on the issues that threaten our economic, social and political well-being.

We must remain steadfast in our belief on the validity of these regional approaches.

East Asia’s passage to the next century is beset by many pitfalls.

There is no guarantee that if we hurdle the present economic crisis, the road ahead will be a well-paved avenue to traverse. We must not be deluded by such thinking.

Our past has served us well, but we must be fully aware of the challenges as well as the opportunities of the new millennium. We should follow the correct signposts so that the next generation cannot accuse us of betraying its hopes and expectations.

So ladies and gentlemen, thank you again for giving me this chance to talk to you this morning. (Applause)

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library