Speech of His Excellency Joseph Ejercito Estrada President of the Philippines During the Loan Signing Ceremony of the Asian Development Bank-assisted Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Program and Luncheon in Honor of ADB President Tadao Chino

[ Delivered at the Heroes Hall, Malacañang, July 21, 2000 ]

A VALUABLE PARTNER FOR A WORTH CAUSE

It is with distinct pleasure that I join all of you in this loan signing ceremony of the Asian Development Bank-assisted Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Program.

At the outset, allow me to thank those who have worked hard to make this event possible. In particular, I would like to express my appreciation to the ADB project staff, our private sector partners, the Manila Water Company, and Maynilad Water Services Incorporated. I would .also like to commend my own staff from the Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission (PRRC), headed by Secretary Ben Diokno, and its commissioners and member agencies, particularly Secretary Gregorio Vigilar, the National Housing Authority, and the Department of Finance.

I am sure that many more have provided valuable support, including the leadership of the Metro Manila Council headed by PRRC co-chairman Jojo Binay and Mayor Jose Capco of Pateros.

I have closely followed the development of this project. There have been major constraints and differences among the various stakeholders. Nonetheless, the fact that this event is taking place today is proof that, despite seemingly insurmountable difficulties, the cooperative spirit inspired by our common desire to save the Pasig River has prevailed. To one and all, my heartfelt thanks.

Indeed, this project is a milestone not only for my administration but also for all who share my vision to revive a dying river. The significance of the project can not be overemphasized. The current state of the river remains to be a major environmental concern. It confronts us direct in the face, so to speak, as it co-exists with us in the very urban environment where we live. And we cannot and should not allow this.

Those of us who have the power and the means to do something must carry on the work of rehabilitation of the Pasig River with greater determination and speed.

As a demonstration of political will, I have made the rehabilitation of the river as the flagship program of my presidency for the environment. As a first step, I have created the Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission directly under my office to put in place an agency dedicated to the work. This was necessary in order to approach the task rehabilitation in a strategic manner and to give it more focus.

Cognizant of the existence of a number of programs in this area, I have commissioned Palafox Associates to formulate a master plan for the rehabilitation of the river. This master plan will integrate and update all pre-existing programs and incorporate my vision for the rehabilitation of the river. The Pasig River Development Plan (PRDP), which was also formulated through an ADB technical assistance, was adopted as an integral component of this master plan.

Today. having just signed the loan agreement for the first phase of the PRDP, we have ensured adequate financing for the initial implementation of the master plan. The Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Program, as the project is called, is quite a mouthful. Allow me, therefore, to be the first to call it by an appropriate acronym, PREMAR , for brevity.

The signing of the loan for PREMAR is surely not the beginning nor the end. Talking of beginnings, already, in an attempt to fast-track the rehabilitation work, we have started the implementation of critical components. The relocation, housing and resettlement of informal families occupying danger zones along the banks of the river have started. Contrary to some reports, the resettlement site is a far better and safer place to live in for the affected families.

The relocatees will stand to benefit from PREMAR’s livelihood program with short, medium and long-term dimensions. For the short term, the families are already being provided with skills training and social credit for small business. In the medium term, training on various skills will be given to enable them to be gainfully employed. Over the long-term dimension, businessmen will be encouraged to set up operations in the vicinity of the resettlement sites, with priority employment given to the relocatees.

To fully clear the riverbanks, consultations and a land acquisition plan are underway for formal settlers along the river. The cost of this program is huge. We, therefore, challenge the Asian Development Bank to be more flexible and innovative in its financing policy by sharing the costs of the land acquisition program, as well as expropriation which will be undertaken as a last resort.

Possible linear parks and promenades along the riverbanks have already been identified out of the cleared areas. Simultaneous flood control works in the form of river and parapet walls and revetments are immediately being put in place in these areas. We will proceed with the development of the linear parks and promenades along the riverbanks as soon as the proceeds from the loan are disbursed.

In the midst of all this, let us not forget that all these are being done with the twin objectives of alleviating the plight of the poor informal families living in danger zones along the riverbanks and improving the water quality of the river.

To improve water quality, solid waste collection, monitoring and enforcement of commercial and industrial pollution controls and water quality monitoring will be intensified.

Along this line, we have started setting up an industrial database and a river modelling tool. The polluters tax principle will be fully implemented in Metropolitan Manila through the administration of .an environmental users’ fee in areas which are not yet covered by such a system.

We want the public to know what we are trying to accomplish to gain widespread support for this undertaking. After .all, a major source of river pollution are domestic households.

Much has been said and done about the Pasig River. We look forward to this loan as a means to expand our resources and capability to undertake the noble task of the river’s rehabilitation. Towards this end, we look at the Asian Development Bank as a staunch and untiring partner in this formidable task. You are truly our valuable partner for this worthy cause since we realize that we cannot do it alone.

I take this opportunity, therefore, to give honor to its president, the honorable Tadao Chino, for making all these possible and for supporting and sharing with us the common vision of rehabilitating a dying river, which is a precious and priceless heritage of the Filipino people.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us not allow the Pasig River to die instead let us continue to work together to revive and restore it so it can be conducive to transport, tourism and recreation.

Thank you and mabuhay !

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library