EXPANDING TRADE PARTNERSHIP

It is my pleasure to meet with the business community here in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. This gives me and my business delegation from the Philippines an opportunity to establish business relationships with you and discuss ways towards further strengthening Philippine-Vietnam economic relations.

This is the third country after Singapore and Malaysia that I am visiting during my presidency. I have declared it my policy that the first countries I will be visiting are the countries in Asia because they — like Vietnam are our immediate neighbors in the Community of Nations. Thus, I am happy to join you here today, during the occasion of the ASEAN Leaders Summit in Hanoi.

The Philippines and Vietnam share a regional affinity because we both belong now to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or ASEAN, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, or APEC.

In the Philippines, I had the opportunity to meet Vietnamese deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Manh Cam on July 29, 1998 in Malacañang. During our meeting, we agreed that our two countries could cooperate with each other not only at the bilateral level but also in various international fora such as ASEAN and APEC.

There are many imperatives why Vietnam and the Philippines should now work more closely together in many areas of cooperation. I am confident that our joint efforts will redound to the mutual benefit of two developing economies.

Our Vietnamese friends may wish to know how we in the Philippines are doing.

The Philippines has proven to be more resilient than some of our neighbors in the financial crisis that has shaken almost all economies in Asia. Through the policies of market liberalization, deregulation, and privatization in the last few years, we have developed sound economic policies that have helped us stand on solid footing and be competitive with the rest of the world.

Our economic indicators continue to be positive. We expect to finish the year with a positive GDP growth rate. Our currency, the peso has recently strengthened to a range of 38 to 39 pesos to one US dollar.

Our exports remain strong at double-digit growth rates due to the strong performance of key sectors such as electronics. We have succeeded in containing inflation, which is expected to remain within our projection this year.

Interest rates have steadily declined closer to the pre-crisis level. The budget deficit has gone down to a more tolerable level compared with our GNP.

Our banking system remains stable and is one of the best capitalized in the region.

Our policy orientation is pro-poor. Our policies are intended to create an environment that lead towards improving the living conditions of the poor.

But we are also pro-business. We are committed to a fair and free-market economy that is conducive to business activities and based on global realities. We are likewise committed to leveling the playing field.

Likewise, we can boast of an improved peace and order situation. We have moved decisively to calm the fears of our people about their personal safety and of companies to go about their business.

There has also been marked improvement in the overall industrial peace situation in the last few months. This has been brought about by the improved maturity of our labor and management groups. Just about two months ago, most of our major labor federations and employers’ groups forged an accord that included a no-strike and no-lockout provision.

Indeed, we see better times ahead. We also see opportunities for stronger economic ties between the Philippines and the rest of the world – especially with our neighbors in ASEAN, including Vietnam.

How are Philippine-Vietnam economic relations progressing?

Last year, Vietnam ranked as the Philippines’ number 22 trading partner. Our total trade with Vietnam has expanded 7.5 times from a mere US$ 48 million in 1993 to US$ 358 million in 1997. In the first nine months of 1998, total trade between our two countries has already reached US$ 377 million, surpassing the level for the whole of 1997 and elevating Vietnam as one of our leading trading partners.

Our exports to Vietnam increased from US$ 37 million in 1993 to US$ 130 million in 1996, although they decreased to US$ 95 million in 1997. Our top exports to this country include various mineral or chemical fertilizers which accounted for 55 percent of our total exports; fuel oils; and pharmaceutical products.

On the other hand, our imports from Vietnam started out much smaller than our exports but they have consistently increased. From only US$ 10.5 million in 1993, they reached US$ 263 million in 1997. In the first nine months of 1998, they amounted to US$ 313 million. Our top imports from Vietnam include rice, petroleum oils, crude oils, and ground nuts.

The balance of trade used to be in our favor, but shifted in Vietnam’s favor in 1996 – which is understandable because our imports from Vietnam have increased faster than our exports to Vietnam.

We look to the example of our close ASEAN neighbors who have been more successful in penetrating the Vietnamese market. Surely, both sides can do something to improve our share of the Vietnam market.

In terms of investments, quite a number of Philippine companies have established operations in Vietnam. These include San Miguel Corporation with its beer and packaging operations, United Laboratories in pharmaceuticals, Columbia Motors in partnership with Vietnam Motors, Far East Bank in banking, and Arthur Andersen/SGV in management consultancy.

The Vietnamese Ambassador to the Philippines, Nguyen Thac Dinh, estimated that total Philippine investments in Vietnam have reached US$ 290 million for 16 projects as of July1998. This places the Philippines as number 17 among foreign country investors in Vietnam and number 4 among ASEAN country investors.

This just goes to show that many Filipino companies have seen Vietnam’s potential to become one of Asia’s most dynamic economies, and have been active in exploring the business opportunities it has to offer.

There are also other mechanisms that have been promoting economic linkages between the Philippines and Vietnam.

There is the Joint Commission for Bilateral Cooperation that facilitates negotiations for cooperative endeavors at the government-to-government level. Our two governments have, in fact, signed various bilateral agreements and memoranda of understanding to promote trade and partnerships in various areas of endeavor.

We have established a representative office of our state trading company — the Philippine International Trading Corporation — in Ho Chi Minh City way back in March of 1994. The company is actively engaged in promoting countertrade and counterpurchase of various products between our two economies.

There is also the Philippine-Vietnam Trade Council, Inc. which familiarizes the Filipino business community on business opportunities here in Vietnam.

It is clear from what I have mentioned that we need to launch more joint initiatives to strengthen, expand, and upgrade our economic relations.

In trade, we need to balance the numbers. We must address the trade deficit the Philippines has been incurring.

We have identified a set of products which the Philippines can supply the Vietnamese market, including consumer products such as contract furniture and interior designs and furnishings; services, such as those related to computers and infrastructure projects; food and food preparations; construction materials especially housing components; and, industrial manufactures, such as electrical products and farm equipment.

There is no doubt that with Vietnam’s continuing economic reconstruction and the liberalization of its investment climate, many Asian and Western economies are considering the potentials for doing more business with Vietnam. The Philippines is one of them.

We see potentials in the construction sector which is becoming one of Vietnam’s fastest growing foreign-invested business sector. With the construction boom expected to continue past the turn of the century, we hope to attract Vietnam in building materials and construction services that the Philippines can supply. Allow me also to make a pitch for our design and supply capabilities in furniture, houseware, and accessories.

Likewise, we foresee a growing demand for skilled workers in Vietnam. Since Vietnam faces an increasing gap between supply and demand caused by shortage of adequate skilled labor, we hope to be able to fill in such a gap with the skills of Filipino manpower services.

Philippine exports have observed difficulties in penetrating the Vietnamese market. Towards addressing these difficulties, we propose the following measures:

– The Chambers of Commerce and Industry of our two countries should facilitate information exchange between them.

– More extensive seminars on how to do business in Vietnam should be held to.

I am optimistic that through the joint initiatives of our respective Governments and business sectors, we can together contribute to the deepening of our regional and bilateral economic interdependence. This will help promote peace and solidarity, economic growth and stability, and progress and prosperity in Asia and the Pacific.

Thank you very much and Mabuhay !

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library