PRIDE IN OUR EXPORTS

I am deeply honored to speak before this gathering of key players in the manufacturing industry of the semiconductor and electronics technology. I wish to congratulate the officers and members of the Semiconductor and Electronics Industries in the Philippines Inc. (SEIPI) for successfully holding its 55th General Membership Meeting.

So far, this is the first invitation that I have received to celebrate the Centennial Christmas. It is a privilege on my part to join you tonight in this advanced Christmas celebration

The microchip is one of the greatest accomplishments of the twentieth century. A quarter of a century ago, such claim would have seemed absurd. Today, however, microchips move closer to the center of our lives, taking a place in the heart of one machine after another.

Today, microchips make most of the things that we use. It has changed not only the quality of the products we produce but our lifestyle as well.

In the past years, your industry has made major contributions in this fast changing world. As we move towards the next millennium, innovations have been taking place so rapidly that daily life without micro-processors has become unimaginable.

I was told that you have recently changed the name of your organization from Semiconductor and Electronics Industry Foundation, Inc. (SEIFI) to Semiconductor and Electronics Industries in the Philippines. Inc. (SEIPI). This is to emphasize not only your geographical location but your identity as well. It is also consistent with your objective to expand the coverage of your membership both here and abroad.

I am also glad to note that you have plans of bringing in the small and medium-sized companies into your group. As we all know, small and medium scale enterprises are likewise vital to our economic development. By absorbing them in, there will be more opportunities for exchange of ideas and information regarding the latest developments in the semiconductor and electronics industries. We welcome your move towards supporting our small and medium sized enterprises.

Through your flagship program “JET” — which stands for job, exports and technology — you express your [willingness to contribute to the advancement of our common goals of job generation, enhanced exportation, and technology dissemination.] I hope that you will continue to create more plans and programs that are directed towards these ends.

Similarly, I expect you to further enhance your support and participation in the development initiatives and efforts of our Government, especially in programs geared towards alleviating the living conditions of the poor.

The Philippines is one of the least affected by the financial crisis sweeping Asia. We are confident that the Philippines will soon recover from it.

We have avoided a deep recession. The stock market has made a very strong recovery. Inflation rate for the first ten months remains within our single-digit target. Interest rates are going down. The peso is getting stronger. Our banking system remains stable and is recognized as one of the strongest and most resilient in the region.

He said, “I am pleased to note that your industry employs 200,000 engineers and technical workers. It will be a big boost to our economy that your industry continues to provide jobs for thousands of Filipinos.”

“I encourage you to continue inviting other global player’s in the electronics industry to relocate and expand their base operations in the Philippines.” In spite of ongoing economic crisis in Asia, our country’s economic prospects and the confidence of local and foreign investors remain strong. This confidence is apparent in the continued establishment of new businesses here in the last few months and the expansion of the businesses earlier established here.

Secretary Pardo has informed me that your industry accounts for more than 60% of now. In 1997, your export totalled US$ 15 billion and your projection is US$45 billion at the end of my term.

I am glad that the manufacturing technologies in semi-conductor and electronics are being transferred by the SEIPI group to Filipino engineers and workers. Training our manpower is one of the key factors in our country’s development. I am happy to know that your industry allots 40 hours of 1 raining to your employees.

All of these developments in your industries are good news for my Administration and for the whole Filipino nation. I assure you that under my leadership, we will do our best to make the environment for your business more conducive to growth so you could hurdle the challenges and changes your industry will face in the years ahead.

Thank you very much. Long live you all. Merry Christmas to all.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library