PARTNERS IN SERVING THE PUBLIC

I extend my heartfelt greetings for a happy new year to all the members of the Malacanang Press Corps who are here. I also thank you for accepting my invitation to attend this small gathering. It’s not just a small gathering because there’s a raffle, it’s different when something is shared.

This holiday season, I have had interactions with the people who work closely with me — the ones who really matter. And of course, I wouldn’t miss the opportunity to be with the members of the Malacanang Press Corps because I consider you as family in the Office of the President.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you for the support you give me and our shared goal of serving the Filipino people. So tonight, I ask you to lay down your pens, tape recorders and cameras, and just enjoy the evening.

This is also my way of celebrating my having survived the first six months in office as President — in spite of the media. From day one, people — and I don’t mean just you — had been watching me and my every move, waiting for me to commit some mistakes.

In the first few months, I had some unpleasant brushes with some of you, but I consider those as the spice of life. It took a little while for me to get used to it, for in the movie industry where I came from, any kind of publicity — good or bad — is always welcome because it adds to one’s popularity. But the Presidency is a completely different matter because it is a far more serious business.

I didn’t even experience what is called a honeymoon with the media. But it’s a good thing I’m not used to honeymoons. Actually, that was the best honeymoon I ever had. But as I often say, what I keep in mind is what I learned from being an actor: the hero gets beaten up first, but in the end, he still wins.

As the weeks and months rolled by, the criticisms somehow na tempered ng konti . I would like to attribute this change to some modest achievements. I successfully negotiated a solution to my first national crisis — the shutdown of the Philippine Airlines; delivered a well-received keynote address in my first international appearance — at an Economic Summit in Singapore; and was designated by my fellow leaders as the ASEAN Spokesman for the Poor — in the APEC meeting held in Kuala Lumpur.

By now, I hope we have all realized that media and government need not work as adversaries. We must be partners, for we serve the same public.

The Press and the State have their respective tasks to fulfill, but in the end, we all share one common goal — the enduring peace, progress and prosperity of our people and our country.

I know you are just doing your job. So continue doing that, and I will do mine as well. I have a sworn duty to uplift our countrymen from poverty. And your duty is to deliver the truth to our people.

We in government regard media as our vital ally in the service of the nation. It is through you that we are able to reach out to our people. It is through you that we communicate with the citizenry. It is through you that we make known to the public the work of Government, the policies of Government, the programs of Government.

The power of media is a power that must be exercised for the good of the majority, for the attainment of national unity and not of divisiveness.

The freedom of thought and of expression not only provides the people with the opportunity to air their grievances, to criticize official wrongdoings, to offer suggestions and recommendations, but more importantly, to widen the arena of political debate.

That is why my Administration is committed to respect the freedom of the press. Dito pa naman sa Pilipinas, the freedom of the press works in such a way that there is not much freedom from it. That being the case, my only request is for you to report me and my policies, programs and activities correctly.

This year, I will concentrate on food security. One food for thought concentrates on agri modernization.

I appeal to all of you to help us rally our people in meeting the challenges of the times. Criticize us constructively when we falter, but support us also when we do things the right way.

I ask you to help me succeed in the fight against poverty, crime, corruption, and the other ills that beset our society. Let us help our people gain access to opportunities that will uplift their living conditions and restore their human dignity.

Having said that, let me conclude by saying that I treasure our relationship very much and cherish the good times along with the bad that came our way in 1998. All things considered, it has been an exhilarating first six months, so I look forward to a better and more harmonious relationship with you in 1999.

Happy New Year to all of you!

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library