Revitalizing the Coconut Industry

Good morning to all of you. I thank you for coming this morning to witness the historic signing of the executive order establishing the Coconut Levy Trust Fund. This fund is allocated for the benefit of more than twenty million of our countrymen who depend on the coconut industry. This includes two and a half million small farmers and workers in the coconut farms.

Perhaps if you remember, on October 9, 1998, on the first one hundred days of my presidency, I uttered the words: “Whatever happens, I promise to ensure that every centavo of the Coconut Levy Trust Fund will return to the farmers.” I am fulfilling that promise today. This trust fund is not less than fifty billion pesos.

I have also worked on this matter for a long time, as did the previous administration, but it was not fulfilled. A week after I took office as president, this was the first thing I attended to. I spoke with former Ambassador Danding Cojuangco and Mayor Ma. Clara Lobregat about this, and I was able to convince them. However, there was a problem with the appropriate executive order, and it took almost a year of discussions to finalize its provisions.

Throughout that time, I was constantly thinking because as time went on, the poverty of our coconut farmers continued to worsen. For those who are not aware, we also have a coconut plantation in Laguna, and this was how our family made a living in the past. This is why coconut farmers are close to my heart, and I understand their situation.

I signed this executive order to show and make you feel the government's appreciation for our coconut industry. This is an industry that provides livelihood for many of our countrymen.

The coconut industry is among the major sources of income of our economy. It provides employment and livelihood opportunities for many of our people. We must protect and strengthen it.

More than three million hectares of land are planted with coconuts and covered by this industry. It is estimated that this is thirty-five percent (35%) of the country's total farmland. The livelihood of many farmers in the country has long depended on coconut products, in cooking and drying copra, and creating various products from different parts of the tree and its fruit.

No less than sixty-four (64) of the total seventy-eight (78) provinces throughout the archipelago depend on this industry. Its total contribution to the national economy reaches seven hundred million dollars ($700 M) annually.

Therefore, coconut should not be underestimated, and even more so, those who earn a living from it. The Philippines is known throughout the world as a major exporter of copra and oil from coconuts.

Our country supplies more than sixty percent (60%) of the world's demand for coconut oil.

However, despite this, those who earn a living from our coconut farms are continuously considered to not earn enough. Seven out of ten Filipinos who depend on coconuts are estimated to live in poverty, and earn only about twenty-two pesos (P22.00) per day. According to our study, the living conditions in provinces known for coconuts are also difficult.

There are many reasons for the unfortunate poverty experienced by coconut farmers. First of these is the lack of realistic programs for the development of the industry by past administrations. Many projects for coconuts exist, but few have succeeded, and created a realistic program to promote private investment in the industry.

Secondly, there are many conflicts and disputes over the large funds collected from those working and depending on the industry that are just lying dormant because they are “stuck” in many issues and cases in court. In truth, while the government is formulating a new program for the industry, the different groups dependent on coconuts have argued and fought several times. This is why we are left behind because we fight amongst ourselves. Other countries are progressing because they are united, like Thailand, Malaysia, Japan and other neighboring countries.

Thirdly, our trees are already old and their production has decreased. We are also lagging behind in technology and the development of new industrial products from coconuts. Throughout the Philippines, we still rely on old seeds, old technology and old processes.

This is what we must face now. We must revive our coconut industry. We must bring it back to its rightful place as one of our top ten agricultural exports. As we all know, I have made food security as the centerpiece program of my administration. And we are lucky to have as secretary of agriculture, former Senator Edgardo Angara who was the author of the Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Law. And above all, we will give a new life to our planters and those who earn a living in our industry.

Today, we begin to revitalize the coconut industry. We will restore its strength and vitality that we have neglected in recent decades.

It is lamentable to think that despite our efforts to improve our economy, there are still sectors of our society that continue to create chaos to undermine our economy and political order, just to gain power.

There are forces in our society that, instead of helping us out in solving our problems,. are busy with discrediting the president. It is sad that as they hit me, it is our people who suffer. It is the poor who bear the hardship at hindi iyong mga nasa Makati.

Nevertheless, I have offered to them the hand of reconciliation. I offered to them a way out which is to work together. I renew these offers to them for the good of our nation.

I am ready for any impeachment process that will be conducted by our congress. I am ready to face prosecution by the senate. As long as it is in accordance with our Constitution. And I believe that, in the end, the whole truth will prevail.

I will prove wrong those who have put their personal and political interests above the interests of our country in demanding my ouster and fomenting political and economic instability .

Meanwhile, let us continue the work that has been temporarily neglected – and there is a lot of it. Let us allow justice to take its course according to our constitution.

The battle now in the global economy is country against country. And while we are not united, foreigners are applauding because competition is reduced.

When I went to Vietnam last year, I saw their unity there, which is why even though they experienced more than twenty years of war, they are now the 3rd largest rice-exporting country in the world.

Because we are not united, we are being taken advantage of. That is why we need to promote this unity starting with the coconut industry. We need to give attention to everyone involved in the industry and the different sectors that depend on it.

The use of this Coconut Trust Fund is allocated for the coconut industry. This fund will come from twenty-seven percent (27%) of the share from San Miguel Corporation (SMC) which was allocated a large portion of the “Coco Levy Funds”.

This fund will be managed by a committee composed of various representatives of coconut farmers and the government. They will be responsible to me and to our farmers and the different sectors of the industry. If any of the representatives of the fund will misuse the money, we will apply the full force of the law.

If anyone uses this fund with irregularities, we will apply the full force of our laws against them. There will be no forgiveness. We will see to it that the funds will be used for the purpose we have intended them, no more, no less.

I will ensure the integrity of this fund. And I will also ensure that it goes to the benefit of coconut farmers and workers in the coconut industry!

In the creation of the Fund for Assistance to Coconut Farmers, it is estimated that at least five billion pesos in income or interest from the trust fund can be used annually for the benefit of those in the coconut industry.

There is no time to waste in reviving this industry. Now is the time to act and strive and care even more.

We now have many competitors in the global coconut oil industry. Other countries have more advanced production, and their products are cheaper. We need to keep up with other countries in the competition. But I believe that palm oil, corn oil, or sunflower seed oil cannot match the natural qualities of coconut oil, especially as an ingredient in chocolate and other foods, and in laundry soap.

In closing, I would like to acknowledge my secretary of the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR). Among my government officials, Secretary Boy Morales dedicated the most time to launching this program.

I also congratulate our Secretary of Agriculture Edgardo Angara and our Philippine Coconut Authority under the leadership of Administrator Ed Escueta for their efforts to strengthen the industry.

You can expect that as long as I am president, I will always help the coconut industry, especially our farmers. I became president in support of the poor, so I will use all the power of my office to improve their living conditions.

Again, thank you all very much. Long live the farmers all over the country!

Long live us all!

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library