SHAPING PHILIPPINE-AMERICAN RELATIONS FOR THE FUTURE

I would like to congratulate the Carlos P. Romulo Foundation and its Chairman, a most distinguished son of the General, former Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Roberto P. Romulo, for organizing this important Conference.

I had a special affinity with General Romulo, whose first wife, the former Virginia Llamas of Pagsanjan, was a very good friend of my father. There was a certain fondness that the General lavished on me as a young boy and the ties that my parents forged with the couple engendered my deep admiration and respect for the General.

General Carlos P. Romulo was a pillar of Philippine diplomacy and it is only fitting that the Foundation that bears his name should hold this Conference at this point in our progress as a nation.

The world around us has changed, but our exposure to the influence of external events has remained. We are confronted by new opportunities and challenges. We have to manage new types of external threats and collaborate in new forms of international cooperation.

With so much rapid change, it is always good to have friends, especially old friends like the United States, with whom we can work together in making this new world safer and more secure.

It is true that the Philippines and the United States began as enemies at the turn of this century. However, what began in war ended in peace; where we were once enemies, we are now friends and allies.

Filipinos and Americans fought together during World War II and in the Korean peninsula. We were partners in the great struggles of the Cold War in East Asia. The U.S. security umbrella helped the Philippines and the majority of nations in our region pursue economic development and ward off communism.

Yet, at the same time, there were strains in our partnership, strains that were associated with the U.S. military bases in our country.

Those bases posed a dilemma. They were pillars of containment which benefited the whole region, but many Filipinos, myself included, felt that they infringed on Philippine sovereignty.

In 1991, the Philippine Senate, of which I was then a member, took the historic decision to terminate our Bases Agreement. In doing so, we opened a new chapter in Philippine-American relations, a chapter that we are still in the process of writing.

Let me make one point very clear. When I voted against the Bases Agreement, I was not voting against America or our partnership with America. I was voting for the sovereignty of the nation and that is not anti-America.

Filipinos and Americans have too much in common, that is why we share fundamental values and essential interests.

We both love democracy and we have both defended democracy.

We both respect universal human rights and we both advocate social openness.

We both know that political and economic policies which empower people, enhance personal freedoms, and liberate individual talent and energy are the best policies for improving living standards and alleviating poverty.

These shared values provide the deep understructure for the new chapter in Philippine-American relations that we are now drafting. There are three major parts to this new chapter: a political and security part; an economic part; and a part devoted to direct people-to-people ties.

Of the three, the political and security dimension requires our most immediate attention. Our economic relationship is diversifying and our business sectors are already very close. The links between our peoples are solid and are growing stronger every day.

In the political and security area, we have to rework the way in which we cooperate in a post-Bases and post-Cold War environment. There are security problems in our region, such as the continuing issue of Mischief Reef and of the South China Sea. Against this background, it is in our interest to maintain our Mutual Defense Treaty (MDT) with the United States.

From this perspective, we can see that the Visiting Forces Agreement (VFA) is essential to ensure that the MDT can operate in practical terms. My Administration has openly stated that the VFA’s ratification is important because the VFA serves our national interest. Simply put, the VFA will make it easier for the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the U.S. military to conduct joint exercises and other activities that any defensive alliance must have in order to be effective.

In addition, we should be able to use our alliance to assist the urgent task of modernizing our Armed Forces. Hi-tech armaments do not in themselves guarantee security; but a defense modernization program, buttressed by a credible alliance, can have a deterrent value that is obviously an advantage for the Philippines.

Although the United States may be the world’s last remaining Superpower, that power may not be used effectively without the cooperation of allies and the support of regional organizations and the United Nations.

We have certain responsibilities as allies to help the United States retain its regional security presence. The holding of regular joint military activities and defense policy consultations are some of the ways that this can be done. For practical reasons, we have to do our part to sustain the American security presence that benefits all of us.

We look forward to strong cooperation with America in three critical areas to promote comprehensive regional security cooperation.

First, the United States helps maintain the region’s security balance. The United States holds the key to preserving calm on the Korean peninsula and in the ties between China and Japan.

Second, as the last remaining Superpower, as the key mediator in crises all over the world, and as our region’s largest export market, the United States stands more than ever as the primus inter pares among us. This translates into unparalleled influence that must be used wisely to benefit all of us.

It is in America’s best interest to use the type of consensus politics and community building that distinguished ASEAN in its role as a regional stabilizer. No other diplomatic method has approached ASEAN’s in successfully managing differences and cooperation within a highly diverse region such as ours.

The diversified nature of our region means that differences have to be accepted as facts of life. Highlighting what separates us will not advance the general welfare within our region. It is fortunate that we have nevertheless found basis to have consensus amongst us and we are gratified that America has helped us in this regard.

On the political side of the regional security equation, what is called for is the politics of engagement and inclusion, wherever practicable. Bilateral problems should not get in the way of regional cooperation. Countries can express their views on what democracy, human rights and free markets mean to them. What is important is that we all remain willing to work at building a regional security community, no matter how divergent our views may be.

The gravest threat at the moment to the region’s stability is economic, not military. Our region is struggling to overcome the massive blow of a financial crisis. It is recovery from this crisis that should be the number one agenda item for regional cooperation these days.

The economic side has two factors. First, we have to keep our region on course towards greater economic liberalization, openness and cooperation. In today’s era of globalization, these are the only options. We have to stay on that path — in APEC and the WTO, in AFTA and other sub-regional economic groups — to foster conditions that will show our peoples that we have a bigger stake in cohesion than in division.

However, this is for the long run. Because of the financial crisis, poverty is once again on the offensive throughout the region. Millions of people and thousands of families are desperately holding the line. The second factor, therefore, must be sensitivity and compassion. These are people, our people, we are talking about. They deserve help, not lectures on political economy.

We appreciate the backing of the United States for more spending on social safety nets and for emergency measures to guard against the return of absolute poverty. We support American and other efforts to increase the resources of the IMF and the World Bank and to strengthen their ability to respond to new issues spawned by the global economy.

If our region’s crisis has taught us anything, it is that we must act faster for damage limitation. Had larger assistance been made available sooner — from the development banks, from the private sector, and from concerned countries — the human cost of the crisis might have been considerably lessened. Globalization must never be paid for again with such heavy expense in human life and dignity.

The third and last area where strong links with America is needed is in preparing the region for the future. At the moment, East Asian countries are preoccupied with pulling through the crisis. So, by, default, the United States has a stronger than usual position in our region to shape the rules to govern the emerging regional order.

The regional agenda for this kind of rule-making is enormous.

In the political and military areas, we have to establish rules in the form of codes of conduct, confidence building, and preventive diplomacy in areas where territorial claims overlap, such as in the South China Sea.

A new generation of security threats — global terrorism, environmental degradation, transnational crime, gun-running, the illegal trade in narcotics and trafficking in human beings — have to be confronted.

The ASEAN Regional Forum should be given a more substantive role in promoting regional security consultation and cooperation.

In the economic arena, rules are required to bring order to an increasingly complex global economy. New sectors like information technology, electronic commerce, hedge funds, and cooperation on the use of natural resources, command our attention.

Issues concerning social, labor and environmental standards will become more important and will require careful management.

Globalization will bring our economies and societies closer together. This will not always be comfortable. Old-fashioned international commerce stopped at the border; global economic interaction does not. What happens in one country will become increasingly relevant not only to its neighbors but also to countries far afield. Our concerns over policies and developments in other countries that impact upon our own will grow.

Under these conditions, we need to engender, above all, a more tangible sense of regional solidarity and of community that will allow us to transcend our differences. The notion of community well-being was sorely tested by the financial crisis. Fortunately, we found ways to come to each other’s assistance.

I am glad to note at this point that the Philippines has withstood the negative effects of the crisis better than our neighbors in the region. This we attribute to our strong democracy, the political maturity of our people, and our good economic foundations based on the principles of liberalization, deregulation and free-market economy. I assure everyone that my Administration will pursue the same political, economic and social policies that will ensure our stability and steady recovery from the crisis.

I am certain that we will be able to do so, especially with my strong pro-poor bias. I believe that economic development can never be sustained here or anywhere else in the world unless the problem of poverty is addressed.

President Aquino has gained worldwide admiration for restoring our democracy. President Ramos turned around our economy due to the reforms he had successfully implemented. I would like to be remembered in history as the President who championed the cause of the masses. As I have always done before, I will continue to be guided by my formula to decide on what can bring about the greatest good for the number.

Thank you very much and good day.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library