TO OUR CLOSER AND DEEPER TIES

Archbishop Gian Vincenzo Moreni, Your excellences of the Diplomatic Corps, Honorable members of the Philippine Congress, My Co-workers in Government Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

I have the pleasure to greet all of you a very happy and prosperous new year. Let me also express my appreciation, on behalf of the Philippine Government and the Filipino people, for your support and cooperation during the year just passed.

We particularly thank your excellencies for your friendship and joint effort with us in further consolidating the excellent relations between the Philippines and your respective countries.

Our partnership with you has helped ensure the success of our diplomatic undertaking in the past year. These include the overseas visits of President Ramos and myself, the visits here of foreign dignitaries, and the many new international initiatives and linkages we launched last year.

Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

1998 was a year full of meaning and challenge for my country.

We marked the centennial of the proclamation of Philippine independence and began our second century as a nation.

My administration took office with a strong mandate from our people, who yet again freely exercised their sovereign democratic rights.

These milestones were the inspirations that prompted me to make a solemn covenant with our people. I said at my inauguration that my government will do everything in its power to be worthy of our people’s trust. We will work to “bring peace to our lives and harmony to Philippine society.” We will be firm in our efforts to “bring order to our streets and justice to our institutions.” And we will not rest until we “impart energy to our economy and more equity in the distribution of its fruits.”

Peace, social justice and prosperity. These are the goals we will pursue under my administration. These are what we will work for in the new year. And these are the ends that will guide us in our international relations.

As international economic and political events in the last eighteen months have shown, the health and wealth of our country are closely intertwined with those of its partners in the world.

I am, therefore, gratified that, during my first six months in office, I have had important occasions to establish solid footing for working with the leaders of our country partners.

At the APEC Summit in Kuala Lumpur last November and the ASEAN Summit in Hanoi last month, I was impressed by the deep desire among leaders in the region to fully cooperate with one another. We discussed and adopted measures to effectively respond to the many challenges facing the region, particularly the economic and financial crisis.

I am particularly proud to be designated by my fellow ASEAN leaders at the APEC summit as their spokesman for the poor. This, in effect, is recognition that our concern for the poor has gained wider acceptance not only within our shores but also throughout the region.

During my visits to Singapore, Batan Island in Indonesia, Malaysia, Vietnam and Thailand, as well as the visits here by the Sultan of Brunei Darussalam and other foreign officials, I reiterated our commitment to be a full and active collaborator of other nations. Together, we can preserve peace and stability, enhance common prosperity, and promote justice and respect for human dignity.

The Philippines successfully hosted the 31st ASEAN Ministerial Meeting and the 5th ASEAN Regional Forum last July, and the 30th ASEAN Economic Ministerial Meeting last October. We are looking forward to hosting the Third ASEAN Informal Summit later this year. I am convinced that we can further contribute to the transformation of ASEAN into a more cohesive and proactive core of east Asian and Asia-Pacific cooperation.

I am also eagerly looking forward to establishing closer working and personal ties with the leaders of our other allies and partners within the next few years. I realize that, in this globalized and interdependent world, only friendship and cooperation – not enmity and confrontation – can work. We intend to expand and deepen our bilateral relations with friends in North and Latin America, the Asia-Pacific, Europe, the Middle East, and Africa.

Your excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

1998 had been a critical year for many countries because of the economic and financial crisis in Asia. We are, however, heartened by the fact that, despite the continuing difficulties, our true friends did come forth when we needed them. Our friends made our tribulations more bearable.

This year, we expect to see much improvement not only in the overall performance of our regional economies but, more importantly, in the living conditions of our poor. With your support, we in the Philippines will do our best to make 1999 a beneficial year for the common man.

On that note, may I invite your excellencies and dear friends to join me in a toast –

To another fruitful year of international cooperation;

To closer and deeper ties between the Philippines and your respective countries;

To a happy and prosperous 1999.

Source : University of the Philippines Diliman Library