Speech of Honorable Joseph Ejercito Estrada, Senator of the Philippines, during the celebration of the 34th Anniversary and National Convention of the National Federation of Labor Unions (NAFLU)

THE VOICE OF THE WORKERS

Good afternoon to our fellow workers, labor leaders and distinguished guests who are here today at the national convention of the National Federation of Labor Union. I consider it an honor to be part of this occasion and I extend my heartfelt greetings for your celebration today of the 34th anniversary of your Federation. I join you in hoping that NAFLU will continue its long and colorful tradition of protecting the welfare of the Filipino worker.

I thank you for the opportunity you have given me to deliver a few words this afternoon. But I feel that I cannot give you good news about what is happening now in our country, especially to our worker brothers and sisters, but rather to the majority of the Filipino people. We continue to suffer now because the leaders of our government continue to ignore the rights and welfare of our poor countrymen. So perhaps, instead of congratulating you today on your anniversary, it would be more appropriate for me to express my condolences to you because, truthfully, the current situation of our workers should be lamented.

I feel that your requests for a minimum wage increase and a rollback in oil prices on Labor Day have not yet been acted upon.

It may not be given because our government is busy paying off our foreign debt. It may not be given because our government is busy negotiating with the Americans regarding the continued presence of the military base. It may not be given because our government is busy defending and protecting the interests of large foreign corporations. It may not be given because some of our high-ranking government officials are busy with corruption.

It may not be given because the government is busy consulting with the IMF, foreign banks, and oil companies on how to further squeeze the Filipino people just to replenish the OPSF funds. It may not be given because the government has no time to study the suffering of the Filipino people because they are busy studying how to protect foreigners. And because of this, I express my condolences to you and to our majority of countrymen who are now being squeezed like rags due to high prices of goods and the violence of poverty. The worker today is in mourning because they, along with the entire Filipino nation, are being buried in poverty! We are being buried in a pit of debt, high prices of goods and continued oppression.

I am filled with shame, anger and hope regarding what is happening in Philippine society today. Shame because I, as a legislator, have my hands tied and cannot help you fully. Shame, because I have nothing to share with you today but my solidarity. Anger, however, because despite recognizing you as the true heroes of society, who carry and bear the industry, production, and progress of a society, it is not reciprocated with appropriate action to improve your lives. The strength and force that gives life to development is in your arms, and because of this, we should recognize the contribution of workers to society… but you are the ones being oppressed and stifled.

But I also have hope that the day will come when we overcome; and the Filipino people will unite in defending their rights, just like the unity of workers today.

Despite the sweet words and flattery of our leaders in this government, we know that workers and the Filipino masses will truly be given recognition if we defend their interests and not the interests of foreigners. I feel compelled to tell you that even if you are given wage increases, if we continue to experience the devaluation of our currency, continue to allocate a large fund to our foreign debt, continue to maintain the current price of oil, I believe that any increase in the minimum wage will be insignificant. What we should ask for now is a change in our government's policy on paying our foreign debt, on import liberalization of non-essential goods like fruits that only help foreign farmers and not Filipino farmers, on import levies and many other aspects of the economy.

It's better for the ranks of workers, they see the solution to our crisis, but our government is always hesitant, like its hesitation in negotiating the military base. It should no longer be maintained, but now it's just negotiation after negotiation while the Americans are fooling our heads. They are talking about compensation for the use of the bases that our government proposes should be worth $825 million. Our freedom seems like a marketplace, being offered, paid for, negotiated. And that is why I oppose the continued presence of the American military base here – freedom and the dignity of a nation can never be paid for. And my question is, if an agreement on compensation is reached, who will benefit from it? Will you, the workers and the majority of the Filipino masses, benefit, or will this money just end up in the pockets of high-ranking government officials? Will your livelihood improve? Is our livelihood improving now that the American military base is paying us millions of dollars every year? So, what I'm saying is, let's end that talk, kick out those bases, and let's talk about the poverty of our people.

This is the sad picture of the Philippines and its government. If the proposal is guided by the welfare of the poor and ordinary citizens, it undergoes a long and lengthy discussion. But if the proposal is like a letter of intent that represents the interests of foreigners, it is approved quickly. In a flash, before we can utter a word, it is already passed.

My heartfelt solidarity with our workers in their struggle to improve the welfare and rights of Filipino workers. We should honor them for their diligence, their resilience in the face of oppression and coercion, despite the unjust wages they receive, despite the continued burden of the needs of industry.

Fellow workers, I do not want to continue to deliver bad news at our gathering today on your anniversary and convention. I just want to convey to you the challenges and threats of the future that should be opposed and countered by the force of workers and other sectors of society who continue to feel hardship. We are facing a struggle to fight for our right to live prosperously. Our future and that of our children depend on this. I believe that if we unite, we can convey the voice of the poor to our government; this is the voice of people who do not know where to get their food tomorrow; this is the voice of people who continue to struggle in the battle for life. And if we unite, our government may listen to oppose the impositions of foreigners like the IMF in running our economy and our society. Let us unite and help each other because no one will help Filipinos but fellow Filipinos.

Thank you very much and long live the workers! Long live the toiling masses!

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Senate of the Philippines. (1991). Speeches of the senators : a collection of speeches by the Senators of the Philippines . Manila : Senate.