MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 35

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 17 (S. 2017) CREATING THE
ORDER OF LAPU-LAPU

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 17 (s. 2017) created the Order of
Lapu-Lapu, which shall be awarded to officials and personnel of the government, as
well as to private individuals, in recognition of their invaluable service in relation to a
campaign or advocacy of the President;

WHEREAS, the recent crisis in Marawi City, Lanao del Sur brought forth
valiant and benevolent acts of civilians and members of the military to ensure the
safety and security of Filipino citizens in Mindanao;

WHEREAS, among these acts of valor and kindness are some that may be
described as extraordinary acts of service and exceptional contributions to the
country, the proper recognition of which calls for the revision and expansion of the
medals in the Order of Lapu-Lapu to more truly reflect the honor being bestowed on
its recipients;

WHEREAS, there is a need to amend EO No. 17 to ensure that the Order of
Lapu-Lapu is conferred upon all who are deserving of merit and recognition and to
more fully express the President's appreciation of the Filipino people’s contributions
to the success of the campaigns and programs of the Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and
existing laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 2 of EO No. 17 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 2. Medals. The Order of Lapu-Lapu shall comprise
four (4) medals, which shall be ranked in the following order of
precedence:

Magalong Medal — Awarded to officials and personnel of the
government and private individuals who have rendered extraordinary
service or have made exceptional contributions to the success of an
activity pursuant to a campaign or advocacy of the President:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Kalasag Medal — Awarded to officials and personnel of the
government and private individuals who lost their lives as a direct
result of their participation in an activity pursuant to a campaign or
advocacy of the President:

Kampilan Medal — Awarded to officials and personnel of the
government and private individuals who were seriously wounded or
injured or suffered great loss of property as a direct result of their
participation in an activity pursuant to a campaign or advocacy of the
President; and

Kamagi Medal — Awarded to officials and personnel of the
government and private individuals who, not falling under any of the
abovementioned Order of Lapu-Lapu Medals, actively participated in
and contributed significantly to an activity pursuant to a campaign or
advocacy of the President.

In all cases, the nominees shall be recommended by the
Heads of Agencies involved in the abovementioned activities.

SECTION 2. Except for the foregoing amendment, all other provisions of EO
No. 17 shall remain unchanged.

SECTION 3. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 28thday of July in the year of Our

Lord, Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By the President:

——e Pu
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

  
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTLEIED COPY

    

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 002960