MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 05

APPROVING AND ADOPTING THE TWENTY-FIVE-YEAR LONG TERM
VISION ENTITLED AMBISYON NATIN 2040 AS GUIDE FOR
DEVELOPMENT PLANNING

WHEREAS, the 1987 Philippine Constitution mandates the independent economic
and planning agency of the government to implement continuing, integrated and coordinated
programs and policies for national development after consultations with the appropriate
public agencies, various private sectors, and local government units;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 292 (s. 1987) or the Administrative Code of 1987
requires the State to ensure that all socio-economic programs and activities of the
government shall be programmed within the context of well-formulated and consistent long,
medium, and short-term development plans and policies to promote both the growth of the
economy and the equitable distribution of the benefits of such growth to the members of
society;

WHEREAS, pursuant to EO No. 292, the National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA) shall serve as the independent planning agency of the government and
shall primarily be responsible for formulating continuing, coordinated and fully integrated
social and economic policies, plans and programs;

WHEREAS, Asia is projected to be the center of the global economy by 2050, and the
Philippines needs a bold vision and effective development planning, one that adopts a
forward-looking approach that goes beyond a single political administration, to be at par with
the region’s economic growth and development;

WHEREAS, as the Filipino should always be at the center of development planning,
knowledge of our peoples’ aspirations for themselves and the country is necessary to enable
the government to design programs, projects and activities geared towards the attainment of
development outcomes in order to fulfill such aspirations;

WHEREAS, the NEDA, through a series of nationwide public consultations composed
of focus group discussions and a survey, has concluded that the Filipinos’ vision for
themselves is:

“In 2040, we will all enjoy a stable and comfortable lifestyle, secure in the
knowledge that we have enough for our daily needs and unexpected expenses,
that we can plan and prepare for our own and our children’s future. Our family
lives together in a place of our own, and we have the freedom to go where we
desire, protected and enabled by a clean, efficient and fair government.”

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Philippines, by
virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Adoption of Ambisyon Natin 2040. Ambisyon Natin 2040 is hereby
adopted as the twenty-five-year long-term vision for the Philippines, to wit:

“By 2040, the Philippines shall be a prosperous, predominantly
middle-class society where no one is poor; our peoples shall live long and
healthy lives, be smart and innovative, and shall live in a high-trust
society.”

SECTION 2. Overall Long-term Goals. The Philippine Government hereby aims to
triple real per capita incomes and eradicate hunger and poverty by 2040, if not sooner. An
appropriate set of milestones shall be identified to guide the successive medium-term
development plans. ‘

SECTION 3. Medium-Term Philippine Development Plans. The four (4) medium-
term Philippine Development Plans, hereafter to be referred to as Philippine Development
Plans (PDPs), to be crafted and implemented until 2040 shall be anchored on the Ambisyon
Natin 2040 and overall goals. The PDPs shall ensure sustainability and consistency of
strategies, policies, programs and projects across political administrations.

SECTION 4. Consistent Government Plans. All plans of government departments,
offices and instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled corporations and
local government units, shall be consistent with Ambisyon Natin 2040.

SECTION 5. Separability. If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid
or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, thisl1lthjay of October _ jn the Year of our Lord
Two Thousand and Sixteen.

By the President:

1¢
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary

 

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 000655

CERTIFIED COPY"

Sa

BAADCERALITIC BA TREIRZA AR ATPRAE

 

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO.04 .

PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPPORT OF DRUG
ABUSE TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION CENTERS THROUGHOUT
THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, in light of the government's unrelenting campaign against illegal drugs,
the number of drug dependents who have voluntarily surrendered to the authorities continues
to grow;

WHEREAS, the State values the dignity of every human person and guarantees full
respect for human rights;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to provide effective mechanisms or measures
to re-integrate into society individuals, who have fallen victim to drug abuse or dangerous drug
dependence, through sustainable programs of treatment and rehabilitation;

WHEREAS, in light of such policy, Republic Act (RA) No. 9165, as amended,
otherwise known as the “Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002,” mandates the national government,
through its appropriate agencies, to establish at least one drug rehabilitation center in each
province, depending on the availability of funds;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9165 also mandates local government units (LGU) to appropriate
a substantial portion of their annual budgets to assist in or enhance the enforcement of such
law, giving priority to preventive or educational programs and the rehabilitation or treatment
of drug dependents;

WHEREAS, RA No. 7160, as amended, otherwise known as the “Local Government
Code of 1991,” mandates the Sangguniang Bayan, Sangguniang Panglungsod and the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan to approve ordinances providing for the care of drug dependents
and, subject to availability of funds, establish and provide for the operation of centers and
facilities for said persons;

WHEREAS, there are only sixteen (16) Department of Health (DOH) accredited
government drug rehabilitation centers operating in the country, and the increasing number
of patients is straining the capacity of such facilities and their personnel beyond their limits;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Philippine Constitution vests in the
President power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Philippines, by
virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force for the Establishment and
Support of Drug Abuse Treatment and Rehabilitation Centers (DATRCs) Throughout
the Country. An inter-agency task force (Task Force) is hereby created for the
establishment and support of DATRCs throughout the country. The Task Force shall be
composed of the following members, or their duly appointed representatives:

Chairperson: Secretary of the Department of the Interior and Local

Government

Vice-Chairpersons: Secretary of the DOH

Chairman of the Dangerous Drugs Board

Members: Secretary of the Department of Social Welfare and

Development

Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM)

Director General of the Philippine Drug Enforcement
Agency

Representative of the Office of the President

SECTION 2. Authority and Functions of the Task Force. Subject to existing laws,
rules and regulations, the Task Force shall have the following powers and functions:

a)

oa
~S

c)

f)

Determine the type, capacity and suitable locations of the DATRCs, taking into
consideration the need of the localities and the accessibility and manageability of
facilities, with the long-term goal of having at least one DATRC in every province.
Such determination shall also take into consideration the presence of duly
accredited private DATRCs and the availability of community-based rehabilitation
programs (CBRPs) in the concerned localities;

Establish the needed DATRCs and provide support for their operations, with
authority to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of
the government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs),
for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require;

In accordance with the pertinent provisions of RA No. 9165, as amended, and RA
No. 7160, as amended, enjoin the cooperation of LGUs in the establishment and
support of the DATRCs and in the implementation of CBRPs;

Submit a report with recommendations to the Office of the President, within thirty
(30) days from effectivity of this Executive Order and every six months thereafter, on
the implementation of the provisions herein;

Issue relevant guidelines for the effective implementation of this Executive Order;
and

Perform such other functions provided in this Executive Order and as may be
authorized or directed by the President.

SECTION 3. Establishment of DATRCs in Military Reservations. To begin
addressing the congestion in existing DATRCs, the Task Force shall establish DATRCs in
military reservations available for the purpose. The Secretary of the Department of National
Defense and the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall sit as additional


members of the Task Force whenever the same will take up any matter involving DATRCs
within military reservations.

SECTION 4. Memoranda of Agreement (MOA). Whenever necessary to facilitate the
establishment of DATRCs including those in military reservations, the Task Force shall
oversee the execution of appropriate MOAs between or among concerned agencies. These
MOAs shall delineate the respective duties and obligations of such agencies in accordance
with pertinent laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 5. Operation of DATRCs. The DOH shall operate, maintain and manage the
DATRCs to be established pursuant to this Executive Order, including those in military
reservations. In the performance of such functions, the DOH shall coordinate with other
concerned agencies and encourage the participation of the private sector, non-government
organizations and faith communities. The Task Force shall provide full support to DOH for the
effective performance of such mandate.

SECTION 6. Support of Government Agencies. All departments, agencies and
instrumentalities of the government, including GOCCs, are encouraged to provide the support
and assistance required in the implementation of this Order.

SECTION 7. Funding. The initial amount necessary for the implementation of this
Executive Order shall be sourced from the appropriations of the members of the Task Force
and other applicable funding sources, subject to pertinent laws, rules and regulations. For the
succeeding fiscal years, the budgetary requirement for the implementation of this Executive
Order shall be incorporated in the budget proposals of the concerned agencies.

Each department and agency represented in the Task Force may receive donations
and other forms of assistance in accordance with applicable laws and issuances, for
purposes relevant to the implementation of this Executive Order, provided that the utilization
thereof shall be coordinated through the Task Force.

SECTION 8. Separability. If any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid
or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting

SECTION 9. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, issuances or any part thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in
a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 11th day of October _ jn the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Sixteen.

By the President: . : é
ZA — * q

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary “4

  

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 000662 Se

CERTIFIED COPY: