IMPOSING AN ENHANCED COMMUNITY QUARANTINE IN HIGH-
RISK GEOGRAPHIC AREAS OF THE PHILIPPINES AND A GENERAL
COMMUNITY QUARANTINE IN THE REST OF THE COUNTRY FROM
01 TO 15 MAY 2020, ADOPTING THE OMNIBUS GUIDELINES ON
THE IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Article II, Section 15 of the Constitution declared it a policy of the
State to protect and promote the right to health of the people;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 929 (s. 2020) declared a State of Calamity
throughout the country and imposed an Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) in
the entire Luzon due to the COVID-19 pandemic;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 11469 or the “Bayanihan to Heal as One Act,”
granted the President temporary authority to carry out tasks necessary to implement
measures to mitigate, if not contain the transmission of COVID-19, and undertake
means to prevent the overburdening of the healthcare system, among others;

WHEREAS, the Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging
Infectious Diseases (IATF) adopted a science-based approach and data analytics in
assessing the risk classification of cities, provinces and regions in the country;

WHEREAS, the parameters for risk classification include trends on the
COVID-19 epidemiological curve, health systems capacity of local government units
(LGUs), as well as economic, social and security considerations, which are reviewed
and updated on a daily basis, consistent with the adoption of a whole-of-government
and whole-of-society approach to managing the COVID-19 outbreak;

WHEREAS, the IATF, based on its risk assessment, recommended the
extension of the ECQ in high-risk geographic areas in Luzon and the imposition of
the ECQ in some high-risk areas in Visayas and Mindanao, while proposing a
General Community Quarantine (GCQ) in all low-risk and moderate-risk areas in the
country, from 01 May 2020 to 15 May 2020;

WHEREAS, the IATF, through Resolution No. 30 (s. 2020) dated 29 April
2020, approved and recommended the adoption of the Omnibus Guidelines for the
Implementation of Community Quarantine in the Philippines, which shall apply to all
regions, provinces, cities, or areas placed under ECQ or GCQ;

WHEREAS, Section 4(g) of RA No. 11469 authorizes the President to ensure
that all LGUs are acting within the letter and spirit of all the rules, regulations and

directives issued by the National Government relative to the COVID-19 situation; are
implementing standards of a community quarantine consistent with what the National
Government has laid down for their respective areas; and are fully cooperating
towards a unified, cohesive and orderly implementation of the national policy to
address the crisis;

WHEREAS, these challenging times call for the full and sincere cooperation of
all LGUs, in the true spirit of nationalism and bayanihan, as unilateral decisions to
close off territorial boundaries and restrict the movement of workers and cargoes
compromise the collective interests of all Filipinos and the country as a whole; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to build on the existing response measures of the
government relative to the COVID-19 outbreak, maximize the gains we have
achieved thus far, and complement efforts to strengthen the health systems capacity
of hospitals, medical facilities and LGUs;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Imposition of ECQ and GCQ. An ECQ shall be in effect in the
entirety of the following geographic areas, including all provinces, highly-urbanized
cities (HUCs), independent component cities (ICCs), component cities (CCs), and
municipalities situated therein, from 12:01 a.m. of 01 May 2020 to 11:59 p.m. of 15
May 2020:

National Capital Region;

Region III (Central Luzon), except Aurora Province;
Region IV-A (CALABARZON);

Benguet Province;

Pangasinan Province;

lloilo Province;

Cebu Province;

Bacolod City; and

Davao City.

“seroaooo

For the same period, a GCQ is hereby imposed in all other areas of Luzon,
Visayas and Mindanao, provided that, as a precondition, minimum health standards
are achieved and continuously observed in these areas.

Any existing community quarantine imposed by an LGU, regardless of
nomenclature, shall cease to take effect on 12:01 a.m. of 01 May 2020, and shall be
superseded by the ECQ or GCQ herein set forth.

The IATF may lift the GCQ in low-risk areas after 15 May 2020, provided that
no deterioration in their risk level occurs.

SECTION 2. Authority of LGUs to Impose, Lift or Extend a Community
Quarantine. Beginning 16 May 2020, all decisions to impose, lift or extend a
community quarantine in provinces, HUCs and ICCs shall rest with the IATF.

This notwithstanding, upon effectivity of this Order, provincial governors shall
be authorized to impose, lift or extend ECQ in CCs and municipalities upon the
concurrence of the relevant regional counterpart body of the IATF. The mayors of
cities and municipalities are likewise authorized to impose, lift or extend ECQ in
barangays, upon the concurrence of the relevant regional counterpart body of the
IATF. This is without prejudice to the authority of the IATF to directly impose, lift or
extend ECQ in these areas should circumstances call for it.

No LGU shall declare its own community quarantine, regardless of
nomenclature, without observing the foregoing procedure.

SECTION 3. Guidelines on the Implementation of an ECQ and GCQ. The
Omnibus Guidelines on the Implementation of Community Quarantine in the
Philippines, as approved and recommended under IATF Resolution No. 30 is hereby
confirmed and adopted. Any amendment or modification of such Omnibus Guidelines
may be approved by the IATF without need of further approval of the President.

SECTION 4. Assistance and Cooperation of Agencies and LGUs. All
departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including state
colleges and universities, government-owned or -controlled corporations, government
financial institutions, and LGUs are directed to render full assistance to and
cooperation with each other and mobilize the necessary resources for the
implementation of the ECQ and GCQ pursuant to this Order.

SECTION 5. Separability. If any part of this Order is held unconstitutional or
invalid, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All orders, rules, regulations and issuances or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 30° day of April in the year of Our Lord, Two
Thousand and Twenty.

A

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary ( .

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIEJED COPY

ATTY. CONCEPCION ZENY E, FERROLINO-ENAD
Y Ga %% DIRECTOR IV
3 Me wn rancor eI mente ee

LI

cari u

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 014522

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES

RESOLUTION NO. 30
Series of 2020
April 29, 2020

RECOMMENDATIONS RELATIVE TO THE MANAGEMENT
OF THE CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019 (COVID-19) SITUATION

WHEREAS, on April 20, 2020, the [ATF adopted the policy of utilizing rapid test kits
to test and manage all incoming repatriated Overseas Filipino Workers;

WHEREAS, on April 22, 2020, the IATF instructed the Sub-Task Group for the
Repatriation of Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) to issue omnibus protocols governing the
aand surveillance of repatriated land-based and sea-based OFWs upon arrival and after the
completion of the mandated quarantine period;

WHEREAS, on April 27, 2020, the IATF directed the National Task Force (NTF)
COVID-19 to explore the utilization of Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction
(RT-PCR) tests for OF W returning from high-risk jurisdictions.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, as it is hereby resolved, that the IATF approves
the following:

A. The IATF formally recommends for the approval and confirmation of the President the
Omnibus Guidelines for the Implementation of Community Quarantine in the
Philippines, which shall apply to all regions, provinces, cities, or areas placed under
General or Enhanced Community Quarantine, and without prejudice to amendment,
revision, or modification.

B. The following geographic areas, including all provinces, highly-urbanized cities (HUCs),
independent component cities (ICCs), component cities (CCs), and municipalities
situated therein, shall be placed under Enhanced Community Quarantine from the period
of May 1, 12:01 AM, up to May 15, 11:59 PM;

1. The National Capital Region;
2. Region III (Central Luzon), except Aurora;
3. Region IV-A (CALABARZON);

is

Pangasinan;
5. Benguet,
6. Tloilo,
7. Cebu,
8. The City of Bacolod; and
9. The City of Davao.

cr X RESOLUTION NO. 30
(dale - Series of 2020
a

April 29, 2020

A special batch of around two hundred (200) Overseas Filipinos (OFs) from Milan, Italy
shall be subjected to RT-PCR test upon arrival. Those who test negative shall be
exempted from the requirement of facility-based quarantine, and shall be allowed to
proceed to their respective destinations and undergo a mandatory fourteen-day home
quarantine;

The NTF COVID-19 Chief Implementer is hereby authorized to exercise discretion in
uulizing RT-PCR or rapid antibody test kits to facilitate the speedy management or
processing of more or less sixteen thousand (16,000) OFWs who are currently in
quarantine facilities, and arriving foreign nationals;

All arriving non-OF Ws shall be managed in accordance with the updated algorithm for
the triage and management of repatriated OFWs from high-risk or other jurisdictions
issued by the Department of Health and the Bureau of Quarantine;

Paragraph (B) of the Inter-Agency Task Force Resolution No. 29, s. 2020 is hereby
amended as follows:

Beginning 16 May 2020, all decisions to impose, lift, or extend a
community quarantine in provinces, highly-urbanized cities (HUCs) and
independent component cities (ICCs) shall rest with the IATF.

This notwithstanding, provincial governors shall be authorized to impose,
lift, or extend ECQ in component cities (CCs) and municipalities upon the
concurrence of the relevant regional counterpart body of the IATF. Local
Chief Executives of cities and municipalities are authorized to impose, lifi,
or extend, ECQ in barangays, upon the concurrence of the relevant
regional counterpart body of the IATF. This is without prejudice to the
authority of the IATF to directly impose, lift, or extend ECQ in these areas
should circumstances call for it.

No LGU shall declare its own community quarantine, regardless of
nomenclature, without observing the foregoing procedure.

RESOLUTION NO. 30
Series of 2020
April 29, 2020

APPROVED during the 30th Inter-Agency Task Force Meeting, as reflected in the
minutes of the meeting, held this 29th of April, 2020 via video conference.

KARLO/ALEXEI B. NOGRALES
Cabinet Secretary, Office of the Cabinet Secretary
IATF Chairperson [ATF Co-Chairperson

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES

RESOLUTION NO. 30-A
Series of 2020
May 1, 2020

WHEREAS, Article II, Section 15 of the 1987 Constitution provides that the State shall
protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness among
them;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. (E.O.) 168, s. 2014 created the the Inter-Agency Task
Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF) to facilitate inter-sectoral
collaboration to establish preparedness and ensure efficient government response to assess,
monitor, contain, control, and prevent the spread of any potential epidemic in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, Section 2(c) of E.O. 168 mandates the [ATF to prevent and/or minimize the
local spread of emerging infectious diseases in the country through the establishment or
reinforcement of a system in screening possible patients infected with emerging infectious
diseases, contact tracing, identification of the mode of exposure to the virus, and implementation
of effective quarantine and proper isolation procedures;

WHEREAS, on 28 January 2020, the IATF convened, and thereafter issued regular
recommendations for the management of the 2019 Novel CoronaVirus Acute Respiratory
Disease which is now known as CoronaVirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19);

WHEREAS, the March 18, 2020 Memorandum from the Office of the Executive
Secretary directed all heads of departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of government,
including the Philippine National Police (PNP), Armed Force of the Philippines (AFP), and the
Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs),
Government Financial Institutions (GFIs), State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), and Local
Government Units (LGUs) to adopt, coordinate, and implement guidelines which the [ATF may
issue on the COVID-19 situation, consistent with the respective agency mandates and relevant
laws, rules, and regulations.

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises set forth herein, the [ATF issues
these clarifications and/or amendments to the Omnibus Guidelines to harmonize and codify
existing policies of the IATF and member-agencies pertaining to community quarantine, which
shall be applied to all regions, provinces, cities, municipalities and barangays placed under
community quarantine.

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES

RESOLUTION NO. 30-A
Series of 2020
May 1, 2020

A. Under Section 2 par. 7

Mass gatherings such as but not limited to, movie screenings,
concerts, sporting events, and other entertainment activities,

community assemblies, religious gatherings, and non-essential

work gatherings shall be prohibited.

B. Under Section [3]:

capacity. Alternative work arrangements such as flexible work
arrangements, compressed _ work week, telework, and

0, the is s. only > rag

C. Under Section 3 par. 6

a. Category HI Industries - Financial services, BPOs, legal and
accounting services, professional, scientific, technical, and other
non-leisure services, barber shops, salon, and oth rsonal care
services as defined by the DTI, and other non-leisure wholesale
and retail establishments, at a maximum of fifty percent (50%)
work-on-site arrangement, and without — prejudice to

work-from-home and other alternative work arrangements.

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES

RESOLUTION NO. 30-A
Series of 2020
May 1, 2020

D. The Omnibus Guidelines are hereby renumbered accordingly.

APPROVED during the 31st Inter-Agency Task Force Meeting held this 1st of May, 2020 via video conference.

T. DUQUE TH KARLO/ALEXEI B. NOGRALES
Segfetary, Department of Health Cabinet Secretary, Office of the Cabinet Secretary
IATF Chairperson IATF Co-Chairperson

K. ‘\ REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
. ay INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE
%, tM Z=" FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES

bie cutoes™

OMNIBUS GUIDELINES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
COMMUNITY QUARANTINE IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Article II, Section 15 of the 1987 Constitution provides that the State shall
protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness among
them;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. (E.O.) 168, s. 2014 created the the Inter-Agency Task
Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (ATF) to facilitate inter-sectoral
collaboration to establish preparedness and ensure efficient government response to assess,
monitor, contain, control, and prevent the spread of any potential epidemic in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, Section 2(c) of E.O. 168 mandates the [ATF to prevent and/or minimize the
local spread of emerging infectious diseases in the country through the establishment or
reinforcement of a system in screening possible patients infected with emerging infectious
diseases, contact tracing, identification of the mode of exposure to the virus, and implementation
of effective quarantine and proper isolation procedures;

WHEREAS, on 28 January 2020, the [ATF convened, and thereafter issued regular
recommendations for the management of the 2019 Novel CoronaVirus Acute Respiratory
Disease which is now known as CoronaVirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19);

WHEREAS, the March 18, 2020 Memorandum from the Office of the Executive
Secretary directed all heads of departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of government,
including the Philippine National Police (PNP), Armed Force of the Philippines (AFP), and the
Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs),
Government Financial Institutions (GFIs), State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), and Local
Government Units (LGUs) to adopt, coordinate, and implement guidelines which the [ATF may
issue on the COVID-19 situation, consistent with the respective agency mandates and relevant
laws, rules, and regulations.

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises set forth herein, the [ATF issues
these Omnibus Guidelines to harmonize and codify existing policies of the [ATF and
member-agencies pertaining to community quarantine, which shall be applied to all regions,
provinces, cities, municipalities and barangays placed under community quarantine.

SECTION [1] DEFINITION OF TERMS. For purposes of these Guidelines, the following
shall be defined as follows:

1. Community Quarantine - refers to the restriction of movement within, into, or out of
the area of quarantine of individuals, large groups of people, or communities, designed to
reduce the likelihood of transmission of CO'VID-19 among persons in and to persons
outside the affected area.

2. COVID-19 - refers to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 which is caused by the virus known
as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).

3. Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) - refers to the implementation of temporary
measures imposing stringent limitations on movement and transportation of people, strict
regulation of operating industries, provision of food and essential services, and
heightened presence of uniformed personnel to enforce community quarantine protocols.

4, Essential goods and services - covers health and social services to secure the safety and
well being of persons, such as but not limited to, food, water, medicine, medical devices,
public utilities, energy and others as may be determined by the IATF.

5, General Community Quarantine (GCQ) - refers to the implementation of temporary
measures limiting movement and transportation, regulation of operating industries, and
presence of uniformed personnel to enforce community quarantine protocols.

6, Health and emergency frontline services - services provided by public health workers
{all employees of the Department of Health (DOH), DOH Hospitals, Hospitals of LGUs,
and Provincial, City, and Rural Health Units, and Drug Abuse Treatment and
Rehabilitation Centers including those managed by other government agencies (e.g.
police and military hospitals/clinics, university medical facilities), uniformed medical
personnel], private health workers, such as but not limited to medical professionals,
hospital and health facility administrative and maintenance staff, and aides from private
health facilities, as well as their service providers, health workers and volunteers of the
Philippine Red Cross and the World Health Organization, and employees of Health
Maintenance Organizations (HMOs), the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation
(PHIC), health insurance providers, disaster risk reduction management officers, and
public safely officers.

7. Minimum public health standards - guidelines set by the DOH, as well as
sector-relevant guidelines issued by government agencies, to aid all sectors in all settings

to implement non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPI), which refer to public health
measures that do not involve vaccines, medications or other pharmaceutical interventions,
which individuals and communities can catry out in order to reduce transmission rates,
contact rates, and the duration of infectiousness of individuals in the population to
mitigate COVID-19.

Skeleton workforce - refers to the operational capacity which utilizes the smallest
number of people needed for a business or organization to maintain its basic function.

SECTION [2] GUIDELINES FOR AREAS UNDER ECQ. Areas placed under ECQ shall
observe the following protocols:

1,

Minimum public health standards shall be complied with at all times for the duration of
the ECQ.

Strict home quarantine shall be observed in all households, and the movement of all
residents shall be limited to accessing essential goods and services, and for work in
permitted offices or establishments listed hereunder.

Any person below twenty-one (21) years old, those who are sixty (60) years old and
above, those with immunodeficiency, comorbidities, or other health risks, and pregnant
women, including any person who resides with the aforementioned, shall be required to
remain in their residences at all times, except when indispensable under the
circumstances for obtaining essential goods and services or for work in permitted
industries and offices.

The following are allowed to work or operate with a skeleton workforce unless a different
operational capacity is provided:

a. All agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including GOCCs, as well
as LGUs, especially health and emergency frontline, border control, and other
critical services, as well as government vehicles;

b. Officials and employees of foreign diplomatic missions and international
organizations accredited. by the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), whenever
performing diplomatic functions and subject to the guidelines issued by the DFA;

c. Industries involved in agriculture, forestry, and fishery and their workers,
including farmers, Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries (ARBs), fisherfolk, and

agri-fishery stores, and such other components of the food value chain, at full
operational capacity;

Private establishments and their employees involved in the provision of essential
goods and services, and activities in the value chain related to food and medicine
production, such as but not limited to, public markets, supermarkets, grocery
stores, convenience stores, laundry shops, food preparation establishments insofar
as take-out and delivery services, water-refilling stations, hospitals, medical,
denial, and optometry clinics, pharmacies, and drug stores. Provided, that for
dental procedures, the wearing of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) by
dentists and attendants shall be mandatory, with strict observance to infection
prevention and control protocols;

Manufacturing and processing plants of basic food products, medicine and
vitamins, medical supplies, devices and equipment, and essential products such as
but not limited to soap and detergents, diapers, feminine hygiene products, toilet
papers and wet wipes, and disinfectants. Provided, that establishments involved in
the production, manufacturing, packaging, processing, and distribution of food
may operate at a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of their respective workforces,
unless the supply level of a basic food product warrants a higher capacity, In
which case, the Department of Trade and Indusiry (DTI) is hereby authorized to
approve the temporary increase of workforce capacity. Provided, further, that
manufacturers of medicines, medical supplies, devices and equipment, including
but not limited to suppliers of input, packaging, and distribution, shall be allowed
to operate at full capacity;

Delivery services, whether in-house or outsourced, transporting food, medicine,
or other essential goods. Delivery of clothing, accessories, hardware, housewares,
school and office supplies, as well as pet food and other veterinary products, shall
likewise be allowed;

Banks, money transfer services, microfinance institutions, excluding pawnshops
not performing money transfer, and credit cooperatives, including their armored
vehicle services, if any;

Capital markets, including but not limited to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas,
Securities and Exchange Commission, Philipppine Stock Exchange, Philippine
Dealing and Exchange Corporation, Philippine Securities Settlement Corporation,
and Philippine Depository and Trust Corporation;

Power, energy, water, information technology and telecommunications supplies
and facilities, including waste disposal services, as well as property management
and building utility services;

Energy companies, their third-party contractors and service providers, including
employees involved in electric transmission and distribution, electric power plant

m

and line maintenance, electricity market and retail suppliers, as well as those
involved in the exploration, operations, trading and delivery of coal, oil, crude or
petroleum and by-products (gasoline, diesel, liquefied petroleum gas, jet oil,
kerosene, lubricants), including refineries and depots or any kind of fuel used to
produce electricity;

Telecommunications companies, internet service providers, cable television
providers, including those who perform indirect services such as the technical,
sales, and other support personnel, as well as the employees of their third-party
contractors doing sales, installation, maintenance and repair works;

Business process outsourcing establishments (BPOs) and export-oriented business
with work-from-home, on-site or near site accommodation, or point-to-point
shuttling arrangements. For this purpose, BPOs and their service providers and
export-oriented businesses shall be allowed to install and transport the necessary
work-from-home equipment, to enhance their operations by deploying their
workers under on-site or near-site accommodation arrangements, or provide
point-to-point shuttle services from their near-site accommodations to their
offices.

Airline and aircraft maintenance employees, including pilots and crew, and ship
captains and crew;

Media establishments, at a maximum operational capacity of fifty percent (50%)
of their total permanent staff complement as registered under the Department of
Labor and Employment (DOLE), inclusive of reporters and other field employees,
as accredited by the Presidential Communications Operations Office;
Construction workers accredited by the Department of Public Works and
Highways to work on facilities identified for purposes of quarantine and isolation,
including such facilities for the health sector, emergency works, flood control,
and other disaster risk reduction and rehabilitation works;

Manufacturing companies and suppliers of equipment or products necessary to
perform construction works;

Workers accredited by the Department of Transportation (DOTr) to work on
utility relocation works, and specified limited works across thirteen (13) railway
projects, including replacement works for the Manila Metro Rail Transit System
Line 3. Provided, that where applicable, on-site or near-site accommodations
and/or point-to-point shuttle services should be arranged;

Employees of the Philippine Postal Corporation at a capacity necessary to
maintain the prompt delivery of services to its clients;

The Philippine Statistics Authority, at a capacity necessary to conduct data
gathering and survey activities related to COVID-19 and the registration and
implementation of the national identification (ID) system;

Funeral and embalming services. Provided, that funeral service operators are
directed to provide shuttling services and/or housing accommodations for their
personnel and staff;

Humanitarian assistance personnel from civil society organizations (CSOs),
non-government organizations (NGOs), and United Nations-Humanitarian
Country Teams, as well as individuals performing relief operations to augment the
government’s response against COVID-19 and other disasters or calamities that
may occur. Provided, that they are authorized by the appropriate government
agency or LGU;

Pastors, priests, imams or such other religious ministers whose movement shall be
related to the conduct of necrological or funeral rites. In this connection,
immediate family members of the deceased from causes other than COVID-19
shall be allowed to move from their residences to attend the wake or interment of
the deceased upon satisfactory proof of their relationship with the latter and social
distancing measures;

. Veterinary clinics; and

Security personnel;

For purposes of the foregoing, transit by permitted persons to and from the above
establishments anywhere within the area covered by ECQ shall be allowed.

The co-equal or independent authority of the legislature (Senate and the House of
Representatives), the judiciary (the Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, Court of Tax
Appeals, Sandiganbayan, and the lower coutis), the Office of the Ombudsman, and the
constitutional commissions to operate and accredit their skeleton workforces, or
implement any other alternative work arrangements, is recognized.

No hotels or similar establishments shall be allowed to operate, except those
accommodating the following:

For areas outside Luzon, guests who have existing booking accommodations for
foreigners as of May 1, 2020;

Guests who have existing long-term bookings;

Distressed Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) and stranded Filipinos or foreign
nationals;

Repattiated OF Ws in compliance with approved quarantine protocols;

Non-Overseas Filipino Workers who may be required to undergo mandatory facility-based quarantine; and

10.

_

12.

13.

f. Health care workers and other employees from exempted establishments under
these Omnibus Guidelines and applicable Memoranda from the Executive
Secretary.

Provided that in all of the foregoing, hotel operations shall be limited to the provision of
basic lodging to guests.

Mass gatherings such as but not limited to, movie screenings, concerts, sporting events,
and other entertainment activities, community assemblies, religious gatherings, and
non-essential work gatherings shall be prohibited.

Physical classes at all levels shall be suspended for the duration of the ECQ,

Public transportation shall be suspended. This notwithstanding, commissioned shuttle
set'vices for employees of permitted offices or establishments, as well as point-to-point
transport services provided by the government for healthcare workers including frontline
and emergency personnel, shall be allowed to operate.

Agencies and their regional offices in the executive branch are hereby directed to issue
accreditation, office, or travel orders to identify their respective skeleton workforces for
critical services operating for the duration of the ECQ. Bona fide IDs issued by the
respective agencies shall be sufficient for movement within the contained areas. Skeleton
workforces may use official agency vehicles,

. Regulatory agencies with jurisdiction over permitted establishments or persons are

likewise tasked to issue official IATF accreditation IDs. Bona fide IDs issued by
establishments exempted from the strict home quarantine requirement shall likewise be
honored by law enforcement agencies.

The RapidPass system shall be complementary to the existing [ATF [Ds issued by the
member-agencies which shall continue to be honored in ali quarantine checkpoints.
Enrollment for RapidPass IDs shall be voluntary and shall only cover qualified private
sector entities or persons. The movement of cargo vehicles shall be unhampered. Cargo
vehicles as well as vehicles used by public utility companies, BPOs, and export-oriented
establishments shall not be subject to an ID system.

Government offices and private corporations are encouraged to process payrolls online.
However, for those who cannot, payroll managers, and such other employees that may be

required to process payrolls and print payrolls shall be allowed to travel and operate
covering the periods of ECQ.

14, Other exemptions from the home quarantine requirement through previous [ATF
resolutions or issuances by the Office of the President shall be honored.

SECTION [3] GUIDELINES FOR AREAS UNDER GENERAL COMMUNITY
QUARANTINE. Areas placed under GCQ shall observe the following protocols:

1, Minimum public health standards shall be complied with at all times for the duration of
the GCQ.

2. The movement of all persons in areas placed under GCQ shall be limited to accessing
essential goods and services, and for work in the offices or industries permitted to operate
hereunder. Provided, that movement for leisure purposes shall not be allowed.

3, Any person below twenty-one (21) years old, those who are sixty (60) years old and
above, those with immunodeficiency, comorbidities, or other health risks, and pregnant
women, including any person who resides with the aforementioned, shall be required to
remain in their vesidences at all times, except when indispensable under the
circumstances for obtaining essential goods and services or for work in permitted
industries and offices. -

4, Work in government offices may be at full operational capacity, or under such alternative
work arrangements as agencies may deem proper in accordance with the relevant rules
and regulations issued by the Civil Service Commission (CSC).

5. Accredited diplomatic missions and international organizations may be at fifly percent
(50%) operational capacity. Alternative work arrangements such as flexible work
arrangements, compressed work week, telework, and telecommuting is strongly
encouraged.

6. The following sectors or industries shail be allowed to operate:

a. Category I Industries - Agriculture, fishery, and forestry industries, food
manufacturing and food supply chain businesses, including food retail
establishments such as supermarkets, grocery stores, and food preparation
establishments insofar as take-out and delivery services, food delivery services,

7.

10.

health-related establishments, the logistics sector, information technology and
telecommunication companies, the media, at full operational capacity;

b. Category II Industries - Mining and other manufacturing, export-oriented, and
electronic commerce companies, as well as other delivery, repair and
maintenance, and housing and office services, at anywhere between fifty percent
(50%) up to full operational capacity, and without prejudice to work-from-home
and other alternative work arrangements; and

c. Category III Industries - Financial services, BPOs, legal and accounting, and
auditing services, professional, scientific, technical, and other non-leisure
services, barber shops, salon, and other personal care services as defined by the
DTI, and other non-leisure wholesale and retail establishments, at a maximum of
fifly percent (50%) work-on-site arrangement, and without prejudice to
work-from-home and other alternative work arrangements.

Specific industries under each category are reflected in a separate document
issued by the DTT.

Limited operations in malls and shopping centers shall be allowed, except for leisure
establishments and services which shall continue to be closed. Provided, that
establishments and services allowed to operate in malls and shopping centers may only
operate at a capacity consistent with item (5) of this Section. Provided, further, those
ages below 21 years old, and those 60 years old and above may not enter malls and
shopping centers, except when indispensable under the circumstances for obtaining
essential goods and services or for work in establishments located therein. Provided,
finally, that DTI may issue guidelines to limit foot traffic in such establishments,

Essential public and private construction projects, such as but not limited to sewerage,
water services facilities, and digital works, and health facilities, and priority projects,
shall be allowed to operate in accordance with guidelines issued by the DPWH, reflected
in a separate issuance.

Amusement, gaming, and fitness establishments, as well as those in the kids and the
tourism industries, and all Category IV industries may not operate, Industries in
Category IV are reflected in the separate DT] issuance mentioned above.

No hotels or similar establishments shall be allowed to operate, except those
accommodating the following:

_
a

12.

13.

1.

a. For areas outside Luzon, guests who have existing booking accommodations for
foreigners as of May 1, 2020;

b. Guests who have existing long-term bookings;

c. Distressed Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) and stranded Filipinos or foreign
nationals;

d. Repatriated OF Ws in compliance with approved quarantine protocols;
Non-OF Ws who may be required to undergo mandatory facility-based quarantine;
and

f, Healthcare workers and other employees from exempted establishments under
these Omnibus Guidelines and applicable Memoranda from the Executive
Secretary.

Provided that in all of the foregoing, hotel operations shall be limited to the provision of
basic lodging to guests.

. Physical classes shall be suspended for the duration of the GCQ.

This notwithstanding, Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) may hold classes through flexible learning arrangements to finish the Academic Year 2019-2020, and may operate at a limited capacity to receive students’ requirements and prepare and issue credentials to students subject to the guidelines as may be issued by the Commission on Higher Education.

The prohibition on mass gatherings as provided in Section 2 of these Guidelines shall
also be applicable to areas placed under GCQ.

The road, rail, maritime, and aviation sectors of public transportation shall operate at a
reduced capacity in accordance with guidelines issued by the DOTr. Provided, that in all
public transports, a strict one (1) meter distance between passengers shall be observed
and appropriate engineering controls in place.

SECTION [4] GUIDELINES FOR INTERZONAL MOVEMENT, This section shall apply
to the transit of people and goods from (a) an ECQ area to a GCQ area, and vice versa, and (b)
an area not under community quarantine to a GCQ or ECQ area, and vice versa. In the case of
transit across localities in the same community quarantine setup, such transits will be treated as
movements within a single GCQ or ECQ zone.

The non-essential entry and exit of people to and from the ECQ zone shall be prohibited,
except: (1) health workers, (2) government officials and government frontline personnel,

(3) those traveling for medical or humanitarian reasons, (4) persons transiting to the
airport for travel abroad, (5) workers in permitted establishments and persons providing
essential goods and services and public utilities, (6) essential skeleton workforce, (7)
repatriated OF Ws and non-OF Ws returning to their residences, and (8) other persons
transported through the efforts of the national government upon conduct of the necessary
quarantine protocols and in concurrence with the receiving LGUs;

The movement of all types of cargoes by land, air, or sea within and across areas placed
under ECQ or GCQ shall be unhampered. Workers in the logistics sector, such as cargo,
trucking, and port operations shall likewise be allowed to transit across areas placed
under ECQ or GCQ. All LGUs are directed to strictly abide by this national policy.
Provided, that only a maximum of five (5) personnel may operate cargo and delivery
vehicles by land, with or without load.

LGUs and Jocal health units (LHUs) are hereby enjoined not to issue orders contrary to
or inconsistent with said directive, such as, but not limited to, requiring asymptomatic
drivers and crew of cargo or service delivery vehicles to undergo mandatory fourteen
(14)-day home quarantine. Provided, further, that strict social distancing measures must
be strictly observed, which may include, if necessary, the putting up of additional safe
and humane seats or space in the vehicles. Provided, finally, that the PNP retains its
authority to conduct inspection procedures in checkpoints for the purpose of ensuring that
protocols on strict home quarantine are observed.

. Land, air or sea travel by uniformed personnel and government officials and employees
for official business, with the corresponding travel authority, especially those transporting
medical supplies and laboratory specimens related to COVID-19, and other relief and
humanitarian assistance, shall be allowed.

OFWs, permanent residents of foreign jurisdictions, and stranded foreign nationals may
leave for abroad through any of the airports or seaports in areas placed under ECQ or
GCQ without any impediment. Provided that this provision shall not be interpreted to
allow outbound travel by Filipinos to countries where travel restrictions are in place.
Provided, further, that departing passengers may be accompanied by not more than one
(1) person when traveling to any international port, who shall be allowed to return to
his/her point of origin.

Repatriated OFWs or returning non-OFWs who have been issued a DOH or LGU
certificate of completion of fourteen (14)-day facility-based quarantine, or those who may
be required to undergo a mandatory fourteen (14)-day home quarantine shall be granted

unhampered transit across zones en route to their final destination in the Philippines. For
this purpose, LGUs are enjoined to allow maritime vessels or aircraft transporting the
aforementioned OF Ws and non-OF Ws to dock or land at their ports of destination.

SECTION [5] GENERAL PROVISIONS

1. LGUs are enjoined to enact the necessary ordinances to enforce curfew for non-workers
in jurisdictions placed under GCQ and to penalize, in a fair and humane manner,
violations of the restrictions on the movement of people as provided under these
Omnibus Guidelines. ‘

2. For residential and commercial rents falling due within the duration of the ECQ or GCQ
upon residential lessees and micro-, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) not
permitted to operate during said period, a grace period of thirty (30) days from the last
due date, or until such time that the community quarantine is lifted shall be observed,
whichever is longer, without incurting interests, penalties, fees, or other charges.

3. All persons are mandated to wear face masks, earloop masks, indigenous, reusable,
do-it-yourself masks, or face shields, handkerchiefs, or such other protective equipment
or any combination thereof, which can effectively lessen the transmission of COVID-19,
whenever they go out of their residences, pursuant to existing guidelines issued by the
national government. Concerned LGUs are hereby enjoined to issue the necessary
executive order or ordinance to that effect, and to provide fair and humane penalties.

4, Supermarkets, public and private wet markets, grocery stores, agri-fishery supply stores,
veterinary supply stores, pharmacies, drug stores, and other retail establishments engaged
in the business of selling essential goods are strongly encouraged to extend their store
operations to a maximum of twelve (12) hours, LGUs are directed to allow such
establishments to operate pursuant to the foregoing. Provided that in the operation of wet
markets, LGUs are encouraged to adopt reasonable schemes to ensure compliance with
strict social distancing measures, such as, but not limited to, providing for specific daily
schedules per sector, barangay, or purok, as the case may be. In no case shall such
schemes involve narrowing the hours of operation of the foregoing establishments.

5. Acts of discrimination inflicted upon healthcare workers, repatriated OFWs and
non-OF Ws, COVID-19 cases, whether confirmed, recovered or undergoing treatment, as
well as suspect and probable cases, and Persons under Monitoring are denounced in the
strongest of terms. Acts in furtherance of discrimination, such as, but not limited to,
coercion, libel, slander, physical injuries and the dishonor of contractual obligations such

as contracts of lease or employment, shall be dealt with criminally, civilly, and/or
administratively. LGUs are enjoined to issue the necessary executive orders and/or enact
ordinances prohibiting and penalizing these discriminatory acts.

SECTION [6] EFFECTIVITY. These Omnibus Guidelines shall take effect upon approval of
the President.

APPROVED during the 30th Inter-Agency Task Force Meeting held this 29th of April,
2020 via video conference.

. DUQUE I KARLO/ALEXEI B. NOGRALES
Secrefary, Department of Health Cabinet Secretary, Office of the Cabinet Secretary
IATF Chairperson IATF Co-Chairperson