MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 144

INSTITUTIONALIZING THE FINANCIAL STABILITY COORDINATION COUNCIL

WHEREAS, financial authorities have learned from the Global Financial Crisis
of 2007-2009 that financial stability is a distinct and over-arching policy objective that
sustains the health of the entire financial system;

WHEREAS, driven by their mutual interest for a well-functioning and resilient
financial system, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), Department of Finance
(DOF), Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Insurance Commission (IC) and
the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC), voluntarily convened in October
2011 to pursue financial stability;

WHEREAS, on 29 January 2014, the BSP, DOF, SEC, IC and PDIC signed a
Memorandum of Agreement to create the Financial Stability Coordination Council as
a voluntary inter-agency body which shall collaborate and cooperate to pursue, sustain
and enhance the health of the financial system under the objective of financial stability;

WHEREAS, under Republic Act (RA) No. 7653, otherwise known as “The New
Central Bank Act”, as amended by RA No. 11211, the BSP is mandated to promote
financial stability and is directed to closely work with the National Government,
including, but not limited to the DOF, SEC, IC and PDIC; and

WHEREAS, in recognition of the importance of financial stability to the overall
health of the country’s financial system, there is a need to formalize the creation of an
inter-agency body on financial stability in order to institutionalize its powers and
functions, and strengthen the ability of the Government to collectively address
systemic risks, which may arise in different segments of the financial market;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Policy of Financial Stability. Consistent with the objective. of
the National Government to safeguard the welfare of Filipinos through a well-
functioning financial system, the government hereby reiterates its policy of enhancing
the stability of the financial system by mitigating systemic risks through timely policy
interventions.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 2. Institutionalizing the Financial Stability Coordination
Council. The Financial Stability Coordination Council (FSCC) is hereby
institutionalized as an inter-agency council composed of the BSP, DOF, SEC, IC and
PDIC, as its member agencies.

SECTION 3. Purpose and Objectives. The FSCC shall enhance the stability
of the financial system by mitigating systemic risks through timely macroprudential
policy interventions. Towards this end, the FSCC shall formulate a Macroprudential
Policy Strategy Framework, which shall guide its policy interventions. The
Macroprudential Policy Strategy Framework shall be made publicly available and shall
be updated periodically, as may be warranted.

SECTION 4. Powers and Functions of the FSCC. To the extent consistent
with the respective mandates of the member agencies, the FSCC shall have the
following powers and functions:

a. Issue directives or policy regulations in the pursuit of its objective of financial
stability;

b. Align various policies, regulations, supervisory frameworks, programs and
initiatives on financial stability;

c. Coordinate with foreign regulators on financial stability and macroprudential
policy;

d. Collaborate with public and private organizations for data collection and
research to facilitate informed policy recommendations; and

e. Formulate and adopt its governance and operational guidelines, as may be
necessary.

SECTION 5. Executive Committee (ExeComm). The affairs of the FSCC
shall be governed by an ExeComm which shall be composed of:

a. The BSP Governor - Chairperson;

b. The Secretary of Finance - Member;

c. Thelnsurance Commissioner — Member;

d. The President of the PDIC - Member;

e. The SEC Chairman - Member;

f. One senior official from each of the five (5) member agencies, as formally

designated by the head of the agency, shall serve as non-voting members.

The ExeComm shail promulgate rules for the conduct of its internal procedures,
issue Resolutions relating to the implementation of its functions, and create Technical
Working Groups and/or Sub-Committees, as necessary.

The National Treasurer may be invited to the meetings of the ExeComm as a
special non-voting member.

SECTION 6. FSCC Secretariat. In performing its purpose and objectives, the
FSCC and its ExeComm shall be assisted by a Secretariat. Unless the FSCC
declares otherwise, the Office of Systemic Risk Management of the BSP shall serve
as the Technical Secretariat to the FSCC.

SECTION 7. Meetings. The FSCC Execomm shall meet periodically, without
prejudice to the discretion of the Chairperson to call meetings, as may be necessary.

SECTION 8. Funding. The funding requirements for the operation of the FSCC
shall be charged against the budget of the BSP.

SECTION 9. Repeal. All other issuances, orders, rules and regulations
inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not affected thereby shall continue to be in
full force and effect.

SECTION 11. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th dayof July , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty One.

 

By the President:

as
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 017725

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIRE COPY

ATTY. CORCEPCIORN