MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO.04 .

PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPPORT OF DRUG
ABUSE TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION CENTERS THROUGHOUT
THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, in light of the government's unrelenting campaign against illegal drugs,
the number of drug dependents who have voluntarily surrendered to the authorities continues
to grow;

WHEREAS, the State values the dignity of every human person and guarantees full
respect for human rights;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to provide effective mechanisms or measures
to re-integraie into society individuals, who have fallen victim to drug abuse or dangerous drug
dependence, through susiainable programs of treatment and rehabilitation;

WHEREAS, in light of such policy, Republic Act (RA) No. 9165, as amended,
otherwise known as the “Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002,” mandates the national government,
through its appropriate agencies, to establish at least one drug rehabilitation cenier in each
province, depending on the availability of funds;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9165 also mandates local government units (LGU) to appropriate
a substantial portion of their annual budgets to assist in or enhance the enforcement of such
law, giving priority to preventive or educational programs and the rehabilitation or treatment
of drug dependenis;

WHEREAS, RA No. 7160, as amended, otherwise known as the “Local Government
Cade of 1991,” mandates the Sangguniang Bayan, Sangguniang Panglungsod and the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan to approve ordinances providing for the care of drug dependents
and, subject io availability of funds, establish and provide for the operation of centers and
facilities for said persons;

WHEREAS, there are only sixteen (16) Department of Health (DOH) accredited
government drug rehabilitation centers operating in the couniry, and the increasing number
of patients is straining the capacity of such facilities and their personnel beyond their limits;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Philippine Constitution vests in the
President power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Philippines, by
virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force for the Establishment and
Support of Drug Abuse Treatment and Rehabilitation Centers (DATRCs) Throughout
the Country. An inter-agency task force (Task Force) is hereby created for the
establishment and support of DATRCs throughout the country. The Task Force shall be
composed of the following members, or their duly appointed representatives:

Chairperson: Secretary of the Department of the Interior and Local
Government

Vice-Chairpersons: Secretary of the DOH
Chairman of the Dangerous Drugs Board

Members: Secretary of ihe Department of Social Welfare and
Development
Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM)
Director General of the Philippine Drug Enforcement
Agency
Representative of the Office of the President

SECTION 2. Authority and Functions of the Task Force. Subject to existing laws,
rules and regulations, the Task Force shall have the following powers and functions:

a) Determine the type, capacity and suitable locations of the DATRCs, taking into
consideration the need of the localities and the accessibility and manageability of
facilities, with the long-term goal of having at least one DATRC in every province.
Such determination shall also take into consideration the presence of duly
accredited private DATRCs and the availability of community-based rehabilitation
programs (CBRPs) in the concerned localities;

b) Establish the needed DATRCs and provide support for their operations, with
authority to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of
the governmeni, including government-owned or -conirolled corporations (GOCCs),
for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require;

c) In accordance with the pertinent provisions of RA No. 9165, as amended, and RA
No. 7160, as amended, enjoin the cooperation of LGUs in the establishment and
support of the DATRCs and in the implemeniation of CBRPs;

d) Submit a report with recommendations to the Office of the President, within thirty
(30) days from effectivity of this Executive Order and every six months thereafier, on
the implementation of the provisions herein;

e) Issue relevant guidelines for the effective implementation of this Executive Order;
and

f) Perform such other functions provided in this Executive Order and as may be
authorized or directed by the President.

SECTION 3. Establishment of DATRCs in Military Reservations. To begin
addressing the congestion in existing DATRCs, the Task Force shall establish DATRCs in
military reservations available for the purpose. The Secretary of the Depariment of National
Defense and the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall sit as additional


members of the Task Force whenever the same will take up any matter involving DATRCs
within military reservations.

SECTION 4. Memoranda of Agreement (MOA). Whenever necessary to facilitate the
establishment of DATRCs including those in military reservations, the Task Force shall
oversee the execution of appropriate MOAs between or among concerned agencies. These
MOAs shall delineate the respective duties and obligations of such agencies in accordance
with pertinent laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 5. Operation of DATRCs. The DOH shall operate, maintain and manage the
DATRCs to be established pursuant to this Executive Order, including those in military
reservations. In the performance of such functions, the DOH shall coordinate with other
concerned agencies and encourage the participation of the private sector, non-government
organizations and faith communities. The Task Force shall provide full support to DOH for the
effective performance of such mandaie.

SECTION 6. Support of Government Agencies. All departments, agencies and
instrumentalities of the government, including GOCCs, are encouraged to provide the support
and assistance required in the implementation of this Order.

SECTION 7. Funding. The initial amount necessary for the implementation of this
Executive Order shall be sourced from the appropriations of the members of the Task Force
and other applicable funding sources, subject to pertinent laws, rules and regulations. For the
succeeding fiscal years, the budgetary requirement for the implementation of this Executive
Order shall be incorporated in the budget proposals of the concerned agencies.

Each department and agency represented in the Task Force may receive donations
and other forms of assistance in accordance with applicable laws and issuances, for
purposes relevant to the implementation of this Executive Order, provided that the utilization
thereof shall be coordinated through the Task Force.

SECTION 8. Separability. lf any provision of this Executive Order is declared invalid
or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 9. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, issuances or any part thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in
a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 11th day of Oeteber _ in the year of Our Lord,
Two Thousand and Sixteen.

By the President: . | é Lo

ee

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

 

 

PRRD 2026 - 000662

CERTIFIED COPY”

=
MARIANITO M. DIMAANDAL
DIRECTOR IVF},
fori? 3% - MALACANANG RECORDSMFRIC!