MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO.103

RECONSTITUTING AND STRENGTHENING THE NATIONAL
QUINCENTENNIAL COMMITTEE, AND AMENDING EXECUTIVE
ORDER NO. 55 (S. 2018) FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, Article XIV, Section 15 of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to conserve, promote and popularize the nation’s historical and cultural heritage
and resources, as well as its artistic creations;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Republic Act No. 10086 or the “Strengthening People's
Nationalism Through Philippine History Act,” the State shall provide the means to
strengthen the Filipino people's nationalism, love of country, respect for its heroes and
pride for the people’s accomplishments by reinforcing the importance of Philippine
national and local history in daily life, with the end view of raising social consciousness;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 55 (s. 2018) created the National Quincentennial
Committee (Committee) to serve as the coordinator and clearing house of all
government initiatives for the 500" anniversary of the role of the Philippines in the first
circumnavigation of the world, the victory of Lapulapu in the Battle of Mactan, and other
related events, collectively known as the 2021 Quincentennial Commemorations in the
Philippines (2021 QCP);

WHEREAS, the Committee espouses a Filipino-centric point of view of the first
circumnavigation of the world, by underscoring the magnanimity, compassion and
humanity of our ancestors in helping the impoverished crew of the expedition that
traversed the Pacific ocean, and the courage and bravery of the warriors in Mactan,
which continue to serve as inspiration to our heroes and martyrs up to this day; and

WHEREAS, the 2021 QCP aims to promote local and national tourism, reignite the
nationalism of every Filipino, inculcate values for the common good, strengthen social
cohesiveness of the community, intensify social awareness, and foster the Filipino
creativity and innovation for our socioeconomic growth;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic of

the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 1. The National Quincentennial Committee. The Committee is hereby
reconstituted as follows:

Chairperson: Executive Secretary
Vice-Chairperson Chairperson, National Historical Commission of the
and Executive Philippines (NHCP)
Director:
Members: Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs:
Secretary, Department of Tourism;
Secretary, Department of Budget and Management;
Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local
Government;
Secretary, Department of Public Works and
Highways;
Secretary, Department of Education;
Secretary, Department of National Defense;
Secretary, Presidential Communications Operations
Office;
Chairperson, National Commission — for Culture
and the Arts; and
Presidential Adviser for the Visayas

 

The Committee shall oversee the preparations for the 2021 QCP and perform the
following functions:

a.

g.

Undertake the overall study, conceptualization and implementation of relevant
programs and projects on, but not limited to, diplomatic concerns, history, culture
and the arts, academic affairs, science, environment and agriculture, socio-civic
participations, volunteer and partner mobilization, military participation, and
infrastructure;

Act as the principal coordinator for all the activities related to the 2021 QCP;

. Serve as clearing house for the preparation and dissemination of all information

on the programs, activities and projects for the 2021 QCP;

Constitute sub-committees or working groups, as may be necessary, to undertake
the implementation of programs, activities and projects;

Undertake fund raising activities, as may be necessary, to attain the objectives of
this Order, subject to applicable laws, as well as budgeting, accounting, and
auditing rules and regulations;

Call on any government agency or instrumentality, and invite private individuals
and organizations, including overseas or international entities, to assist in the
preparations and celebration of the 2021 QCP; and

Carry-out such other functions as may be directed by the President.

The Committee shall be provided with technical and administrative staff support by a
Secretariat to be constituted by the NHCP.

SECTION 2. Powers and Functions of the Vice Chairperson and Executive
Director. The Vice Chairperson and Executive Director shall have the following powers
and functions:

a. Coordinate and monitor the implementation of the projects and activities of the
Committee;

b. Represent the Committee in meetings, as may be authorized or delegated by the
Committee;

c. Supervise and ensure that the Secretariat provides administrative support to the
Committee and the working groups or subcommittees thereunder; and

d. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Committee.

SECTION 3. The 2021 Quincentennial Commemorations of the Philippines
(QCP). The 2021 QCP is a historical event that seeks to reinvigorate the sense of
nationalism of every Filipino through the commemoration of our ancestors’ heroism,
humanity and significant contribution to the first circumnavigation of the world. Towards
this end, all government initiatives related to the 2021 QCP must reflect the following
principles:

a. Filipino-centric - All activities relative to the 2021 QCP shall reflect Filipino
viewpoints and highlight our cognizance and pride for our ancestors and rich
cultural heritage through literature, languages, art and other cultural outlooks.
Further, commemorative activities must emphasize the Filipino identity and the
values of unity, magnanimity and sovereignty;

b. Multidisciplinary - Preparations for the 2021 QCP shall engage scholars from
several academic disciplines and professional specializations to facilitate the
contribution to the advancements of our historical understanding, as well as
encourage historical research and discussion; and

c. Communicative and Transformative - QCP commemorations shall endeavor to
increase knowledge of historical education among Filipinos through traditional and
new media, and further encourage promotion, restoration and conservation of
historic sites associated with the 2021 QCP.

Relative thereto, the Committee shall come up with an appropriate QCP branding or
logo that will reflect and depict the heroism of Lapulapu in the Battle of Mactan, as well
as highlight the 500" anniversary of the role of Filipinos in the first circumnavigation of
the world.

SECTION 4. Funding. The funding necessary for the implementation of this Order
shall be sourced from the funds of the NHCP and, as may be necessary, the Contingent
Fund, subject to existing budgeting, accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations.
Thereafter, subsequent funding requirements shall be included in the budget proposal of
the NHCP, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

SECTION 5. Sunset Provision. The Committee shall cease to exist after the
liquidation and turnover of all documents and properties to the NHCP, or twelve (12)
months from 31 December 2021, whichever is earlier.

SECTION 6. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order is held
unconstitutional or invalid, other parts not affected thereby shall continue to be in full
force and effect.

SECTION 7. Repeal. Except for the foregoing, all other provisions of EO No. 55
shall remain in full force and effect. All other orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof, which are contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are
hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 28thday of | January , in the year of our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty.

 

By the President:

A be
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary Qe

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 013974

 

 

Office of ti the F
_ en RECORDS OFFICE

om i
iy a a
<! é