MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 80

RATIONALIZING THE RULES FOR THE ENGAGEMENT OF
THIRD PARTY PARTICIPANTS UNDER PETROLEUM SERVICE
CONTRACTS, REPEALING FOR THE PURPOSE EXECUTIVE
ORDER NO. 556 (s. 2006)

WHEREAS, Section 2, Article XII of the Constitution declares that all
minerals, petroleum and other mineral oils, and other natural resources are owned
by the State, and that the exploration, development, and utilization of these
resources shall be under the full control and supervision of the State;

WHEREAS, Section 4, Presidential Decree No. (PD) 87, as amended,
otherwise known as the “Oil Exploration and Development Act of 1972,” allows the
Government to promote and undertake the exploration, development, and production
of the country’s indigenous petroleum resources by engaging technically competent
and financially capable contractors through service contracts,

WHEREAS, Section 11 of PD 87 allows holders of service contracts to assign
or transfer their rights thereto by way of farm-in/farm-out contracts upon the prior
approval of the Department of Energy (DOE),

WHEREAS, the exploration, development, and utilization of energy resources
such as oil and gas are capital-intensive activities, and farm-in/farm-out agreements,
by distributing the risks and financial burden among several industry players,
facilitate the undertaking of such activities;

WHEREAS, the PNOC Exploration Corporation (PNOC EC), being the
upstream oil and gas subsidiary of the Philippine National Oil Company (PNOC),
participates in a number of petroleum service contracts, either as operator or non-
operating partner; and

WHEREAS, it is the aim of the Government to achieve energy independence
for the Filipino people by, among others, enhancing the country’s competitiveness as
an oil and gas investment destination through the adoption of industry practices;

7 NOW, THEREFORE !, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Engagement of Third Parties. The PNOC EC is hereby
permitted to enter into farm-in/farm-out agreements through which: (a) third parties
can participate in the service contracts awarded by the Government to PNOC EC;
and (b) PNOC EC can participate in the service contracts awarded by the

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Government to third parties. In all cases, PNOC EC shall enter into farm-in/farm-out
agreements only with reputable, technically competent and financially capable
entities.

Earm-in/farm-out refers to a practice, recognized and accepted in the oil and
gas industry, of allowing third party participation to spread the risks inherent in oil
and gas exploration, development, and production. The entity acquiring the
participating interest considers the transaction as a “farm-in’, while the entity
transferring such interest considers the transaction as a “farm-out’.

SECTION 2. Selection, Review and Approval Procedures. The third party
selection process to be undertaken by PNOC EC shall conform to best practices
widely adopted in the international petroleum industry, as may be determined by the
DOE.

For this purpose, the DOE, in consultation with the Governance Commission
for Government-Owned or —Controlled Corporations (GCG), shall issue rules and
regulations specifying the selection process to be observed by PNOC EC. The DOE
shall take into consideration provisions of existing government selection procedures
that enhance transparency and objectivity in the selection process, including GCG
issuances requiring that contracts to be entered into by government-owned and/or -
controlled corporations (GOCCs) undergo review by the Office of the Government
Corporate Counsel. Such provisions shall be incorporated in the aforementioned
rules and regulations insofar as may be consistent with the best practices in the
industry.

Compliance with the selection process shall be closely monitored by both the
DOE and the GCG. Every farm-in/farm-out agreement of PNOC EC shall only take
effect upon approval of the DOE, which approval shall be granted after the
Department finds that all aspects of the agreement, including the qualifications of the
relevant third party and the selection process that was undertaken, all comply with
PD 87, this Order, and other applicable laws and issuances.

SECTION 3. Business Judgment. PNOC EC shall observe sound business
judgment and exercise extraordinary diligence, with paramount consideration to the
national interest, in entering into the commercial contracts and arrangements
contemplated herein.

SECTION 4. Reportorial Requirement. The DOE shall submit regular
reports to the President on the implementation of this Order, copy furnished the
GCG.

SECTION 5. Duty to Extend Assistance. The departments, bureaus, offices,
agencies or instrumentalities of the Government, including GOCCs and government
financial institutions, are hereby directed to extend such assistance and support as
may be necessary for the successful implementation of this Order.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause. Executive Order No. 556 (s. 2006) and all
other executive issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are

inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order is declared
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this2gth day of May _ in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Nineteen.

 

By the President:

a

be
SALYADOR C. MEDiIALDEA

Executive Secretary 6

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 010785

   

   

Office of the President
NANG RECORDS IP FICE