FROM =

©)

FAX NO. : 3S Jul. 2017 16:17AM

 

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 31

CREATING THE STRATEGY, ECONOMICS, AND RESULTS
GROUP IN THE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE

WHEREAS, the Government is committed to pursuing a socioeconomic
agenda that will spur inclusive growth and development, poverty alleviation,
more and better job opportunities, and better quality of life for all Filipinos,
especially the poor and the marginalized;

WHEREAS, the 0+10-Point Socioeconomic Agenda covers the priority
programs on macroeconomic policies, taxation, competitiveness, infrastructure,
rural development, land administration and management, human capital
development, science, technology, the creative arts, social protection, and
reproductive health;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EQ) No. 292 (s. 1987), otherwise known as
the “Administrative Code of 1987,” provides that the Department of Finance
(DOF) is responsible for the formulation, institutionalization and administration of
fiscal and tax policies, as well as act as custodian and manage all financial
resources of the national government;

WHEREAS, EO No, 24 (s. 2017), which reorganized the Cabinet Cluster
system, designates the Secretary of Finance as the Chairperson of the Economic
Development Cluster (EDC), wherein the EDC is primarily tasked to focus on the
promotion of rapid, inclusive and sustained economic growth;

WHEREAS, the President is granted the authority under Section 82 of
Republic Act No. 10924, or the General Appropriations Act of 2017, to create
new offices and modify the existing organization structure of the agencies in the
Executive Branch, as well as create. new positions or modify existing onés,
whenever public interest so requires; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a specialized group in the DOF to
provide strategic advice, economic policy research, and reform management and
coordination, including reform coalition building, in the area of fiscal policy to

‘support the priority reforms under the 0+10-Point Socioeconomic Agenda of the

national government;

Pt

-

i

 

FROM :

oo

FAX NO. 5 Jul. 2017

NOW, THEREFORE, !, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Strategy, Economics, and Results
Group. There is hereby created the Strategy, Economics, and Results Group
(SERG) within the DOF, which is mandated to:

a. Provide strategic advice to the Secretary of Finance, as the EDC
Chairperson, as regards fiscal policies and financial implications of the
nationa! government's priority programs;

b. Conduct fiscal economics policy research to support the identified
priority programs; and

c. Manage and coordinate transformative reforms of the DOF that will
ultimately result in better life for all Filipinos, especially the poor and
the marginalized.

SECTION 2. Control and Supervision. The SERG shall be under the
direct control and supervision of the Secretary of Finance, who shall designate
an Undersecretary and Assistant Secretary to oversee the operations of the
Group.

SECTION 3. Offices and Functions. The SERG shall be composed of
two (2) new offices, each to be headed by a Director IV and to be assisted by a
Director Il:

1. Strategy and Results Office (SRO) — The SRO shall have the following
functions:

a. Develop strategy maps and plans to convert the priority
socioeconomic agenda into executive and legislative action from a
fiscal perspective, complementing the National Economic and
Development Authority’s Philippine Development Plan;

b. Provide fiscal policy advice and inputs to the DOF officials and the
members of the EDC, including the performance of quality assurance
and review of the pronouncements and policy decisions of the
Secretary of Finance;

c. Manage an up-to-date data bank of fiscal economic insights, outlooks,
tisks and accomplishments for the Secretary of Finance's domestic
and international engagements, in collaboration with other DOF
offices;

d. Prepare detailed implementation plans for the priority fiscal reforms in
support of inclusive growth, monitor the progress of identified priority
programs and mitigate any emerging risks; and

2

1@:18AM Pe

 

 

FROM :

C)

FAX NO. : S Jul. 2017 16:18AM P3

e. Build fiscal reform coalitions with the public sector, private sector and
civil society organizations to help deliver the priority programs.

The SRO shall be organized into Project Teams, each to be headed by a
Project Manager to implement the engagement strategy to key public
influencers in the government, civil society and media in order to pursue and gain
support for any proposed fiscal reforms.

2. Fiscal Economics Research Office (FERO) - The FERO shall have the
following functions:

a. Research on and analyze priority programs to ensure that fiscal
policies and reforms translate to fiscal sustainability, inclusive growth,
job creation and poverty reduction;

b. Simulate the economic impact of strategic tax reforms and other fiscal
initiatives; ‘

c. Monitor and report economic and fiscal risks and prospects for the
country and provide just-in-time technical notes to the Secretary of
Finance;

d. Analyze the equity and economic impact of various fiscal-related
proposals of the legislature, industry associations, civil society and
other stakeholders, and assess which ones are progressive and
equitable proposals; and

e. Discuss and collaborate with development partners, investors and
rating agencies to enhance market confidence in the economy,

The FERO shall be organized into Divisions, each to be headed by a
Division Chief, which shall conduct the technical policy studies on specific reform
areas.

SECTION.4. Personnel and Staffing Complement. The SERG shail be
composed of organic personnel, subject to approval of the Department of Budget
and Management (DBM), upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Finance.
The staffing complement shall be augmented and reinforced by existing DOF
personnel as well as those detailed or seconded from other agencies, whether
attached to DOF or not. In addition, upon approval of the Secretary of Finance,
SERG may hire or engage technical consultants to provide necessary support in
the performance of its mandate,

SECTION 5. Period of Existence. The presence of SERG as a
specialized group in the DOF shall be co-terminous with the tenure of the
Secretary of Finance under the current Administration.

 

FAX NO. 5 Jul. 2617 1:18AM P4

SECTION 6. Implementing Guidelines and Procedures. The Secretary
of Finance is hereby authorized to issue guidelines and prescribe procedures to
enable SERG to effectively exercise its powers and discharge the functions
herein provided, to guide the general public and to enhance transparency and
accountability.

SECTION 7. Funding. The funds necessary to implement this Executive
Order shall be sourced from the available appropriations in the annual General
Appropriations Act, subject to pertinent budgeting and accounting laws, rules and
regulations. The Secretary of Finance may also avail of international financing,
such as grants and loans, for the delivery of the mandate of SERG.

SECTION 8. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order is
declared invalid’.or-unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby
shall remain valid-and subsisting.

SECTION 9. Repeal. All orders, issuances, proclamations, rules,
regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of
this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION: 10. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect
immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, thisa8th dayof June in the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By the President:

Tey

a
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary A

 
   

   

eee 8
cay WW ee
ese
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2026 - 002748