MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 46

REVIVING THE POST CLEARANCE AUDIT FUNCTION OF THE
BUREAU OF CUSTOMS AND _INSTITUTIONALIZING THE
FUNCTIONS OF THE FINANCIAL ANALYTICS AND INTELLIGENCE
UNIT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 160 (s. 2003) created the Post Entry
Audit Group (PEAG) of the Bureau of Customs (BOC), under the direct supervision
and control of the Commissioner of Customs, to perform the post clearance audit
functions of the BOC;

WHEREAS, EO No. 155 (s. 2013) transferred the functions of the BOC-PEAG
to the Fiscal Intelligence Unit (FIU) of the Department of Finance (DOF);

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 10863, otherwise known as the “Customs
Modernization and Tariff Act’ (CMTA), mandates the BOC to conduct audit
examination, inspection, verification and investigation of transaction records of
importers and brokers;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution provides for the
President's power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Reversion of the Post Clearance Audit Function to the Bureau
of Customs. The post clearance audit function shall be transferred from the DOF-FIU
to the BOC. For this purpose, the operations of the BOC-PEAG are hereby revived
and such group is renamed as the Post Clearance Audit Group (PCAG) under the
supervision of the Commissioner of Customs.

SECTION 2. Composition of PCAG. The PCAG shall be headed by an
Assistant Commissioner (SG 28) of the BOC, duly appointed by the President of the
Philippines, upon recommendation of the Commissioner of Customs through the
Secretary of Finance.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

The Assistant Commissioner shall exercise direct supervision and control in the
management of the following operating units of PCAG:

a. Trade Information and Risk Analysis Office (TIRAO); and
b. Compliance Assessment Office (CAO).
TIRAO and CAO shall each be headed by a Director Il (SG 26).

The Commissioner, with the approval of the Secretary, is hereby authorized to
determine the number of personnel requirements of PCAG and issue the necessary
order to reassign the required organic personnel of BOC to the Group

Subject to the principles of economy, efficiency and effectiveness, the
Commissioner is likewise authorized to further recommend necessary changes to the
personnel and staffing of the PCAG and, with the approval of the Secretary of Finance,
submit the same for evaluation of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).

SECTION 3. Functions of PCAG. The PCAG is mandated to conduct, within
three (3) years from the date of final payment of duties and taxes or customs
clearance, an audit examination, inspection, verification, and investigation of records
pertaining to any goods declaration, which shall include statements, declarations,
documents, and electronically generated or machine readable data, for the purpose of
ascertaining the correctness of the goods declaration and determining the liability of
the importer for duties, taxes, and other charges, including any fine or penalty.

The TIRAO shall perform the following functions:

a. Review available trade data to determine compliance markers of
industry (or other means of data groupings) and set benchmarks for the
purpose of developing an audit program for the Commissioner's
approval;

b. In coordination with the Management Information System and
Technology Group (MISTG), develop a computer-aided risk-based
management system, the parameters of which are to be based on
objective and quantifiable data, subject to the approval of the Secretary
of Finance upon recommendation of the Commissioner, for use in the
profiling and identification of potential priority audit candidates based on
the approved audit program;

Ci Recommend for approval of the Commissioner of Customs the potential
priority audit candidates;

d. Develop policies, guidelines, manuals and standard operating
procedures relating to the audit process; and

e. Perform such other functions as may be necessary or incidental in
carrying into effect the provisions of this Order, and as may be provided
by law.

The CAO shall perform the following functions:

a. Prepare the audit work plan, scope and approach for the approved
priority audit candidates;

b. Conduct the audit examination, inspection, verification or investigation
of records subject to applicable laws, approved policies, guidelines,
manuals and standard operating procedures;

C. Prepare and submit the required reports on audit findings and
recommendations to the Commissioner of Customs for approval;

d. Establish and maintain a customs compliance program; and

e. Perform such other functions as may be necessary or incidental in
carrying into effect the provisions of this Order, and as may be provided
by law.

SECTION 4. Renaming the DOF-FIU and defining its functions. The DOF-
FIU shall be instituted and renamed as the Financial Analytics and Intelligence (FAI)
Unit, and its functions established as follows:

a. Act as the data analytic unit of the DOF for purposes of revenue
management;
b. Require, as it may deem necessary, agencies, bureaus and offices

attached to DOF to submit all relevant trade and industry data related to
revenue generation, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations,

C. Review matters that may be deemed fiscally adverse to the government,
including those elevated by agencies, bureaus and offices attached to
DOF for the approval and conformity of the Secretary of Finance;

d. Provide recommendations to the Secretary of Finance on policies and
actions to be taken on the basis of its analysis of the available data; and

e. Perform such other functions as may be necessary or incidental in
carrying into effect the provisions of this Order, and as may be provided
by law

SECTION 5. Turn-over of Post Clearance Audits. The DOF-FAI shall, as may
be practicable, transmit to the BOC-PCAG all files and documents of any pending post
clearance audits following the effectivity of this Order

SECTION 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the BOC-PCAG shall be
sourced from the applicable budget of the BOC. Thereafter, the funding shall be
included in the budget proposal of the BOC, subject to the usual budget preparation
process.

The appropriation for the DOF-FIU as well as its organization and staffing, as
approved by the DBM, shall effectively be retained for the use of the DOF-FAI.

SECTION 7. Separability. Should any provision of this Order be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid
and subsisting.

SECTION 8. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect fifteen days following its

publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this2gth day of
year of our Lord Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By the President:

ope
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary A

   
 

2 i rs
ae) aalaieia !
Ce ee

    
 

PRRD 2016 - 003992

October , in the

 

 
     
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERLEPFED COPY

     

 
   
 

 

ATTY. CONCE NW ZENY E, FERROLINO-ENAD
In--2q- efGIRECTOR IIT - ACTING HEAD