NSE

    

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 96

ESTABLISHING THE PHILIPPINE RAILWAYS INSTITUTE UNDER
THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AS THE PLANNING,
IMPLEMENTING AND REGULATORY AGENCY FOR HUMAN
RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT IN THE RAILWAYS SECTOR

WHEREAS, Section 1, Chapter 1, Title XV, Book IV of Executive Order (EO)
No. 292 (s. 1987) or the “Administrative Code of 1987,” espouses the Government’s
commitment to the maintenance and expansion of efficient, fast, safe and
dependable transportation systems, which are effective instruments for national
recovery and economic progress;

WHEREAS, the transportation sector, which includes the railways industry,
has been identified as a priority sector under Ambisyon Nation 2040, where
investments should be complemented by appropriate human capital development;

WHEREAS, the Department of Transportation (DOTr) is mandated under EO
No. 292 to establish and prescribe rules and regulations for the inspection of land.
transportation facilities, specifically railways;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to develop the human resource
capacities of railways personnel to ensure their availability and competence, and
guarantee their compliance with generally accepted standards of practice, as well as
the rules and regulations pertaining to the safety, operation and maintenance of
railways; and

WHEREAS, Article VII, Section 17 of the Constitution provides that the
President shall have control of all the executive departments, bureaus and offices,
and shall ensure the faithful execution of the laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation and Mandate. The Philippine Railways Institute (PRI) is
hereby created as a research and training center under the DOTr, and shall serve as
the planning, implementing, regulating and administrative entity for the development
of human resources in the railways sector, to ensure efficient, reliable and safe
railway transportation services. The PRI shall be placed under the administrative
supervision of the DOTr.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 2. Powers and Functions. The PRI shall have the primary powers
and functions of developing, formulating and recommending plans, programs,
standards and guidelines pertaining to the development of personnel in the railways
sector. Consistent with its mandate, the PRI, with the guidance and supervision of
the DOTr Secretary, shall:

(a)

(i)

Formulate and recommend guidelines regarding human resources
development in the railways sector, including the promotion of safety in
train operations;

Establish and administer a comprehensive human_resources
development program for railways personnel, and for this purpose, call
on relevant agencies and entities whose development programs include
human resources development for railways personnel, to participate and
assist in the preparation and implementation of such program;

Coordinate with the Department of Education, the Technical Education
and Skills Development Authority, the Commission on Higher Education,
Professional Regulation Commission, the University of the Philippines -
National Center for Transportation Studies, and relevant government
agencies to assist in the formulation of guidelines on human resources
development and other matters related thereto, including relevant
research, and issue technical standards to ensure competency of
railways personnel;

Prescribe rules and regulations for the issuance of certificates attesting
to the competence of railways personnel, including train drivers;

Prescribe rules and regulations for the accreditation of training facilities
of railways operators and independent training centers;

Assist in the enforcement of laws, rules and regulations in the field of
human resources development for the railways sector;

Determine and collect reasonable fees, dues or assessments relative to
certificates and accreditations issued under this Order, and all trainings
and services to be administered by the PRI;

Accept, through the DOTr, donations, grants, services and assistance of
all kinds from private and public sources, foreign governments, as well
as international institutions, and utilize the same for the purposes set
forth in this Order, provided that acceptance of donations and grants
from foreign governments shall be subject to prior clearance and
approval by the President or his authorized representative; and

Perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes of this Order.

Section 3. Organizational Structure. The PRI shall consist of appropriate
divisions on training, certification and accreditation, and research and development.

There shall be an Executive Director (ED), with the rank of an Undersecretary,
who shall be appointed by the President. The ED must have at least a Master's
Degree in a related field and has experience in the administration, management or
implementation of transportation capacity development programs.

The ED shall be in charge of the day-to-day operations of the PRI and
exercise control over its personnel.

The ED shall submit to the Department of Budget and Management the
Organizational Structure of the PRI, as approved by the DOTr Secretary.

Section 4. Funding. The initial budget of the PRI shall be sourced from the
available funds of the DOTr. Appropriations for the succeeding years shall be
incorporated in the annual budget proposal of the DOTr.

SECTION 5. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified
accordingly.

SECTION 6. Separability. In the event that any provision of this Order or any
part thereof is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby
shall remain in force and effect.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this2lst dayof November | jn the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Nineteen.

 

By the President:

C&

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

 

  
  
  

Office of the President

 

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE
CERTIFIED COPY
é
se a Ce seers 3 ATTY. CORCEPCH Y £, FERROLINC-ENAD

y- 2b 209. DIRECTOR Ng