MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 34

FURTHER AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 423 (S. 2005), AS
AMENDED, PRESCRIBING THE RULES AND PROCEDURES ON
THE REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF ALL GOVERNMENT
CONTRACTS, PURSUANT TO REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9184,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
REFORM ACT OF 2003”

WHEREAS, Section 4 of Executive Order (EO) No. 423 (s. 2005), as
amended by EO No. 645 (s. 2007), provides that for government contracts
amounting to at least 2500 Million, the Head of the Procuring Entity, before resorting
to any of the alternative methods of procurement, is required to obtain the approval
of the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) that the proposed
procurement undertaking falls within the exceptions from public bidding and that the
proposed specific alternative mode of procurement is appropriate;

WHEREAS, under Republic Act (RA) No. 9184, otherwise known as the
“Government Procurement Reform Act of 2003,” and its revised Implementing Rules
and Regulations (IRR), the authority to approve or disapprove the use of alternative
modes of procurement, regardless of the amount of the Approved Budget for the
Contract (ABC), lies with the Head of Procuring Entity or his duly authorized
representative, who shall be accountable for determining whether all the required
conditions are present for the use of the proposed alternative method of
procurement;

WHEREAS, in the course of the implementation of EO No. 423, as amended,
the Head of Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative remains
accountable in ensuring that government contracts have been executed in faithful
compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations;

WHEREAS, the requirement of GPPB determination and approval as to the
appropriateness of the alternative method of procurement to be adopted adds to the
total procurement process and timeline, and defeats the very purpose of resorting to
alternative methods of procurement, which is to promote economy and efficiency;
and

WHEREAS, it has now become necessary to further amend Section 4 of EO
423, as amended, to streamline, expedite, and make more efficient the current
procurement procedures in order to achieve a more optimal and expedient
procurement system, pursuant to the provisions of RA 9184 and its IRR.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and
existing laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 4 of EO No. 423, as amended, is hereby further
amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 4. Approval of Government Contracts Entered
Into Through Alternative Methods of Procurement. Where the
Head of the Procuring Entity has made a determination that a
Government contract, including Government contracts required by law
to be acted upon and/or approved by the President, regardless of
amount, falls under any of the exceptions from public bidding
described in Section 3 hereof, the Head of the Procuring Entity may
proceed with the alternative methods of procurement according to the
law and applicable rules and regulations; Provided, that for
Government contracts involving an amount of at least 2500 Million,
the Head of the Procuring Entity issues a certification under oath that
the contract falls within the exceptions from public bidding, is being
entered into in faithful compliance with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations, and is advantageous to the government.

Except for Government contracts required by law to be acted
upon and/or approved by the President, the Head of the Procuring
Entity shall have full authority to give final approval and/or enter into
said Government contracts through alternative methods of
procurement allowed by law and applicable rules and regulations
upon issuing the certificates mentioned in the immediately preceding
paragraph, when applicable.

The Head of the Procuring Entity may delegate in writing this
full authority to give final approval and/or to enter into Government
contracts, through alternative methods of procurement allowed by law,
involving such amount or threshold as he may deem appropriate, as
circumstances may warrant, subject to existing laws and such
limitations imposed by the Head of the Procuring Entity concerned
(Section 5(j), Republic Act No. 9184). However, the Head of the
Procuring Entity may not delegate the authority to certify under oath
that the contract falls within the exceptions from public bidding, is
being entered into in faithful compliance with all applicable laws, rules
and regulations, and is advantageous to the government.”

SECTION 2. Section 6(b) of the same EO is also hereby amended to read as
follows:

“SECTION 6. Government Contracts Requiring Presidential
Action and/or Approval.

XX XX

b. All Government contracts required by law to be acted upon
and/or approved by the President, and any subsequent
amendments or supplements thereto, shall be submitted
with complete documentation to NEDA, through its Director-

General, within seven (7) days from approval by the Head
of Procuring Entity concerned or his duly authorized
representative, as the case may be, for NEDA’s review and
evaluation.

Government contracts submitted hereunder shall be
accompanied by a complete execution copy of the contract,
related agreements, annexes, other approvals and permits,
including a detailed summary of the pertinent laws, rules
and regulations governing the processing and award of the
contract, and accompanied by the requirements of Section
4 hereof where alternative methods of procurement were
resorted to.”

SECTION 3. Except for the foregoing amendments, all other provisions of EO
No. 423, as amended, shall remain unchanged.

SECTION 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 17thday of July in the year of Our
Lord, Two Thousand and Seventeen.

 

By the President:

Te 4 Ge
savAoor C. MEDIALDEA

Executive Secretary 4

  

im
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 002881