MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 166

ADOPTING THE TEN-POINT POLICY AGENDA TO ACCELERATE
AND SUSTAIN ECONOMIC RECOVERY FROM THE COVID-19
PANDEMIC, AND DIRECTING A WHOLE-OF-GOVERNMENT
APPROACH TO ALIGN ALL ECONOMIC RECOVERY PROGRAMS
AND MEASURES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, the COVID-19 pandemic has drastically affected the economy of
the country, leading to loss of jobs, productivity and income;

WHEREAS, data gathered by the National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA) show that at the height of the pandemic in 2020 (i) 10.1% of
businesses temporarily closed, and 0.4% permanently ceased operations; (ii)
unemployment swelled to around 8.7 million Filipinos; (iii) the loss of household wage
and income amounted to PhP 1.04 Trillion, or an average of PhP23,806.00 per worker;
and (iv) hunger incidence increased to 1 in 4 families in the National Capital Region;

WHEREAS, the COVID-19 pandemic has impeded the country’s three (3)
decades of uninterrupted growth, contracting its gross domestic product (GDP) by as
much as -9.6% in 2020;

WHEREAS, key findings of the NEDA suggest that the pandemic will have long-
term adverse effects on consumption and investment, workers’ productivity, and
general wellness of Filipinos;

WHEREAS, despite the pandemic’s negative consequences, swift Government
response has enabled the economy of the country to grow faster than most forecasts
in 2021 and surpass government targets, with the GDP growing by as much as 12%
in the 2°¢ quarter, 6.9% in the 3" quarter, and 7.7% in the 4! quarter of the year,
signaling that the country is on track to rapid recovery despite the impact of various
natural hazards, including the Typhoon Odette;

WHEREAS, the robust economic expansion has been mainly driven by the risk
management strategies of Government, particularly by allowing the economy to further
reopen safely, while implementing measures such as the acceleration of the
Government's vaccination program, and a shift to the alert level system and granular
lockdowns;

WHEREAS, studies show a decreasing trend in COVID-19 fatality ratios
notwithstanding cyclical case surges, due mainly to the continued roll-out of
vaccination programs, leading certain countries such as the United Kingdom, Spain,
France, Portugal, Singapore, South Korea and Thailand to treat COVID-19 as endemic

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

for the purpose of minimizing mass societal disruptions, thereby fully opening schools
and removing mobility restrictions;

WHEREAS, the Economic Development Cluster has recommended the
adoption of the Ten-Point Policy Agenda to accelerate and sustain the country's
economic recovery;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to adopt policies on economic recovery to
sustain current economic gains, minimize the pandemic's long-term adverse effects,

WHEREAS, Article Vil, Section 17 of the Constitution provides that the
President shall have control of all executive departments, bureaus and offices:
, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic

NOW, THEREFORE
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing
laws, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Adoption of the Ten-Point Agenda on Economic
Recovery. The State hereby adopts the Ten-Point Policy Agenda to sustain and
, and to drive broad. various

departments, bureaus,
ies, including government-owned or -controlled corporetions and state
universities and colleges, are directed, and local govemment units (LGUs) are
enjoined, to ensure that all related polices, measures and programs are aligned with
the following principles:

1. Strengthen Heefthcare Capacity.
appropriate measures to expand the healthcare capacity across the country,
and align with the global standards of health workers and other health
resources to population ratios;

2. Accelerate and Expand the Vaccination Program. The National Government
shall ensure that vaccination sites are expanded, artificial barriers
vaccination are reduced, and procedures relating thereto are streamlined.
Subject to existing laws and regulations, restrictions on the use of vaccine
stocks by the private sector shall be reduced;

4.

Resume Face-to-Face Learning. Drhiscsgiaeerthiphapaechan_ ipa
efforts towards the safe resumption of face-to-face learning, and capitalize on
the gains achieved in the conduct of pilot face-to-face schooling;

Reduce Restrictions on Domestic Travel and Standardize LGU

Requirements. The shall streamline and standardize

for domestic travel and local tourism, and maximize the use of
information and commu solutions to ease related
processes. Except as otherwise required by the GU of destination,

negative
Seed Cas ee as ee a ee eae
unvaccinated individuals and/or an inter-scannable Quick Response (QR)

The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious

Diseases (IATF-EID) and the National Task Force (NTF) Against COVID-19

Seca mrOperenily, of CR codee. ors imcous: contect Samay
ications;

Relax Requirements for international Travel. The National Goverment shail
endeavor to further relax requirements relating to international travel and
provide quarantine exemptions for vaccinated individuals coming into the
country, in order to boost international tourism, increase foreign investments,
and restore jobs in the tourism sector;

. Accelerate Digital Transformation through Legisietive Measures. The

National Government shall prioritize the passage of key legislations on digital
Cerneteaaee,  CTPRNE SrmeRaSt, "eae cRate! a! cruneys cguel

. Provide for Enhanced and Flexible

Emergency Measures through
Legisiation. To OS nere Fenpemnct aN) No. Ago oF the “Philippine

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010,” tha National
Government shall formulate and propose legisiation that would allow the
efficient roll-out of emergency The

programs proposed
lagisiation may include measures such as the establishment of a stand-by fund
to be utilized during pandemics, grant of authority to re-allocate funds for
pandemic response, lifting of the ceilings on the use of Quick Response Funds,
relaxation of data privacy requirements, and standardization of special risk
allowance, hazard pay and other reasonable forms of compensation to
healthcare workers:

. Shift the Focus of Decision-Making and Government Reporting to More
Useful and

and Empowering Metrics. The National Government shall ensure that
policies on economic recovery, as well as goverment reports on COVID-19
cases, primarily take into consideration the: (j) total severe or critical cases; (ii)
case fatality ratio; and (ill) total vaccinations, with the objective of
Se en CIMar IRE In Otte vals end encoeeagrig PaCbis bo get wacchnated,

pandemics, taking into consideration intemational best practices, as well as the

country’s experience in handling the COVID-19 pandemic. The Government
shall likewise endeavor to strengthen health and social protection systems.

SECTION 2. implementation of the Ten-Point Policy Agenda. The IATF-EID
and the NTF Against COVID-19 shall ensure the proper implementation of the
Ten-Point Policy Agenda, and ensure alignment therewith of ail measures relating to
the National Govemment's COVID-19 pandemic response. The Economic
Development Cluster, through the NEDA, Department of Finance and Department of
Trade and industry, shall be consulted prior to the implementation of all such
measures.

The NTF’s Working Group on Strategic Communications and the Presidential
Communications Operations Office shall build public understanding of government
initiatives towards adjusting to the new normal, and effectively engage the most
affected sectors of the population.

SECTION 3. Monitoring. The NEDA shall monitor compliance of concemed
agencies with this Order and periodically report the same to the President, through the
Office of the Executive Secretary.

SECTION 4. Separability. Should any part of this Order be declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SECTION 5. Repeal. All issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof,
which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately after its
publication in the Official Gazette or In a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 21st dayof marca in the year
of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By the President:

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 020675