PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS AND RATES OF
EXPENSES AND ALLOWANCES FOR OFFICIAL LOCAL AND
FOREIGN TRAVELS OF GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL

WHEREAS, under Section 72, Chapter 7, Book VI of Executive Order (EO)
No. 292, otherwise known as the “Administrative Code of 1987,” the rates of per
diem and other allowances for official travel in the government shall be determined
by the President, and may be changed from time to time upon the recommendation
of the Travel Rates Committee (TRC);

WHEREAS, existing rules and regulations and rates of expenses and
allowances for local and foreign travels under the category of conferences, special
missions and other non-study trips under EO No. 248 (s. 1995), as amended by EO
No. 248-A (s. 1995) and EO No. 298 (s. 2004), as well as for foreign study trips
under EO No. 367 (s. 1989), and other pertinent issuances must be consolidated,
updated, and rationalized to make their application fair and reasonable;

WHEREAS, outdated rates of travel expenses, varying regional differences
on local travel costs, and other economic and fiscal considerations warrant the
review of current rates of expenses and allowances on official travels, while ensuring
that they are fairly reasonable, cost effective and within the financial capability of the
government; and

WHEREAS, the TRC has submitted to the President its recommendations to
modify existing rules and regulations, and rates of expenses and allowances for
official local and foreign travels;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by existing laws, do hereby order
the following:

Section 1. Coverage. This Order shall cover official local and foreign
travels of personnel of National Government Agencies (NGAs), including State
Universities and Colleges (SUCs), Government-Owned or -Controlled
Corporations (GOCCs), Government Financial Institutions (GFls), Congress of

the Philippines, Judiciary, Constitutional Commissions, Office of the
Ombudsman, and Local Government Units (LGUs).

Section 2. Definition of Terms. For purposes of this Order, the following
terms are defined as follows:

(a)

(b)

(d)

Permanent Official Station — the place where the office or regular
place of business/work of an official or employee is permanently
located and where the official or employee is expected to stay most of
the time as required by the nature and the duties and responsibilities of
the position of such official or employee.

Daily Travel Expenses — the amounts authorized to cover expenses
for local travel, which consist of (i) costs for hotel accommodation or
lodging, including the prescribed taxes and service charges, (ii) meals,
and (iii) incidental expenses, including cost for local or inland
transportation and reasonable miscellaneous expenses at the place of
assignment.

Transportation Expenses — the actual fares of the authorized modes
of transportation (e.g., land, sea and air) for local and foreign travels
from the permanent official station to the destination or place of
assignment and back.

Daily Subsistence Allowance — the cost to cover expenses for foreign
travel which includes costs for hotel accommodation or lodging, meals
and incidental expenses.

Section 3. Authorized Official Travel.

(a)

Official local or foreign travels and assignments under this Order shall
cover only those which meet the following criteria: (i) it is essential to
the effective performance of an official or employee’s mandates or
functions; (ii) it is required to meet the needs of the department,
agency, bureau or office, or there is substantial benefit to be derived by
the State; (iii) the presence of the official or employee is critical to the
outcome of the meeting, conference, seminar, consultation or any
official activity to be attended; and (iv) the projected expenses are not
excessive or involve minimum expenditure.

All officials authorized to approve local or overseas travels are
required, as far as practicable, to minimize travel cost. Hence, all forms
of communications, such as, but not limited to teleconferencing and
videoconferencing or submission of briefs and position papers, as
alternatives to travel, must be explored, provided, these do not
compromise national security and confidentiality of official
communications.

The following individuals shall not be issued foreign travel authorities
and shall not be entitled to government funding for such trips:

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

Private individuals;

Consultants of, and/or those engaged by way of contract of
service by, government agencies, except in highly meritorious
circumstances (e.g., unavailability of qualified employees in
highly technical or specialized fields), and upon written
justification submitted to the authorized approving officials; and

Spouses or children of government officials, except when
diplomatic protocol or established international practices provide
otherwise.

TITLE I: OFFICIAL LOCAL TRAVEL OF GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL

Section 4. Approval of Local Travels.

(a)

(b)

The official local travels of the following officials, in pursuance of the
functions of their respective offices, irrespective of the number of days,
need not be approved by higher authorities:

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

Heads of NGAs;

Chairs of Governing Boards, Commissions, and Committees,
collectively referred herein as “Governing Boards,” and heads of

Regional Governors of Autonomous Regions, Provincial
Governors and Mayors of Special, Highly Urbanized, and
Independent Component Cities.

The official local travels of government personnel for less than thirty
(30) days and payment of their corresponding travel expenses shall be
approved by the following officials:

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

In NGAs, by heads of agencies;

In NGAs composed of Governing Boards, including SUCs,
GOCCs, and GFIs -

(iia) By Chairs of Governing Boards — for Board Members and
Chief Executive Officers; and

(ii.b) By Chief Executive Officers — for other personnel;
In LGUs -

(iii.a) By Municipal Mayors or City Mayors — for their respective
LGU officials and employees, and the officials and

employees of barangays within their territorial jurisdiction;
and

(iii.b) By Provincial Governors — for their respective LGU
officials and employees and the Mayors of Component
Cities and Municipalities.

(c) The official local travels of government personnel for thirty (30) days or
more and payment of their corresponding travel expenses shall be
approved by the following officials:

(i) In NGAs -

(ia) By Department Secretaries, those of equivalent rank, or
their authorized representatives — for personnel in their
respective agencies;

(i.b.) By the Chair, Commission on Higher Education (CHED),
or his/her authorized representatives — for personnel in
SUCs; and

(i.c.) By the Director General, Technical Education and Skills
Development Authority (TESDA), or his/her authorized
representatives -— for personnel in technical and
vocational schools;

(ii) In GOCCs and GFls attached to Departments or Organizational
Equivalents — By the corresponding Department Secretaries,
those of equivalent rank, or their authorized representatives; and

(iii) In all Levels of LGUs — By the Secretary of the Department of
the Interior and Local Government (DILG), or his/her authorized
representatives.

(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Office of the President (OP) is not
precluded from requiring any official or employee to secure authority for
local travel from said Office or from another approving authority to be
designated by it.

(e) The approval of official local travels of personnel in the Congress of the
Philippines, the Judiciary, Constitutional Commissions, and the Office
of the Ombudsman shall be governed by rules and regulations
prescribed by the respective heads of those offices and bodies.

Section 5. Travel Beyond 50-Kilometer Radius from the Permanent
Official Station. Official local travel to destinations beyond the 50-kilometer radius
from the permanent official station shall be allowed the following expenses:

(a) Transportation Expenses and Miscellaneous Expenses. The
allowable transportation expenses and reasonable miscellaneous

(b)

expenses (e.g., terminal fees, parking fees, road tolls, etc.) from the
permanent official station to the destination or place of assignment
shall cover the following areas:

(i) From the office or residence to the point of embarkation, and
vice versa;

(ii) From the point of embarkation to the point of disembarkation in
the place of destination, and vice versa; and

(iii) | From the point of disembarkation to the office of destination or
place of assignment in the field, and vice versa.

The transportation expenses and reasonable miscellaneous expenses
under this provision shall be in addition to the daily travel expenses
under Section 5(b) of this Order.

Personnel concerned shall not be entitled to transportation expenses
for the entire trip or portion of such trip where government vehicle was
used.

If a private vehicle is used, no reimbursement of the cost of gasoline
and fuel shall be allowed. The official or employee concerned,
however, is entitled to the equivalent cost of the customary mode of
transportation.

Daily Travel Expenses (DTE).

(i) The maximum allowable DTE of government personnel,
regardless of rank and position, shall be at the following rates:

Maximum DTE
Destination

Cluster | Region | P1,500

Region Ill
Region V
Region VIII
Region IX
Region XII
Region XIll
ARMM
Cordillera
Administrative Region
Region VI

Region VII

Region X

Region XI!

Region II

Cluster II

Cluster Ill

National Capital Region
Region IV-A
Region IV-B

(ii) Claims for payment of DTE as provided under Section 5(b)(i)
hereof shall not require presentation of bills and receipts.

Apportioned Travel Expenses. The allowable DTE for travel beyond
the 50-kilometer radius from the permanent official station shall be
based on the following apportionment:

100%

[Percentage | Tocover___

| = |

Travel Expenses in Excess of Authorized Travel Rates. Claims for
reimbursement of actual accommodation expenses (excluding
expenses for valets, room attendants, laundry, pressing, haircuts, and
similar services furnished by hotels) in excess of the accommodation
component of the DTE may be allowed, but in no case shall the
difference exceed one hundred per cent (100%) of such component of
the prescribed DTE rate, and only upon:

Particulars

Day of arrival at
point of destination
(regardless of time)
and succeeding
day/s thereof on
official business

[_totover_

Hotel/lodging (50%),
meals (30%), and
incidental expenses (20%)

Day of departure
for permanent
official station

(regardless of time)

if other than date of

arrival

Meals (30%), and incidental
expenses (20%)

(i) Submission of certification by the agency head or authorized
representative as absolutely necessary in the performance of an
assignment; and

(ii) Presentation of bills and receipts. A certification or affidavit of
loss shall not be considered as appropriate replacement for lost
bills and receipts.

Precluding Double Payment of Travel Expenses. To preclude
double payment, the corresponding portion of the DTE shall not be
allowed when the fare paid for transportation includes meals and/or

quarters en route, or where meals and/or lodging are paid for or
furnished by the government or other parties.

Section 6. Travel Within the 50-Kilometer Radius from the Permanent
Official Station.

(a)

(b)

For official travel to destinations within the 50-kilometer radius from the
permanent official station, the actual transportation expenses under
Section 5(a), as well as the DTE under Section 5(b) not exceeding the
rates provided therein, may be authorized. Provided, that the personnel
concerned shall stay in the place of assignment and does not commute
daily from the place of assignment to the place of residence or
permanent official station and back. The claim for hotel/lodging
expense shall be substantiated by a hotel bill or invoice to prove that
the official or employee stayed in the place of assignment for the whole
duration of the official travel.

Personnel on official travel who commute daily from the place of
assignment to the place of residence or permanent official station shall
be allowed the following expenses:

(i) Actual fare at the prevailing rates of authorized modes of
transportation from the permanent official station to the place of
assignment and back;

(ii) Meals in an amount not exceeding the thirty per cent (30%) of
the authorized meal component of the DTE as indicated in
Section 5 hereof.

Presentation of transportation ticket or any equivalent document shall
be required as proof of actual travel undertaken.

Section 7. Mode of Transportation and Type of Accommodation.

(a)

(b)

The agency head concerned or the designated officials shall determine
the mode of transportation and type of hotel/lodging to be availed,
which in all cases shall be the most economical and efficient.

As a general rule, only the ordinary public conveyance or customary
modes of transportation shall be used. The use of chartered trips,
special hires of public utilities, garage cars, water vessels, and other
extraordinary means of transportation shall not be allowed unless
justified by the prevailing circumstances, such as but not limited to,
carrying large amounts of cash, bulky equipment and important
documents, inclement weather, accompanying dignitaries or high level
government officials, or when time is of the essence.

Section 8. Availment of Department of Tourism (DOT)-Accredited
Accommodations. If a government agency lacks residential facilities for its
personnel on official local travel, the approving authority and personnel concerned

are encouraged to patronize DOT-accredited accommodations to ensure availment
of adequate but reasonably-priced services and amenities.

TITLE Il: OFFICIAL FOREIGN TRAVEL OF GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL

Section 9. Types of Foreign Travels. Foreign travels authorized under
Section 3 of this Order shall refer only to those under the following categories:

(a)

(b)

International conferences or meetings to which the Philippine
Government has commitments, or to undertake official
missions/assignments which cannot be assigned to government
officials posted abroad;

Scholarships, fellowships, trainings, and studies abroad which are
grant-funded or undertaken at minimal cost to NGAs, including SUCs,

Invitations for speaking engagements or receiving of awards from
foreign governments/institutions or international agencies/organizations
as defined under international law, whether fully or partially funded by
the government, upon the endorsement of the DFA.

In case of trips involving delegations, the authorized approving authority shall
ensure that the number of participants is kept to the barest minimum and the role of
each member in the delegation is clearly specified and justified in the travel
application or proposal.

Section 10. Approval of Foreign Travels.

(a)

Regardless of the length of travels abroad and the number of
delegates, official foreign travels and payment of travel expenses shall
be approved by the following officials:

(i) By the OP — for the following:

(ia) Department Secretaries or those of equivalent rank;

(ib) Chairs and Members of Governing Boards and Chief
Executive Officers of GOCCs and GFls under or attached
to the OP;

(ic) | Heads of NGAs under or attached to the OP.

(ii) By Department Secretaries or those of equivalent rank - for
personnel in NGAs, GOCCs, and GFls under or attached to

departments or their organizational equivalents;

(iii) | By the heads of agencies under or attached to the OP — for
personnel in such entities;

(iv) | By the Chief Executive Officers of GOCCs and GFls attached
to the OP, subject to the policies approved by the respective
governing boards — for personnel in such entities;

(v) By the Secretary of the Department of Public Works and
Highways, through the Local Water Utilities Administration — for
Local Water District Directors;

(vi) By the Chair, CHED — for heads of SUCs; and by the latter — for
personnel of SUCs;

(vii) By the Chair, TESDA — for heads of technical and vocational
schools; and by the latter — for personnel of technical and
vocational schools; and

(viii) By the Secretary of the DILG, or his/her authorized
representative — for personnel in all levels of LGUs.

b) Notwithstanding the foregoing approving authorities, the OP is not
precluded from requiring any official or employee to secure authority to
travel abroad from said Office or from another approving authority to be
designated by it.

c) The approval of official foreign travels of personnel in the Congress of
the Philippines, the Judiciary, Constitutional Commissions, and the
Office of the Ombudsman shall be as prescribed by the respective
heads of those agencies.

Section 11. Pre-Departure Expenses and Return Trip Fees.

(a) | Pre-departure expenses not exceeding 3,500.00 shall be allowed to
cover miscellaneous expenses for taxicab fare, passport processing,
immunization and medical laboratory fees, photographs, porterage,
airport terminal fees, if any, and other related expenses.

(b) Likewise, reimbursement of airport terminal fees imposed at the point/s
of embarkation on the return trip to the Philippines, if any, shall be
allowed upon completion of the official trip.

Section 12. Transportation Expenses. In case the officials and employees
authorized to travel abroad shall not be provided with transportation by the host
country or sponsoring organization, they shall be allowed transportation expenses for
the economy class, which for purposes of this Order does not include premium
economy class. For long-haul trips, described as flights exceeding four (4) hours
without counting lay-overs, of Department Secretaries, Undersecretaries, Assistant
Secretaries and those of equivalent ranks, business class airfares may be
authorized, subject to approval of the OP.

Section 13. Clothing Allowance.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Clothing allowance shall be granted to personnel on foreign travel in
tropical countries or temperate countries for the period coinciding with
the summer and spring seasons, regardless of the nature of travel, if
the travel will last for more than one (1) month. The clothing allowance
shall be granted on pro-rated basis, as follows:

More than one (1) month but

less than three (3) months US$200.00
Three (3) months and more but less

than six (6) months US$300.00
Six (6) months and more US$400.00

Provided, however, that the clothing allowance in connection with study
trips to tropical countries shall not exceed US$300.00.

When the travel to temperate countries, regardless of the nature of
travel, coincides with the autumn or winter seasons, the clothing
allowance shall be granted as follows:

Two (2) weeks or less US$200.00
More than two (2) weeks but less

than one (1) month US$300.00
One (1) month and more US$400.00

Grantees provided by donor institutions with clothing allowance at rates
equal to or higher than those indicated above shall no longer be
granted said allowance by the government agency concerned.

When the clothing allowance granted by the donor is less than the
rates indicated above, the personnel concerned may be given the
difference.

The clothing allowance may be granted more than once in every
twenty four (24) months. In no instance, however, shall the total
clothing allowance exceed US$400.00 within a twenty four (24)-month
period.

Applicable rate of clothing allowance shall be based on the season
officially declared by the authorized agency in the country of
destination. In case the travel dates span two seasons or coincide with
the change of seasons, the prescribed rates of clothing allowance shall
be based on the season corresponding to the most number of days of
authorized stay.

Section 14. Daily Subsistence Allowance (DSA).

(a) | Those who travel abroad shall be granted the DSA based on the daily
rates established by the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC)
of the United Nations which may be accessed at www.undp.org.ph or
at www.dfa.gov.ph of the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA).

When the country of destination is not listed therein, the DSA for the
nearest country shall be adopted. When the city of destination is not
listed therein, the “elsewhere” rate established for the country shall be
adopted.

(b) The DSA shall only start upon arrival at the country of destination and
shall cease upon departure therefrom, at the following percentages:

Hotel/lodging (50%), meals
(30%) and incidental
expenses (20%)

Day of arrival at
point of destination
(regardless of time)

and succeeding

day/s thereof on
official business

Day of departure for
permanent official
station Meals (30%) and
(regardless of time) incidental expenses (20%)
if other than date of
arrival

(c) If hotel/lodging, meals and incidental expenses are provided by the
host country or donor institution, the DSA shall not be allowed.

(d) Claims for payment of DSA as provided under Section 14(a) and (b)
hereof shall not require presentation of bills and receipts.

(e) Subject to the approval of the authorities listed under Section 10(a) of
this Order, claims for reimbursement of actual accommodation
expenses in excess of the accommodation component of the DSA may
be allowed, but in no case shall the difference exceed thirty per cent
(30%) of such component of the prescribed DSA rate, and only upon
certification by the head of agency as absolutely necessary in the
performance of an assignment and presentation of bills and receipts.
An affidavit of loss shall not be considered as appropriate replacement
for the required bills and receipts.

Section 15. Payment of DSA Differential.

(a)

(b)

Where personnel on travel abroad, to attend international conferences
or meetings or to undertake official missions or assignments, are
provided by the host government with DSA and allowances lower than
those prescribed in this Order, such personnel shall only be entitled to
the difference.

Personnel on scholarships, fellowships, trainings, workshops, and
study grants abroad shall not be allowed payment of DSA differentials.

Section 16. Reimbursement of Representation Expenses.

(a)

(b)

The following officials, who are authorized to attend international
conferences or meetings or undertake official missions or assignments
in the exigency of the service, may be entitled to reimbursement of
actual reasonable representation expenses not exceeding the following
rates, subject to the approval of the authorities listed under Section
10(a) of this Order, based on justifications presented and upon
presentation of bills and receipts:

(i) Cabinet Members and those of equivalent rank — US$1,000.00;

(ii) Department Undersecretaries and those of equivalent rank, if
they are designated as head of the delegation — US$700.00;

(iii) | Department Assistant Secretaries and those of equivalent rank,
if they are designated as head of the delegation — US$500.00;
and

(iv) | Those holding positions lower than an Assistant Secretary level
who are designated as head of the delegation — US$300.00.

Such expenses may cover necessary entertainment, contributions,
flowers, wreaths, and the like, when justified by circumstances and in
conformity with generally accepted customs, usages, and practices.

Officials on travel abroad for speaking engagements, and for
scholarships, fellowships, trainings, workshops and studies, and those
whose travels are fully funded by donors or sponsoring organizations,
shall not be allowed reimbursement of representation expenses.

Section 17. Scholarships, Fellowships, Trainings, and Studies Abroad.

(a)

The Department of Education, CHED, and TESDA, which absorbed the
functions of the abolished Special Committee on Scholarships and
tasked to jointly issue the implementing rules and regulations pursuant
to Section 2 of EO No. 402 (s. 2005), shall incorporate in the joint
guidelines the pertinent rules and regulations relative to grant-funded

scholarships, fellowships, trainings and studies abroad, consistent with
this Order.

(b) Expenses of government agencies related to such travels abroad shall
be limited only to pre-departure expenses since donor
countries/organizations/institutions shall pay for airfares, school/
training fees, accommodations, health insurance, and stipend. In cases
where airfares and clothing allowance will not be shouldered by the
donors, the government agency concerned may pay the same, subject
to the provisions of the memoranda of agreement or any similar
document that may be entered into by and between the donor and the
said agency, and of this Order.

Section 18. Insurance. Personnel on foreign travel pursuant to this Order
may be entitled to travel insurance at the minimum amount required by the country of
destination, depending on the duration of the official travel or a travel coverage of
500,000.00 if there is no minimum coverage set by a country.

TITLE Ill: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 19. Prohibition against Junkets of Government Officials and
Employees. All forms of travel junkets shall be strictly prohibited. The conduct of
strategic planning workshops or team building activities abroad shall not be allowed.
The taking of a personal leave immediately before or after the official activity is highly
discouraged. If travel circumstances, such as the nature of activity, purpose and
itinerary, indicate that the trip is mainly intended for personal purposes, no part
thereof shall be considered as official.

Section 20. Travel in Connection with Official Duties Paid for by a
Private Source. Official foreign trips partially or fully sponsored or funded by private
corporations or private individuals shall be fully disclosed. No official or personal
travel of government officials and employees shall be funded directly or indirectly,
fully or partially, by private individuals, including suppliers or contractors, with
pending request/s or application/s or future dealings with any branch, department,
bureau or office of the National Government or local government units concerned.
This prohibition applies to invitations to travel purportedly to undertake study or
assessment of the proponents’ capabilities as such contractors or suppliers.

Section 21. Implementing Rules and Regulations on Local and Foreign
Travels of Personnel in NGAs, including SUCs, GOCCs, GFls, and LGUs.

(a) Subject to the pertinent provisions of this Order:

(i) Department Secretaries and those of equivalent rank shall
cause the preparation and issuance of internal guidelines on
local and foreign travels of personnel in NGAs, including SUCs,
GOCCs, and GFls under or attached to their respective
departments/agencies, in order to (i.a) provide additional
safeguards as are best suited to agency conditions,

(i.b) address agency peculiarities, and (i.c) ensure the judicious
use of public funds;

(ii) The Secretary of the DILG shall cause the preparation and
issuance of the rules and regulations governing official local and
foreign travels of LGU personnel.

(b) In accordance with the pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 7157 or

the Philippine Foreign Service Act of 1991, the DFA and the Department of
Budget and Management shall cause the preparation of separate rules
and regulations governing the travels of DFA personnel outside their
assigned foreign posts, including service attaches to embassies and
representatives to consulates from other departments, subject to approval
by the President. Such rules and regulations and rates of expenses,
however, should be consistent with the pertinent provisions of this Order.

Section 22. Rendition of Account on Cash Advances and Sanction.

(a)

(c)

Within two (2) calendar months after the return of an official or
employee to the Philippines, in the case of official travel abroad, or
within one (1) calendar month of his/her return to permanent official
station in the case of official local travel, such official or employee shall
render an account of the cash advance received in accordance with
existing applicable rules and regulations.

Refund of excess cash advance may be made either in United States
dollars if allowed by the Department Secretary or equivalent official, or
in Philippine currency computed at the prevailing bank rate at the day
of refund.

No foreign travels with government funding shall be allowed for those
who have not liquidated their expenses for previous government-
funded travels abroad.

Section 23. Reportorial Requirements and Sanction.

(a)

(b)

Within one (1) calendar month after returning to the permanent official
station, every personnel authorized to travel under this Order shall
submit to the head of the agency a report with recommendations, if
any, on the conference or seminar attended, examination or
investigation conducted, or mission undertaken.

In case of participation in an international conference or convention in
which the Philippines is represented by a delegation, a report of the
delegation shall be submitted to the OP through the Department
Secretary or those of equivalent rank from whose department the head
of delegation belongs, copy furnished the Secretary of the DFA, not
later than one (1) calendar month after the closing of the conference or
convention. Any member of the delegation may also submit a
supplementary report.

(c) Violation of the provisions of this Section shall subject the officials or
employees concerned to disciplinary action.

Section 24. Fund Sources. In the case of government personnel in NGAs,
including SUCs, funds for local and foreign travels shall be charged against the
appropriation for travelling expenses in the annual agency budgets. For GOCCs,
GFls, and LGUs, funds for the purpose shall be sourced solely from their respective
corporate and local funds, respectively.

Section 25. Periodic Review of Local Travel Rates Every Three (3) Years.
To ensure that local travel rates remains up-to-date, the TRC shall conduct a regular
review of the travel rates every three (3) years based on the survey of lodging costs
to be conducted by the DOT, and other economic indicators to be provided by the
Philippine Statistics Authority.

Section 26. Resolution of Cases. Cases not covered by the provisions of
this Order shall be referred to the OP for final resolution.

Section 27. Separability Clause. If any part or provision of this Order shall
be held unconstitutional or invalid, other parts or provisions hereof which are not
affected shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 28. Repealing Clause. EO No. 248 (s. 1995), EO No. 248-A (s.
1995), EO No. 298 (s. 2004), and EO No. 459 (s. 2005) are hereby repealed. EO No.
367 (s. 1989), Memorandum Circular No. 35 (s. 2017) and other presidential
issuances on travel rates and regulations on official foreign and local travels,
administrative authorizations, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with
this Order are hereby modified accordingly.

Section 29. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Our Lord, Two Thousand Nineteen.

fo

a
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA

19-24-2009 D NZ