MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 99

ENJOINING ALL SANGGUNIANG BARANGAYS TO ESTABLISH A
YULETIDE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR ALL BARANGAY
OFFICIALS AND FUNCTIONARIES FOR FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2019

WHEREAS, Section 25 of Republic Act No. 7160 or the “Local Government
Code of 1991” (LGC), states that the President shall exercise general supervision over
local government units;

WHEREAS, Section 391 of the Local Government Code provides that the
Sangguniang Barangay may enact ordinances to promote the general welfare of the
inhabitants therein, as well as enact annual and supplemental budgets in accordance
with the Code;

WHEREAS, the State recognizes the role of the Barangay as an engine for
national growth, and acknowledges the significant role and enormous responsibility of
our barangay officials and functionaries in nation-building;

WHEREAS, the State values the significant contribution of the barangay in the
attainment of the objectives under the Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022, through
its unconditional and passionate service rendered to the community, despite the
inherent limitations in resources, logistics, facilities and remuneration;

and functionaries are at the forefront in the
delivery of essential and basic ¢ ent services, such as healthcare, social welfare,
agricultural support, settleme c putes, peace and order, as well as the promotion
of the general interest of the community; and

Ui

WHEREAS, barangay offi

   
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 

 

on is an opportune time to establish such
powerment of barangay officials and
eaningful service that effect genuine
ies, consistent with the provisions of

JUTERTE, President of the Philippines,
ynstitution and existing laws, do hereby

ogram. All Sangguniang Barangays
for the purpose of establishing a
9 for the economic empowerment of

barangay officials and functionaries. j i
Saas unctionaries, including but not limited to the punong barangay,

arangay treasurer, bar.
Tagapamaya ; angay tanods, members of the Lupong
barangay, yapa, and other workers/personnel appointed, designated or engaged by the

me SECTION 2. Funding. The Yuletide Social Assistance Program of the
ngays shall be charged against their respective available funds, subject to Sections
321 and 323 of the Local Government Code, as well as existing budgeting, accounting
and auditing laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 3. Implementing Guidelines. The Department of the Interior and
Local Government (DILG) and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) shall
jointly issue the appropriate guidelines to effectively carry out and implement this Order.
The guidelines shall include, among others, the components of the Yuletide Social
Assistance Program, and the specific criteria and parameters for the determination of
the barangay officials and functionaries qualified thereunder.

SECTION 4. Proposed Measures for Succeeding Years. For the succeeding
years, the DILG, in consultation with the DBM, shall study and propose measures for
the provision of social assistance to qualified barangay officials and functionaries, as
well as identify funding sources against which said social assistance may be charged.

SECTION 5. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order is declared
invalid or unconstitutional, other parts not affected thereby shall continue to be in full
force and effect.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All other orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof,
which are contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 6th dayof December , in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand Nineteen.

Office of the

President
MALACARIANG RECORDS GFFICE

ED COPY