BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 1 of 24

Implementing Guidelines of Executive Order No. 114

Institutionalizing the Balik Probinsya, Bagong Pag-asa Program  
as a Pillar of Balanced Regional Development,  
Creating a Council Therefore, and for Other Purposes

4 June 2020

implementing guidelines are hereby issued.

Section 1. Legal Bases

a. Section 9, Article II of the 1987 Constitution, State Policies on poverty 
alleviation and improved quality of life for all;

b. Section 15, Article II of the 1987 Constitution, State Policies on protection 
and promotion of health;

c. Section 20, Article II of the 1987 Constitution, State Policies on the role of 
the private sector;

d. Section 21, Article II of the 1987 Constitution, State Policies on rural 
development;

e. Sections 4, Article X of the 1987 Constitution, on the President’s general 
supervision over local government units (LGUs);

f. Section 14, Article X of the 1987 Constitution, on the participation of regional 
development councils (RDCs);

g. Section 1, Article XII of the 1987 Constitution, on the national economic goal 
of more equitable distribution of opportunities, income, and wealth;

h. Section 1, Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution, on the right of all citizens to 
quality education;

i. Section 3, Article XV of the 1987 Constitution, on the rights of families;

j. Section 16 of Republic Act (RA) No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local 
Government Code of 1991, on the promotion of general welfare by the LGUs;

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 2 of 24

k. Section 17 of the Local Government Code of 1991, on the provision of 
essential services and facilities by the LGUs;

l. RA No. 11469, otherwise known as the Bayanihan to Heal as One Act

m. EO No. 114, Series of 2020

Section 2. Purpose of the Program. The Balik Probinsya, Bagong Pag-asa (BP2) 
program is institutionalized to ensure balanced regional development and equitable 
distribution of wealth, resources, and opportunities through policies and programs 
that boost countryside development and inclusive growth, provide adequate social 
services, and promote full employment, industrialization, and an improved quality 
of life in rural areas.

Section 3. The Balik Probinsya, Bagong Pag-asa (BP2) Program Framework. 
The multidimensional program framework emphasizes facilitation of rural 
environments to boost sustainable countryside development and promote more 
inclusive growth; thereby enabling all constituents, including the BP2 beneficiaries 
and locals, to invest in themselves and their communities, and improve their general 
welfare.

The BP2 Program framework also emphasizes the development of sustainable 
communities to achieve long-term growth driven by the people and for the people. 
It espouses a vibrant local economy that promotes sustainable production and 
consumption and enhances the countryside’s resilience to climate change, natural 
disasters, and other economic and health risks.

The framework espouses social inclusion by encouraging effective participation of 
all stakeholders to ensure that the projects and activities to be undertaken respond to 
articulated priorities at the local level. The priorities shall be initially financed by 
line departments and special programs and over time transferred to the local 
government units (LGU) to ensure sustainability.

Finally, the program framework encourages integration by designing effective 
mechanisms to achieve the desired synergy for rural growth and development. This 
mechanism includes the identification of priority activities, how they are 
implemented, and how the integration will be accomplished. To this end, the 
program seeks the active participation of all stakeholders to improve coordination, 
understanding, and support for the program.

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 3 of 24

3.1. The Program’s Key Results Areas. The Program Framework consists of four 
(4) key results areas to ensure more inclusive and balanced urban and rural 
development, and resilient and sustainable communities.

3.1.1. Empowerment of local industries. A sustainable program for public 
sector investments and private sector participation shall be introduced to 
encourage the transfer or expansion of medium and large businesses to 
provincial economic hubs and promote regional development. To ensure 
sustainability and competitiveness, the program shall promote local industries 
with clear comparative advantage in the locality, leveraging on local skills and 
resources, and the proactive and efficient services of the LGU.

Moreover, enabling support shall be provided to micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) to promote their continued growth. This includes 
programs to further ease doing business, particularly in the areas of starting, 
maintaining, and closing businesses, accessing credit, securing permits and 
licenses, and paying taxes.  Further, a system of fiscal or tax incentives that is 
performance-based, targeted, time-bound, and transparent may be provided in 
accordance with the national policy on tax incentives. Forward and backward 
linkages shall be strengthened in export- and domestic-oriented enterprises 
through increased access to markets, use of e-commerce, and accelerated 
integrated value chains. Finally, other programs and thrusts to achieve this 
policy objective shall be developed in accordance with emerging priorities.

3.1.2. Food security and agricultural productivity. The transformation of 
local economies hinges on a productive and resilient agriculture value-chain. 
To achieve this, innovations and technologies that are conducive to long-term 
and sustainable rural development shall be encouraged and facilitated for 
agricultural modernization, such as modern rice farming techniques, high-yield 
seed production, and farm mechanization. Local agricultural industries shall be 
supported and strengthened through infrastructure, logistical support, and value 
chain development. In addition, financial support shall be extended to farmers, 
such as but not limited to loans sourced from the Agricultural Competitiveness 
Enhancement Fund. Furthermore, measures to promote economies of scale in 
agricultural production, promote value chain development, increase farm 
incomes, and improve the quality of life of farmers, shall be sustainably 
pursued. Finally, other programs and thrusts to achieve this policy objective 
shall be developed in accordance with emerging priorities.

3.1.3. Housing, social welfare, health, employment, and human resource 
development. The health and education of the people in their home provinces, 
particularly the program beneficiaries, are important underpinnings for the 
success of this program. To this end, comprehensive assistance packages shall

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 4 of 24

be designed to encourage the voluntary and immediate movement of BP2 
beneficiaries to their respective home provinces, including workers and 
overseas Filipino workers, especially those stranded in the National Capital 
Region (NCR) due to the Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ).

Inclusive access to basic services such as social welfare, health, employment, 
affordable education, and decent housing shall be provided for the BP2 
beneficiaries. These shall include the following:

a. Housing and Settlements. Development of a housing and settlements 
upgrading program that will offer affordable, disaster-resilient, livable, 
sustainable, and gender-sensitive housing. This shall also include new 
modalities for delivery, such as usufruct and rental housing, farm-lot 
subdivision projects and agrarian urbanism development, housing 
microfinance, and employee housing programs.

The government shall consider settlements model (e.g., Department of 
Science and Technology – University of the Philippines or DOST-UP 
PLANADES’ model, EXODUS for Progress, and Innovations for 
Filipinos Working Distantly from the Philippines (iFWD PH)) in 
determining future housing supply and demand, and the suitable  location 
of housing projects especially in emerging growth centers.

b. Social welfare. Provision of targeted and time-bound assistance packages 
and social preparation through comprehensive family case management 
prior to transfer and throughout the program implementation.

c. Health. Strengthening of the local health systems to provide access to 
comprehensive quality health services to all members of the community 
by upgrading local health facilities, capacity enhancement of health 
workers, and organization of healthcare provider networks, including the 
assignment of individuals to a primary care provider of choice.

d. Employment. Creation of employment opportunities through sustainable 
livelihood programs, active labor market policies to match skills with jobs, 
time-bound emergency employment, and retooling, reskilling, and 
upskilling of  workers to address the emerging requirements of industries; 
exploring the conversion of idle lands into science or technology parks in 
line with the regional spatial development framework and comprehensive 
land use plan of the concerned city or municipality.

e. Education and Training. Establishment of quality educational institutions 
in rural areas that offer Science, Technology, Engineering, and

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 5 of 24

Mathematics, technical, and vocational courses to create a base of workers 
ready to be tapped for manufacturing and digital-industries; and increase 
investments in learning management systems and e-learning resources.

Finally, other programs and thrusts to achieve this policy objective shall be 
developed in accordance with emerging priorities.

3.1.4. Infrastructure development. A key success factor for the program is 
taking advantage of economic geography to ensure connectivity of localities to 
economic hubs and the rest of the world. This would help ensure the efficient 
movement of goods, services, and people to take advantage of markets and new 
opportunities. To this end, the Build Build Build program, both at the national 
and local levels, shall be pursued.

Infrastructure such as transportation and telecommunications, power resources, 
and irrigation facilities which support the operation and development of other 
economic sectors shall be developed in all regions of the country. The 
completion of existing and future national road, highways, and railway projects 
to facilitate the movement of people, the creation and improvement of transport 
terminals, and the construction of public markets, logistics chains, and cold 
storage in communities, shall be prioritized.  Finally, other programs and thrusts 
to achieve this policy objective shall be developed in accordance with emerging 
priorities.

3.2. Short-, Medium-, and Long-Term Components. Short-, medium-, and long-
term programs, activities, and projects (PAPs) in support of BP2 shall be 
implemented. The short-term PAPs shall include those that will be implemented 
from 2020 until 2022 and other short-gestating PAPs thereafter. The medium- and 
long-term PAPs will be implemented from 2020 and can extend beyond 2022.

3.2.1. Short term. The short-term PAPs shall include the immediate activities 
meant to assist the relocation of BP2 beneficiaries who are ready to return to the 
provinces. Annex A provides the guidelines for the proper conduct of 
relocation, with procedures before departure and during dispatch of selected 
BP2 beneficiaries from  the sending LGUs and upon their arrival in the receiving 
LGUs.

There shall also be a transition phase where existing supportive PAPs with 
available funds or appropriations are implemented to facilitate the repatriation 
of beneficiaries and start strengthening the local economies to provide sources 
of income for beneficiaries. These PAPs shall ensure strict adherence to health 
protocols to prevent the spread of SARS-Cov-2 during this COVID-19 
pandemic.

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 6 of 24

During this transitory period, convergence points are critical to ensure a holistic 
and integrated delivery of social services, including the creation of common 
targeting systems, particularly for basic services. Strong coordination with 
LGU local housing offices for assistance and monitoring of housing program 
beneficiaries shall be pursued.

PAPs that enhance agriculture production, strengthen existing agri-based 
enterprises, help develop new agri-based enterprises, and provide other 
livelihood and employment packages shall also be immediately rolled out. 
Relevant training programs shall be conducted to develop skills that match the 
available and potential employment in the locality.

Funded PAPs that enhance connectivity, power, and communication in the 
receiving LGUs shall also be implemented.

3.2.2. Medium term. In the medium term, the relocation of BP2 beneficiaries 
shall continue following the same relocation protocols described in Annex A. 
Likewise, existing PAPs with available funds or appropriations supportive of 
the BP2 program shall continue to be implemented. PAPs for funding in 2021 
shall also be pursued to facilitate the implementation of other critical projects. 
These PAPs shall include the development of new housing projects to ensure 
the BP2 beneficiaries’ access to permanent housing. The housing sites shall be 
identified based on a set of criteria defined in Annex B.  To this end, the 
concerned government agencies shall submit to the Department of Budget and 
Management (DBM) a budget proposal in line with this program.

The relocation of enterprises, including start-ups and new enterprises, shall also 
be pursued by offering a combination of tax and non-tax incentives. Any tax 
and fiscal incentives to be given shall conform to the national policy that all 
incentives given shall be performance-based, targeted, time-bound, and 
transparent. In addition to national government tax incentives, the LGUs may 
also provide counterpart incentives. Non-tax incentives shall cover areas such 
as ease of doing business, access to credit, access to utilities, and other related 
needs of the enterprises. Considering price and quality, enterprises to be 
established shall make use of skills and local products to help the local 
community expand their markets and add to the value of their products.

3.2.3. Long term. In the long term, given initial support from the national 
government, LGUs would be more equipped to attract relocators with little or 
no national government assistance.

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 7 of 24

PAPs that require longer time horizons to implement but require initial steps to 
be undertaken by national government agencies (NGAs) shall be considered. 
These include the proposed decentralization of powers and moving the seat of 
governance, priority legislation on rationalized, transparent, targeted, and 
results-based tax and non-tax incentives, and the creation of new urban centers 
outside of the NCR and existing major urban centers.

The emerging PAPs by duration are provided in more detail in Annex C.

3.3. Target Beneficiaries. The BP2 Council shall issue the necessary resolutions 
confirming and identifying the basic set of criteria for the target beneficiaries, in 
coordination with the relevant implementing agency.

In general, the BP2 program shall benefit low-income families who opt to move out 
of NCR or other highly urbanized cities, and return or relocate to other provinces 
due to but not limited to the following circumstances: (a) voluntary decision to return 
to the provinces; (b) loss of job or other sources of income; (c) unsafe current 
dwelling places; or (d) exposure to health and safety risks and other environmental 
hazards.

The preliminary details of selecting the target beneficiaries are provided under 
Annex D.

3.4. Development of Housing Sites for the BP2 Program. The BP2 Council shall 
issue the necessary resolutions confirming and identifying the criteria for selection 
of relocation areas. A preliminary set of criteria for selection of housing areas and 
relocation process is provided under Annex B.

Section 4. The Program Governing Council

4.1. The Balik Probinsya, New Hope Council

4.1.1 Composition of the Council. To ensure a more coordinated whole-of-
government approach on the implementation of the BP2 Program, the Balik 
Probinsya, Bagong Pag-asa Council shall be composed of the following:

Chairperson: 
Vice-Chairperson: 
Secretary, National Economic and Development 
Authority (NEDA) 
Members:  
Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local 
Government (DILG);  
Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and 
Development (DSWD);

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 8 of 24

Secretary, Department of Agriculture (DA); 
Secretary, Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR); 
Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry 
(DTI);  
Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment 
(DOLE);  
Secretary, Department of Health (DOH);  
Secretary, Department of Information and 
Communications Technology (DICT); 
Secretary, Department of Finance (DOF); 
Secretary, Department of Budget and Management 
(DBM);  
Secretary, Department of Public Works and 
Secretary, Department of Transportation (DOTr);  
Secretary, Department of Tourism (DOT);  
Secretary, Department of Human Settlements and 
Urban Development (DHSUD);  
Secretary, Department of Education (DepEd); 
Chairperson, Commission on Higher Education 
(CHED);  
Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural 
Resources (DENR);  
Director-General, Technical Education and Skills 
Development Authority (TESDA);  
Chairperson, Mindanao Development Authority 
(MinDA); and  
Chairperson, Cooperative Development Authority.

A member of the Council shall designate a permanent and alternate 
representative, who is fully authorized to decide for and on behalf of his or her 
respective department, agency, or office and perform the functions provided in 
EO No. 114 s. 2020.

The Council shall be assisted by a Secretariat, to be headed by the General 
Manager of the National Housing Authority (NHA) as Executive Director, 
which shall provide technical and administrative support to the Council. The 
Secretariat shall be composed of personnel from the NHA and, as may be 
necessary, from member agencies of the Council.

The Council may amend the list of members and call upon other government 
agencies and private sector groups to advise the Council or help implement the 
program.

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 9 of 24

4.1.2 Powers and functions of the Council

The following powers and functions provide details and nuances to the powers 
and function of the Council as stated in EO No. 114 s. 2020.

a. Provide overall direction in the implementation of the BP2 Program, 
including guidance and technical assistance to government agencies 
and LGUs; 
b. Approve or modify key areas and components of the BP2 program, and 
ensure the compliance of government agencies involved in its 
implementation; 
c. Develop a strategic communications plan to educate the people and 
advocate for supportive policies in the local level, in coordination with 
the Presidential Communications Operations Office (PCOO);  
d. Identify legislative, regulatory, and policy changes to promote balanced 
regional development, and recommend to Congress and advocate for 
the enactment of such reforms into law;  
e. Engage, consult, and coordinate with LGUs in the formulation of 
policies, and implementation of the components of the BP2 program that 
will allow for resource-sharing arrangements among the national and 
local governments through, among others, co-financing mechanisms 
with development partners; 
f. Enlist the support and assistance of other government agencies, 
instrumentalities, government-owned or controlled corporations 
(GOCCs), and state universities and colleges (SUCs), and consult and 
provide avenues for the private sector, relevant stakeholders, advocacy 
groups, and non-government organizations (NGOs) to participate in the 
attainment of the objectives of EO No. 114 s. 2020; 
g. Create sub-groups, technical working groups, or committees as 
necessary, to implement the objectives of EO No. 114 s. 2020; 
h. Adopt mechanisms, such as but not limited to the establishment of an 
online platform and  BP2 desks in all offices of member agencies, to 
facilitate accessibility to the public, enhance monitoring of 
implementation, and ensure the compliance of beneficiaries;  
i. Issue supplemental guidelines amending policies through Council 
resolutions if and when necessary;  
j. By the end of each year, produce a compendium of resolutions and 
codify the guidelines-related resolutions into an Omnibus Guidelines 
and disseminate the same to all stakeholders;  
k. Assign particular agencies to perform specific functions that will 
facilitate more effective implementation of the program; and

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 10 of 24

l. Perform other functions and activities as necessary to carry out the 
provisions of EO 114 s. 2020, or as the President may direct.

4.1.3 Roles and functions of member agencies. Member agencies shall 
provide strong and coordinated support to the objectives of the BP2 consistent 
with  their respective mandates and shall identify and implement sustainable 
programs that contribute to the said objective, in accordance with relevant laws, 
rules, and regulations Implementing agencies shall constantly coordinate with 
the Council regarding their programs, and shall provide updates and reports as 
required by the Council. The member agencies shall have the following primary 
roles and functions in accordance with their respective mandates, and subject 
to relevant laws, rules, and regulations.  Additional roles and functions may be 
provided by the Council to carry out emerging and priority programs.

a. National Housing Authority  
i. As the designated Secretariat of the Council, the NHA shall manage 
the BP2 enrollment system and database for applicants and 
beneficiaries. It shall coordinate the establishment of local BP2 
Centers where applicants can manually apply and operate the online 
portal balikprobinsya.ph. It shall also initially provide the necessary 
BP2 personnel needed for processing and other coordinating 
activities; 
ii. Coordinate with other NGAs on the actual transfer arrangements of 
approved applicants, and the provision of benefits and assistance 
packages to transferees; and  
iii. Assign Regional Coordinators from its staff to provide regular 
updates and feedback to NEDA Regional Offices on developments 
from the BP2 National Council.

b. Department of the Interior and Local Government  
i. Assist NGAs in coordinating with LGUs in the implementation of the 
program on various phases; 
ii. Ensure that all efforts, updates, and developments at the national level 
are properly cascaded to the LGUs; 
iii. Ensure that potential constraints faced by LGUs are properly 
evaluated, channeled to, and addressed by concerned NGAs; 
iv. In coordination with concerned NGAs, provide necessary assistance 
and support to LGUs in performing their responsibilities and 
functions accordingly; 
v. Develop and implement initiatives that shall address policy, 
governance, and operational gaps in the implementation of the BP2 
program at the local level;

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 11 of 24

vi. Ensure 
that 
governance 
principles 
such 
as 
transparency, 
accountability, and citizens empowerment are embedded in the 
program implementation at the local level; and  
vii. Assist in monitoring the progress of program implementation in the 
concerned LGUs.

c. Department of Social Welfare and Development  
i. Coordinate with the referring LGUs and the BP2 Secretariat in the 
identification, profiling, and assessment of target families, conduct of 
social preparation and psychosocial intervention, and facilitation of 
family development plans;  
ii. Ensure linkages of beneficiary list with other targeting databases, 
such as the conditional cash transfer program, unconditional cash 
transfer program, rice subsidy program, indigent senior citizen 
pension, among others; 
iii. Provide immediate relocation and transitional packages to help BP2 
beneficiaries settle in their new environment; 
iv. Facilitate community-driven development initiatives in the settlement 
areas by providing technical and other appropriate forms of support 
to concerned LGUs; and  
v. Facilitate and manage the implementation of community-based 
interventions that will support livelihood and develop opportunities 
for the validated eligible families, including the provision of capacity 
building interventions to enhance their livelihood and employability 
skills; and livelihood settlement grants to start their microenterprises 
or support pre-employment requirements.

d. Department of Agriculture 
i. Provide BP2 beneficiaries training in innovative, highly productive, 
and profitable climate resilient food or farm production practices; 
assistance in integrating agri-fisheries organizations; assistance in 
obtaining credit and other available assistance packages; assistance in 
linking to markets; and assistance in achieving household food 
security; 
ii. Identify new agri-fisheries areas in public lands in collaboration with 
the DENR; 
iii. Provide the infrastructure support for developing food production 
areas in collaboration with relevant government agencies, such as the 
National Irrigation Administration, the DPWH, and the LGUs; 
iv. Assist in the creation of rural industries through farm consolidation 
and transformation of producers’ organization into viable business 
enterprises, or linking producers’ organizations with established 
enterprises;

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 12 of 24

v. Assist in promoting rural tourism; and 
vi. Assist food or farm producers in actively participating in the value 
chain.

e.  Department of Agrarian Reform 
i. Fast-track the distribution of individual titles to agrarian reform 
beneficiaries on private agricultural and government-owned lands; 
ii. Organize agrarian reform beneficiaries to establish mega farms and 
facilitate their development; 
iii. Coordinate the provision of the needed assistance for production and 
processing; and 
iv. Facilitate productive and sustainable agribusiness partnership 
between the Agrarian Reform Beneficiary Organizations and business 
partners such as the private sector.

f. Department of Trade and Industry 
Undertake a needs assessment of MSMEs to: 
i. Link BP2 beneficiaries to available business or employment 
opportunities from MSME clients of the respective DTI Regional 
Offices;  
ii. Provide guidance to local chief executives in implementing 
appropriate incentives; and 
iii. Advise national government on further policy adjustments.

g. Department of Labor and Employment 
i. Provide livelihood and emergency employment assistance to 
beneficiaries; and 
ii. Provide active labor market programs to match available skills with 
jobs, such as through job fairs, in coordination with the local 
business chamber.

h. Department of Health 
i. Provide the necessary technical assistance to LGUs and their health 
facilities for the efficient implementation of guidelines on health 
service delivery and health systems strengthening; and  
ii. Assist in the smooth integration of returning residents to the LGUs 
through its Centers for Health Development (CHDs) and the 
Ministry of Health in Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim 
Mindanao (BARMM).

i.  Department of Information and Communications Technology  
i. Develop and promote ICT in education and respond to the human 
resources needs of the ICT and ICT-enabled services sectors;

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 13 of 24

ii. Provide regulations for the establishment, operations, and 
maintenance of ICT infrastructures in unserved and underserved 
areas especially in identified locations for BP2 beneficiaries; 
iii. Assist, guide, and support ICT-related activities and initiatives to 
support countryside economic development; and 
iv. Ensure universal access to ICT services and infrastructure to 
generate investments and opportunities in the rural area.

j. Department of Finance 
Assist in creating a conducive environment for investments and 
enterprise development in the regions through the identification, 
formulation, and institutionalization of necessary tax and other 
fiscal reforms.

k. Department of Budget and Management 
i. Identify sources of funds for the PAPs to be implemented by 
relevant agencies; and 
ii. Monitor and assess the use of funds and physical accomplishments 
of the program.

l.  Department of Public Work and Highways  
Together with DTI, and in coordination with the respective LGUs, 
jointly identify and implement industry-promoting and growth-
driving infrastructure projects in the countryside.

m. Department of Transportation  
i. In coordination with the concerned government agencies and the 
private sector, establish a seamless and demand-responsive, 
intermodal transport network, including appropriate railway 
systems, that connects provinces to growth centers; and ensure 
efficient logistics and supply chains, and unimpeded flow of people, 
goods, services, disaster response equipment, relief goods, and basic 
commodities in times of emergencies; and 
ii. Strengthen convergence in agriculture, industry, trade, and tourism 
development by ensuring that these economic sectors are provided 
with adequate transport infrastructure support and services.

n.  Department of Tourism 
i. Develop tourism-specific and tourism-related socioeconomic 
projects and activities to generate local employment for BP2 
beneficiaries; and

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 14 of 24

ii. Provide technical assistance to LGUs with identified BP2 
beneficiaries in tourism development that provides local 
employment.

o. Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development   
i. Facilitate matching and access of identified program beneficiaries 
to available housing projects or house financing programs of its key 
shelter agencies; 
ii. Facilitate planning and program convergence budgeting for the 
development of new resettlement sites and township projects to 
ensure provision of adequate basic services and facilities to the 
project beneficiaries; 
iii. Identify idle government lands that are suitable as housing sites for 
the BP2 program; 
iv. Propose incentives and provide technical assistance to LGU-led 
housing projects that are in support of the BP2 program;  
v. Expand existing and develop new programs to promote community-
driven housing and relocation projects aligned with the BP2 
program;  
vi. Assist LGUs in the review and updating of their comprehensive land 
use plans (CLUPs) to support the objectives of the BP2 program; and 
promote the development of regional growth centers and sub-
regional growth centers by providing incentives and subsidies to 
developers; and 
vii. Promote the development of regional centers and sub-regional 
centers by formulating policies that will provide incentives and 
subsidies to developers.

p. Department of Education 
i. Implement and coordinate programs and projects in formal and non-
formal basic education to support returning learners;  
ii. Supervise the transfer of all returning learners in elementary and 
secondary education institutions in the provinces; and 
iii. Supervise all elementary and secondary education institutions, 
including alternative learning systems in the provinces.

q. Commission on Higher Education 
i. Formulate and recommend development plans, policies, priorities, 
and programs on higher education that BP2 beneficiaries can access; 
and 
ii. Develop criteria for allocating additional resources such as 
scholarships and other similar programs intended for the BP2 
beneficiaries.

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 15 of 24

r. Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
Guide and monitor the implementation of BP2 projects to ensure that 
natural resource endowments are protected and that environmental 
management services such as solid waste management services are 
provided.

s. Technical Education and Skills Development Authority  
i. Provide relevant training and scholarships interventions, including 
entrepreneurship training, to ensure livelihood and employment 
opportunities of the target beneficiaries and the community; 
ii. Implement technical vocational education and training (TVET) 
program offerings that aligned with the needs of the priority sectors 
of provinces; and  
iii. Capacitate beneficiaries to be TESDA-certified workers and 
possible trainers and assessors on their areas of expertise.

t. Mindanao Development Authority  
i. Provide Mindanao-wide integrated peace and development 
perspective and initiatives of the BP2 program; 
ii. Coordinate inter-regional or Mindanao-wide BP2 programs and 
projects and provide technical support as needed;  
iii. In coordination with concerned LGUs, agencies, and the relevant 
Mindanao RDCs, identify and select suitable pilot relocation sites 
for BP2 beneficiaries;  
iv. In coordination with concerned LGUs, Mindanao RDCs, BP2 
member agencies, and other relevant institutions, initiate the 
preparation of pilot relocation sites, assist host LGUs and concerned 
agencies in social mobilization, and facilitate inter-agency support  
for the development of the identified BP2 sites; and 
v. Mobilize assistance of the development partners and other private 
and public entities for the BP2 program in Mindanao.

u. Cooperative Development Authority 
i. Mobilize medium and large cooperatives (with total assets of PHP 
50 million and above) to assist, as a possible conduit, in the 
implementation of the program; 
ii. In coordination with other implementing agencies, conduct social 
preparation among the willing beneficiaries to organize them as 
cooperative; and  
iii. Coordinate inter-regional BP2 programs and projects needing 
cooperative intervention, and provide technical assistance as 
needed.

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 16 of 24

4.2. The Balik Probinsya, Bagong Pag-asa Regional Council. The RDCs shall be 
the counterparts of the Council in the regions. In the case of the BARMM, the 
Bangsamoro Economic and Development Council (BEDC) shall be the counterpart 
of the Council.

The Presidential Advisers for Northern Luzon, Southern Tagalog, Bicol, and 
Visayas shall provide strategic advice to the RDCs in the implementation of the BP2 
program. In the case of Mindanao, the MinDA shall provide strategic advice to 
RDCs in as far as inter-regional and Mindanao-wide perspectives in BP2 
implementation is concerned.

4.2.1. Relationship of the RDCs and BEDC with the BP2 Council

a. To ensure consistency and harmony in carrying out the BP2 program, 
all activities shall be under the guidance of the BP2 Council. All 
initiatives and agreements made by the RDCs shall be consistent with 
policies, rules, and guidelines issued by the Council. 
b. The RDCs and BEDC may involve the regional counterpart agencies of 
the Council, including non-RDC or BEDC members, in the BP2-related 
activities.

4.2.2. Powers and functions of the RDCs and BEDC in the BP2 Program

a. Formulate the Regional BP2 Action Plan and engage the participation 
of concerned LGUs, GOCCs, NGOs, and other stakeholders to ensure 
coordinated efforts in the implementation of BP2 programs and 
projects;  
b. Provide technical guidance to agencies, LGUs, and other private 
organizations in conceptualizing, designing, and financing of BP2 
projects; 
c. Promote market investment destinations in the region to bring in more 
agri-business, manufacturing, industrial, information technology-
business process outsourcing, service, and tourism ventures, ultimately 
providing more opportunities for employment and livelihood in the 
countryside; 
d. Assess the progress of the implementation of the BP2 Program in the 
region using the Regional Project Monitoring and Evaluation System 
(RPMES), and other mechanisms such as but not limited to, an online 
platform and a tracer system that will track programs and projects 
availed by beneficiaries;

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 17 of 24

e. Undertake problem-solving sessions or consultative meetings to 
resolve issues, problems, bottlenecks, and other concerns in the 
implementation of BP2 programs; 
f. Recommend measures that will further strengthen the effectiveness of 
the BP2 program introduced at the regional and local levels; 
g. Create a team of information officers that will develop a strategic 
regional BP2 communications strategy to inform the public of goals and 
objectives of the program, highlighting new initiatives in the region; 
h. Advocate and promote gender sensitivity, respect for the elderly, 
protection of children, preservation of heritage, protection of natural 
resources, and disaster risks reduction and climate change adaptation in 
all interventions under the BP2 program; and 
i. Perform other related functions and activities as necessary to ensure the 
success of the BP2 Program.

4.2.3. The RDC and BEDC BP2 Committees

a. For the RDCs. The RDC shall create a special BP2 Committee to 
coordinate BP2 activities in the region and act on matters needing 
immediate attention as it receives guidance and instructions from the 
BP2 Council. It shall also advise the RDC on resolutions that need to be 
formulated to ensure the effective and efficient implementation of the 
Regional BP2 Action Plan.

The RDC special BP2 Committee shall be chaired by the designated 
Cabinet member under the Cabinet Officers for Regional Development 
and Security (CORDS) system and vice-chaired by the NEDA Regional 
Director as ex-officio RDC vice-chair and shall have the following 
members:

i. Provincial governors 
ii. Mayors of cities/municipalities hosting BP2 programs 
iii. RDC sectoral committee chairpersons/co-chairpersons 
iv. DILG 
v. DA 
vi. DTI 
vii. DENR 
viii. DSWD  
ix. DHSUD  
x. DOH 
xi. DPWH  
xii. DBM 
xiii. NHA

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 18 of 24

xiv. Department of Labor and Employment
v. Cooperative Development Authority
vi. Technical Education and Skills Development Authority

The RDC special BP2 Committee shall utilize and align the key program 
areas with the following RDC sectoral committees:

BP2 Key Results Areas 
RDC Sector Committee 
Empowerment of local 
industries 
Economic Development 
Committee 
Food security and agricultural 
productivity 
Economic Development 
Committee 
Housing, social welfare, 
health, employment, and 
human resource development  
Social Development 
Committee 
Infrastructure development 
Infrastructure Development 
Committee

Good governance for all the key program areas shall be monitored by the 
RDC’s Development Administration Committee.

b. For the BEDC. The BEDC shall determine the appropriate structure 
and mechanism for coordination of BP2 activities within the BARMM.

4.2.4. The BP2 Regional Secretariat

a. For the RDCs. The NEDA Regional Offices, as Secretariat of the 
RDCs, shall continue to provide technical and administrative support 
to the RDC BP2 Committee.

b. For the BEDC. The Bangsamoro Planning and Development 
Authority shall provide technical and administrative support to the 
BEDC BP2 structure.

4.2.5. Role of the LGUs

a. Management of the COVID–19 and other pandemics. All concerned 
sending and receiving LGUs shall properly observe and follow the 
prescribed DOH guidelines and protocols for the management of 
COVID- 19 and other pandemics as specified in Annex E, particularly 
during the immediate phase of the program. The DOH, in coordination

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 19 of 24

with other concerned agencies, may propose amendments or specific guidelines to the BP2 Council.

b. Advocacy and information dissemination. LGUs shall assist in the 
advocacy and information dissemination on the benefits of the program 
to their constituents in terms of economic, infrastructure, and social 
service development, and document best practices of LGUs as a 
program offshoot;

c. Assistance to beneficiaries. In coordination with the national 
government, provide necessary assistance to the beneficiaries in 
various phases of the program;

d. Governance processes and systems.  Continue improving governance 
processes and systems to attract investments and business which is 
critical to program sustainability; actively engage the private sector to 
offer more employment and livelihood opportunities to their 
constituents and the BP2 beneficiaries. Monitor the progress and status 
of beneficiaries within their respective jurisdiction who have availed of 
the program and cooperate with the national government to ensure 
program sustainability;

e. Local Development Council (LDC). All concerned LGUs at all levels, 
through their respective LDCs shall oversee the implementation of the 
program within their respective areas of jurisdiction. The LDCs, 
consistent with their respective mandates, and subject to relevant laws, 
rules and regulations shall:

i. Identify relevant PAPs consistent with Section 17 of the Local 
Government Code of 1991, that support the achievement of the BP2 
overall objectives; 
ii. Ensure convergence of all local efforts undertaken by national and 
regional agencies, the private sector, and other key partners in the 
locality; 
iii. Ensure vertical alignment of PAPs to the national and sub-national 
priorities. 
iv. Facilitate and assist the concerned national and regional line 
agencies, the private sector, and all key partners in the effective 
implementation of PAPs; 
v. Ensure proper handling and management of local investment 
incentives; and

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 20 of 24

vi. Monitor the program implementation in their respective localities 
and immediately raise to appropriate the offices those that need 
inter-agency or inter-LGU attention.

Section 5. Strategic Program Communication. Strategic communication shall be 
developed and implemented to educate the people; advocate for supportive policies 
at the national and local levels; enlist the support of government agencies, 
instrumentalities, GOCCs, SUCs, and development partners; and provide venues for 
feedback and consultation with the private sector, NGOs, and advocacy groups.

5.1   Specific communication objectives

5.1.1. Emphasizing shared goals. Find a common ground and communicate 
higher-level goals and aspirations shared by majority of the population that the 
BP2 supports, including AmBisyon Natin 2040 and those mentioned in EO 114 
s. 2020.

5.1.2. Informing and educating the public on BP2. Make the public, 
particularly settlers in the NCR, understand the specific elements of the 
program to help in their decision to relocate to the provinces;

5.1.3. Preparing the provinces. Make the implementing agencies and target 
receiving LGUs understand the short-, medium- and long-term requirements for 
attracting and retaining investors, entrepreneurs, employers, employees, and 
residents or settlers;

5.1.4. Engaging stakeholders. Generate and process public and stakeholder 
sentiment and feedback on the program as input to BP2 Council policies, 
operations, and risk management; and

5.1.5. Managing expectations. Manage stakeholder and public expectations on 
the BP2 program in line with the program components with specific progress 
points categorized into short, medium, and long term.

5.2   Institutional Arrangement

5.2.1. To develop a communication strategy and implement a communication 
plan, a BP2 Communication Group (ComGroup) shall be created as follows:

Lead Convenor: 
NEDA 
Co-convenor:  
DHSUD 
Spokesperson: 
PCOO

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 21 of 24

Secretariat:

PCOO 
Members:

DOT, DILG, DOTr, DOLE, DA, DTI, DICT, DAR, NHA

5.3   Functions of the BP2 ComGroup

NEDA, as the lead convenor, shall set the strategic direction for communication 
and advocacy of the BP2 program. It shall convene the BP2 ComGroup, set 
meeting agenda, facilitate discussion and approval of overall communication 
and advocacy strategy. It shall also ensure coherence of all official 
communication materials to the overall messaging, and coordinate the 
development of a strategic communication and advocacy plan for the BP2.

DHSUD, as co-convenor, shall establish mechanisms for feedback and 
consultation on policy issues and program design at the national and regional 
levels, and communicate feedback and issues generated to the BP2 Council to 
facilitate resolution and align messaging accordingly.

PCOO shall be the spokesperson and secretariat of the BP2 ComGroup. As a 
spokesperson, PCOO shall represent the BP2 Council in media and public 
engagements and communicate to the media and the public all official 
information on the BP2 program and ensure that these are aligned with the 
overall messaging. As secretariat, it shall provide technical, logistical, and 
administrative support to the convenors, including the preparation of agenda 
materials, meeting notes and minutes containing issues, concerns, and action 
points. It shall also monitor status of action points and emerging issues, in 
coordination with BP2 ComGroup members. Moreover, it shall ensure smooth 
internal coordination and communication within the ComGroup. 
Member agencies of the BP2 ComGroup and other members of the Council shall 
provide inputs on communicating government programs and policies in their 
respective sectors in support of the objectives of the BP2 program and shall 
come up with their own information, education, and communication (IEC) 
materials on their agencies’ contribution to BP2. They shall prepare IEC 
materials for their respective stakeholders and ensure alignment with overall 
messaging and communication strategy.

All other BP2 Council member agencies shall prepare and disseminate IEC 
materials on BP2. The BP2 ComGroup shall form a speaker’s bureau to 
promptly address sectoral issues or questions raised by stakeholders and the 
public on BP2 that concern their respective agencies.

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 22 of 24

Section 6. Sources of funds. The PAPs for FY 2020 shall be charged from the 
available funds of the NGAs concerned. The NGAs, to the extent permitted by Law, 
are authorized to realign a portion of the budget of their enrolled PAPs. They shall 
always be required to perform steering functions to ensure the effective and efficient 
implementation of the PAPs by the LGUs.

The PAPs for FY 2021 will be implemented under the Budget Priority Framework 
Tier 2. Concerned agencies shall submit budget proposal to implement the program 
for review and approval of the DBM.

The cost-sharing scheme between the National Government and the LGUs shall be 
applied only during the first two (2) years of implementation of EO No. 114 from 
FY 2020 to 2021.

Thereafter, the funding requirements for the implementation of the programs, 
projects, and activities under the BP2 Program shall be funded by the LGUs out of 
their respective local funds.

Section 7. Accountability and Transparency

7.1. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Mechanism. Integral to the BP2 program 
is ensuring delivery of commitments of implementing agencies under their 
respective programs, and ensuring that the beneficiaries meet the concomitant 
expectations from them to dwell productively in the provinces and housing sites. 
Thus, monitoring and evaluation under the BP2 Program shall comprise of two (2) 
schemes:

7.1.1. Monitoring of beneficiaries by the NHA. A system of monitoring of 
and periodic reporting by beneficiaries shall be developed and implemented by 
the NHA as Council Secretariat. The NHA shall coordinate with the PCOO, 
DILG, and DICT for this purpose. Physical reporting of beneficiaries shall be 
explored, especially in areas without access to information technology.

7.1.2. Project monitoring through the Regional Project Monitoring and 
Evaluation System (RPMES). The RPMES shall be utilized to monitor and 
assess the implementation of agencies’ BP2 programs and projects. The 
monitoring reports shall contain information on the following: (a) actual 
physical progress of programs and projects against the target accomplishments, 
including relevant information such as employment generated, initial 
observable results, problems encountered, and measures taken or to be taken to 
address such issues; and (b) actual expenditures or financial progress made by 
the project against its releases (funds utilization) or against the total amount for 
the project (funding support). Financial reports shall also account for factors

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 23 of 24

behind low disbursements. The integration of geo-tagged photos may also be 
required in the submission of reports to enhance M&E activities and for further 
transparency. The existing RPMES monitoring forms shall be adopted for this 
purpose (Annexes F and G).

Performance of the program will be monitored and evaluated based on these 
key results areas, the indicators for which are defined in the Results Matrix 
shown in Annex H.

7.2. Reporting

7.2.1. Submission of agency and RDC reports 
a. Agency reports. Each implementing agency shall submit to the Council, 
through the Secretariat, a report on its implementation of the relevant 
programs under the BP2 framework including the over-all progress, 
issues and problems encountered, actions taken, and ways forward. 
Such report shall be at such frequency as may be prescribed by the 
Council.

b. Regional reports. The RDCs and the BEDC shall submit a bi-annual 
report to the Office of the Executive Secretary on the status of 
implementation of regional programs and projects, summarizing the 
over-all progress of the BP2 program, the issues and problems 
encountered, actions taken, and recommended ways forward.

7.2.2. The Council, through the Office of the Executive Secretary, shall submit 
to the President a bi-annual report on the implementation of the BP2 program, 
including its accomplishments in terms of short-, medium-, and long- term 
goals and budget utilization. The Council shall review annually the 
effectiveness of the programs and projects. The preparation of the annual report 
shall be coordinated by the Council Secretariat and the lead agency for the bi-
annual report shall rotate among the Council members.

7.3.  Knowledge, Information, and Database Management. The BP2 system and 
database (balikprobinsya.ph) being managed by the NHA shall be enhanced into a 
knowledge and database system. National agencies and LGUs shall agree on data 
sharing and access to the BP2 enrolment system and database. This will also facilitate 
ease of reporting to agencies.

The regional repository of project reports shall be managed by the BP2 Committee 
Secretariat, which can be accessed through the NEDA Regional Offices’ official 
website (e.g., M&E dashboard).

BP2 Implementing Guidelines 
Page 24 of 24

Section 8. Miscellaneous Provisions

8.1. Mandatory Review of the Program. In view of Section 7 of EO No. 114 s. 
2020 and Section 7.2 of this Implementing Guidelines, which require a bi-annual 
reporting by the Council to the President, and periodic reporting by the agencies to 
the Council, the mandatory review herein shall be undertaken every three (3) years 
from the effectivity of EO No. 114 s.2020.

8.2. Separability Clause. If any part or provision of this Implementing Guidelines 
is held unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining sections or provisions not otherwise 
affected shall remain in full force or effect.

8.3. Effectivity. This Implementing Guidelines shall take effect immediately.