MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 358

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION FOR THE RESTORATION, CONSERVATION AND PRESERVATION OF THE VIGAN HERITAGE VILLAGE

WHEREAS, The Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for 1993-1998 has identified the North Western Luzon Growth Quadrangle (NWLGQ) comprising the provinces of Region I and the Baguio-La Trinidad-Itogon-Sablan-Tuba (BLIST) area in Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR) as a component strategy towards tourism and agri-tourism development;

WHEREAS, an important component of the NWLGQ master plan is the tourism Development Master Plan for Region I which identified the area of Vigan and its adjacent municipalities as major destination called “the Vigan Heritage Village and Tourism Complex” in the North Quad Area;

WHEREAS, the Vigan Heritage Village and Tourism Complex is envisioned to be the first of its kind in the country and even in the East Asia vicinity;

WHEREAS, to enable the government and the private sector to undertake measures in restoring, preserving and conserving the uniqueness and rich cultural and heritage of Vigan and its environs and in promoting the accelerated socio-economic development of the area, there is a need to create a body that shall be in-charge of the overall direction, coordination and supervision in the planning implementation, management and monitoring of the development efforts of the Vigan Heritage and Tourism Complex.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created under the Office of the President, a Presidential Commission to be called Vigan Heritage Village Commission, hereinafter referred to as Commission. The Commission shall be responsible for the overall policy direction, coordination management and implementation of the entire Vigan Heritage Village and Tourism Complex development efforts. It shall be composed of the following members:

The Commission shall be chaired by the Secretary of Tourism and co-chaired by the Governor of the Province of Ilocos Sur.

The Commission shall have the following functions:

a. Cause the preparation of the detailed master plan of the Vigan Heritage Village and Tourism Complex to serve as the blue print for development of the area;

b. Review and submit to the President for approval, the Vigan Heritage Village and Tourism Complex Master Plan and Development Program;

c. Provide overall direction and coordination in the planning and monitoring of all program/project components and development activities, e.g. tourism development, environmental protection, attracting business investment, social development, and institutional building of the Vigan Heritage Village and Tourism Complex Project in consultation and coordination with concerned entities;

d. Study and review policy measures that shall promote and address the concerns on environmental protection, poverty alleviation, eco-tourism, and sustainable development of the area;

e. Encourage the support and assistance from government and non-government institutions in planning and implementing the various components under the Vigan Heritage Village and Tourism Complex Project;

f. Review and endorse to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) the annual budget for the operations of the Vigan Heritage Village Commission;

g. Submit to the President regular quarterly reports on the development of the Vigan Heritage and Tourism Complex and such other reports as may be required;

h. To accept and manage grants, donations or any such funds for the development of the Vigan Heritage and Tourism Complex Project;

To mobilize private sector participation as the primary actor for the development of the project;

j. To conduct advocacy and investment promotion activities; and

k. To adopt rules, systems and procedures and structures that the Commission may deem fit to carry out its functions.

SEC. 2. Executive Committee (ExCom). There is hereby created a Vigan Heritage Village Commission Executive Committee (ExCom) to supervise its day-to-day operations. The ExCom shall be comprised of not more than one third of the total membership of the fully-constituted Commission. The Commission shall appoint the members of the ExCom. The ExCom Chairman shall possess among others, provincial statute and  perspective. All action/s undertaken by the ExCom shall be confirmed by the Commission proper.

SEC. 3. Technical Working Group. A Technical Working Group shall be created by the Commission or thru its ExCom to serve as the technical secretariat. And as such, shall undertake the day to day activities of the Vigan Heritage Village Project. The Technical Working Group (TWG) shall be headed by an Executive Director to be appointed by the President. It shall be composed of concerned line agencies. The Department of Tourism – Region I and the Provincial Development Staff shall provide secretariat support to the Commission, its ExCom and the TWG.

SEC. 4. For the operational requirements of the Vigan Heritage Commission for the year 1996, the amount of Two Million Pesos (P2,000,000.00) shall be drawn from the President’s Contingent Fund, the funds of DOT and Local Provincial and Municipal Government or units concerned. Appropriate funds for succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget proposal under the Office of the President.

SEC. 5. All executive issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the Executive Order are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Executive Order Nos. : 301-440]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.