MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 256

REVISING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 58, S. 1987, BY RATIONALIZING THE FEES AND CHARGES ON FIREARMS, AMMUNITION, SPARE PARTS, ACCESSORIES, COMPONENTS, EXPLOSIVES, EXPLOSIVE INGREDIENTS, PYROTECHNICS AND FIRECRACKERS

WHEREAS, the current rates of fees and charges being collected by the Firearms and Explosives Office of the Philippine National Police on firearms, ammunition, spare parts, accessories, components, explosives, explosive ingredients, pyrotechnics, and firecrackers are not sufficient to cover administrative costs and other expenses incurred for the services rendered in connection therewith;

WHEREAS, the revision of the rates of existing fees and other charges on firearms, ammunition, spare parts, accessories, components, explosives, explosive ingredients, pyrotechnics, and firecrackers and the imposition of new ones will provide the necessary financial support to meet the increasing administrative and service costs of regulation by the Firearms and Explosives Office of the Philippine National Police.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The rates of license/registration/permit fees, other charges and penal/administrative fines relative to firearms, ammunition, spare parts, accessories, components, explosives, explosive ingredients, pyrotechnics, and firecrackers shall be as follows:

A. FIREARMS, AMMUNITION, SPARE PARTS, ACCESSORIES AND COMPONENTS:

h) Any extra slide/barrel or conversion kit shall be assessed a corresponding license fee amounting to fifty (50) percent of the rate for said caliber.

j) The cost of the license card is not included in the license fee being paid annually and must be shouldered by the licensee.

The above amounts are one-time registration fees imposable and payable for items registered pursuant to this Executive Order.

P10.00 per firearm payable upon arrival in the Philippines

11. The firearm bond for firearms covered by Regular License (RL) in the amount equivalent to the following administrative fines shall be deposited as a cash bond with any duly designated bank(s) with extensive network in the country capable of servicing the licensed firearms holders nationwide. The corresponding bond certificate shall be surrendered by the applicant/licensee to the Firearms and Explosives Office, which shall be forfeited in favor of the Philippine National Police if and when a particular firearm is reported lost and/or the license is revoked.

B. EXPLOSIVES AND EXPLOSIVE INGREDIENTS:

SEC. 2. The Philippine National Police is hereby authorized to impose the following fees for licenses, issued in connection with the manufacture, importation and sale of firearms, ammunition, explosives, explosive ingredients, pyrotechnics and firecrackers, as well as the licenses of indentors, firearm, repair shops, foremen, and purchasers of explosives and explosive ingredients.

A. FIREARMS, AMMUNITION, SPARE PARTS, ACCESSORIES AND COMPONENTS:

B. EXPLOSIVES AND EXPLOSIVE INGREDIENTS:

C. PYROTECHNICS AND FIRECRACKERS:

SEC. 3. The Firearms and Explosives Office shall retain twenty percent (20%) of the total collections for firearms and explosives fees and charges to fund the direct operational expenses of the FEO other than what is provided for in the General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 4. The Philippine National Police (PNP), Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), and the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) and other law enforcement agencies, shall be exempted from paying the firearms license fees provided for in this Order. All other government agencies and instrumentalities which, by the nature of their jobs, are considered to be revenue-earning entities shall pay the necessary firearm license fees and administrative fines provided herein for the firearms used by them in performing functions/duties inherent in the mission and organization of the agencies concerned.

SEC. 5. Private Security Agencies (PASs) and Company Guard Forces (CGFs) shall be allowed to pay the cash bond for their existing firearms on a staggered basis over a period of five (5) years from the date of the effectivity of this Order, provided, however, that such payments to be made shall be in equal amounts each year and provided further that upon the effectivity of this Order, Private Security Agencies and Company Guard Forces, purchasing or acquiring new firearms shall pay the corresponding cash bond in a maximum of four (4) installments over a period of one (1) year.

SEC. 6. The Office of the President may issue exemptions from the payment of the fee for the issuance of permits to carry firearm outside residence (PTFCOR) under such rules or guidelines as it may promulgate.

SEC. 7. No firearm application shall be approved by the FEO, PNP without a certificate of attendance by the applicant in a seminar covering gun safety, responsibility, laws, regulations and other pertinent topics.

SEC. 8. The Chief, Philippine National Police (PNP), shall promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the implementation of this Executive Order, subject to the approval of the Office of the President.

SEC. 9. The Executive Order shall take effect on January 1, 1996 after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation. The rates and charges provided under this Executive Order shall be subject to periodic review to reflect any changes in the cost of operations, consumer prices and technology.

SEC. 10. All orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21 st day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Executive Order Nos. : 126 – 300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.