MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 319

INSTITUTIONALIZING THE MORAL RECOVERY PROGRAM (MRP) IN ALL GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES, AGENCIES AND GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF INTEGRITY CIRCLES

WHEREAS , the Preamble of the 1987 Constitution ordains and promulgates that “the sovereign Filipino people imploring the aid of Almighty God in order to build a just and humane society and establish a government that shall embody our ideals and aspirations, promote the common good, conserve and develop our patrimony and secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessing of independence and democracy under the rule of law and a regime of truth, justice, freedom, love, equality and peace”;

WHEREAS , Article II, Section 21 of the Constitution’s Declaration of Principles and State Policies further provides that “[T]he state shall maintain honesty, integrity in the public service and take positive measures against graft and corruption;

WHEREAS , Proclamation No. 62 dated 30 September 1992 declared a Moral Recovery Program in response to the need to strengthen the moral resources of the Filipino people rooted in Filipino culture, values and ideals that are pro God, pro people, pro country and pro nature;

WHEREAS , the same proclamation has declared the Moral Recovery Program as official government policy and enjoined the active participation of all sectors in Filipino Society;

WHEREAS , the MRP vision is a Filipino nation that is God-centered, people-empowered, prosperous national community living in Unity, Justice, Freedom, Love and Peace governed by a visionary government that is democratic, responsive and effective, graft-free, transparent and self-corrective with a community of civil and military servants who are professional, competent, disciplined and trustworthy;

WHEREAS , despite earlier proclamations to create Moral Recovery consciousness, and issuance of the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees (R.A. No. 6713), graft and corruption, lack of discipline, dishonesty, patronage, etc., continue to taint the public service;

WHEREAS , during the Third National Summit on Peace and Order, a Covenant for Peace and National Progress through moral enhancement and transformation was adopted requiring the Government Sector’s action plan to be institutionalized;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, do hereby enjoin and order:

SECTION 1. All government departments, offices, agencies, instrumentalities and government-owned and controlled corporations are enjoined to establish Integrity Circles or any similar mechanism to lay the necessary foundations of the moral recovery crusade for Filipino core value infusion into the organization’s culture, systems and processes.

Sec. 2. The Moral Recovery Program National Secretariat, as designated implementing arm of the MRP through the constituted Government Sector Core Group, shall monitor the implementation of the MRP Integrity Circles of various government agencies through the designated Moral Recovery Officer (MRO) of the agency.

Sec. 3. The MRO designated by the agency will initiate the formation of Integrity Circles or similar mechanisms, strategies and activities that would evolve mass action addressed at affecting personal change and lead to appropriate systematic and structural change within the agency.

Sec. 4. All the agencies concerned shall allocate 1% of their Human Resource Development (HRD)/Training appropriation for the initial implementation of their agency MRP; additional appropriation may be funded as may be determined by the Department of Budget and Management.

Sec. 5. The agencies are required to provide support to the MRP Integrity Circle’s efforts to prime moral recovery transformations among employees and develop role models at all levels and sectors.

Sec. 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of April in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Reference : Implementing Rules and Regulations Governing Moral Recovery Program

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 440]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.