MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 254

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE GAS PROJECT TASK FORCE

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to ensure a continuous, adequate and economic supply of energy;

WHEREAS, natural gas deposits of at least 2.5 trillion cubic feet discovered in offshore Malampaya/Camago by Service Contractors under Service Contract No. 38 (Shell Exploration B. V. and Occidental Philippines, Inc.) potentially represent the country’s largest indigenous source of fossil fuel;

WHEREAS, the Government is committed to pursue the development and utilization of the Malampaya/Camago gas reserves for power generation through a Philippine Gas Project with the end in view of providing a long-term market for the gas, which potential resource level is projected to supply 400 million standard cubic feet of gas per day equivalent to 3,000 megawatts of baseload generating capacity;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Gas Project (PGP) shall involve operations consisting of the development of the Malampaya/Camago gas field, and the development and constitution of offshore production pipeline systems from the offshore production area to onshore gas-fired power plants and other target markets;

WHEREAS, the critical nature of the PGP necessitates the creation of an ad hoc, multi-agency body that will ensure a unified and coordinated effort towards achieving the goals of the PGP;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the creation of the Philippine Gas Project  Task Force, hereinafter referred to as the Gas Task Force:

SECTION 1. Composition. – The Gas Task Force shall be composed of the Secretary of Energy, as Chairman, and as members, the heads of the following agencies or their duly designated alternates with the rank of Undersecretary or its equivalent rank:

a. Department of Environmental and Natural Resources; b. Department of Finance; c. Department of Interior and Local Governments; d. Energy Regulatory Board e. Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council; f. National Economic and Development Authority; g. National Power Corporation; h. Office of the President i. PNOC Exploration Corporation; j. Two (2) representatives from relevant private sector entities, to be appointed by the President.

The Gas Task Force may create such inter-agency subcommittees as may be necessary to fulfill its mandate. The Gas Task Force may also call upon any department, agency or instrumentality of the Government for assistance. It shall also have the authority to hire the services of technical consultants of proven and internationally recognized expertise in natural gas technology as may be deemed necessary.

The Department of Energy (DOE) shall provide the technical, administrative and secretariat support to the Gas Task Force.

SEC. 2. Powers and Functions. The Gas Task Force shall:

a conduct studies to determine the appropriate options for the long-term markets of Malampaya/Camago gas;

b. formulate action plans and work programs necessary and appropriate to attain the objects of the PGP;

c. coordinate the implementation of component work programs of the PGP;

d monitor and review the issues and concerns affecting or which may affect the timely and efficient implementation of the PGP;

e. identify and/or formulate policy measures to address such issues and concerns;

f. enhance collaboration among agencies of the Government in ensuring concerted/congruent efforts towards meeting the goals of the PGP;

g. monitor, coordinate and ensure compliance with existing government rules and regulations;

h. conduct periodic public consultations with appropriate local government units and other concerned sector of communities which may be affected by the PGP;

i. perform such other functions as may be deemed necessary and incidental to the implementation of the PGP.

SEC. 3. Funds. – The funding requirements to carry out the mandate of the Gas Task Force shall be chargeable against the savings from the appropriations of the DOE for the first year of implementation of this Order. Funds for succeeding years shall be chargeable against the regular appropriations of the DOE.

SEC. 4. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of June , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Executive Order Nos. : 126-300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.