MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 463

CREATING THE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM AND TECHNOLOGY GROUP IN LINE WITH THE COMPUTERIZATION PROGRAM OF THE BUREAU OF CUSTOMS

WHEREAS, to achieve modernization and global competitiveness, and as an important catalyst for change, the Bureau of Customs has adopted the World Bank-sponsored computerization and information technology program;

WHEREAS, in the implementation of the said computerization program, the services of foreign consultants have been engaged by the Bureau of Customs and their service contract will expire in the first quarter of 1998;

WHEREAS, there is a need to continue computerization and information technology program initiated by the said foreign consultants;

WHEREAS, the computerization program will facilitate productivity and increase efficiency of transactions and services, automate processes and reduce human intervention, thus maximizing revenue and facilitating trade;

WHEREAS, an in-depth study made jointly by the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP), National Computer Center (NCC), United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), and World Bank found the urgency to create a centralized and integrated office that will handle the computerization program of the Bureau of Customs to ensure proper implementation and continuous progress of the said program;

WHEREAS, Section 2 par. 2(f) of Presidential Decree No. 1772, amending PD 1416, expressly grants the President the continuing authority to reorganize the National Government, including the power to group and consolidate bureaus and agencies, abolish offices, transfer functions, create and classify functions, services and activities and standardize salaries and materials; and

WHEREAS, under Section 76 of the General Provisions of Republic Act No. 8250 (FY 1997 General Appropriations Act), the President may direct changes in the Organization and key positions in any department, bureau or agency.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. CREATION. A new office in the Bureau of Customs is hereby created and shall be known as the Management Information Systems and Technology Group (herein after referred to as MISTG for brevity).

SEC. 2. COMPOSITION. The MISTG shall be headed by a Deputy Commissioner to be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of Customs. The Deputy Commissioner shall exercise overall supervision in the management of the different operating units of the MISTG.

The MISTG shall have the following offices/units:

I. Planning and Systems Development Services which shall be headed and supervised by Service Chief/ Director III who shall exercise supervision over the following:

a. Planning and Management Information Division; and

b. Systems Development Division

II. Technology Management Service which shall be headed and supervised by Service Chief/Director III who shall exercise supervision over the following:

a. Systems Management Division;

b. Technical Support Division;

c. POM Database Management;

d. MICP Database Management;

e. CEBU Database Management; and

f. NAIA Database Management

The technical and support staff of MISTG shall primarily be drawn from the existing personnel of the Bureau who possess the capabilities and qualifications required by the positions to be filled up subject to existing civil service laws and regulations.

SEC. 3. FUNCTIONS. The MISTG shall upgrade the present information technology group where it will have a more strategic position within the Bureau of Customs organizational setup and provide a functional structure which will encompass the functions which are seen as vital in the attainment of the vision of a modernized trade facilitating and globally competitive Bureau of Customs.

SEC. 4. APPROPRIATIONS. Funds for the necessary expenses for the initial operations of the MISTG shall come from available funds of the Bureau of Customs and subsequent appropriations shall be incorporated into the budget proposals, subject to existing accounting and auditing laws and procedures.

SEC. 5. IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITY. With the approval of the Secretary of Finance, the Commissioner is hereby authorized to determine the number of personnel consistent with the requirements of the MISTG and the principles of economy, efficiency and effectiveness. The Commissioner is likewise authorized to organize such units under the Services and Offices allowed under this Executive Order, subject to Department of Budget and Management evaluation.

SEC. 6. Transitory Provision. This Executive Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Executive Order Nos. : 441 – 488]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.