MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 331

EXTENDING THE COORDINATIVE AND MANAGEMENT ROLE AND FUNCTION OF THE SOUTH COTABATO/SARANGANI/GENERAL SANTOS CITY (SOCSARGEN) AREA DEVELOPMENT PROJECT OFFICE

WHEREAS, the SOCSARGEN Area Development Project Office has demonstrated its effectiveness in integrating and accelerating the implementation of major development activities of the national government, and ensuring the participation of the local government units and private sector as mandated by Executive Order No. 474 dated 12 August 1991 and as amended by Executive Order No. 480 dated 16 September 1991;

WHEREAS, the experience and success of the SOCSARGEN Area Development Project Board in integrating infrastructure development with private sector-led growth and sustainable use of environment and natural resources, and in actively promoting intra-regional economic ties in the BIMP-EAGA Region have made the SOCSARGEN Area Development Project a front-runner and model for the Mindanao 2000 Agenda;

WHEREAS, there is a need to sustain these initiatives and to champion growth with equity by expanding the scope of the SOCSARGEN Area Development Project to include programs and policies that address the basic social needs of marginalized sectors in support of the national social reform and food security agenda and all other local and national projects that require integration and coordination at the sub-regional level;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The provision on the establishment of the South Cotabato/Sarangani/General Santos City – Area Development Project Office in Section 1 of Executive Order No. 474 series of 1991, is hereby amended to read as follows:

SEC. 1. SOSKSARGEN Area Development Project Office. There is hereby established the South Cotabato/Sultan Kudarat/Sarangani/General Santos City – Area Development Project Office, hereinafter referred to as the ADP Office as a Special Project under the Department of Agriculture for integrating, coordinating, supervising, directing and formulating policies and guidelines for the implementation of major project undertakings in SOSKSARGEN. The ADP Office shall be composed of a Project Board and a Project Management Unit (PMU) which shall hold office in General Santos City.

SEC. 2. The composition of the Project Board under Section 2 of Executive Order No. 474 is hereby reconstituted as follows:

The powers and functions of the Board under Sec. 2 of Executive Order No. 474 are henceforth amended as follows:

a. Formulate policies and guidelines and establish development goals within the context of the Area Growth Plan and the role of SOSKSARGEN in the Mindanao 2000 Development Plan, supportive of social reform policy, food, security agenda and other local and national thrusts;

b. Advocate, supervise, facilitate, orchestrate and provide overall direction in the planning, timely implementation and monitoring of all project components and development activities;

c. Pool existing resources and encourage the support and participation of government and non-government institutions by creating Task Forces, councils or appropriate bodies to expedite implementation of major development projects;

d. Review and endorse to the Regional Development Council, Region XI, for approval the multi – year and annual plans and investment programs under the project;

e. Review and endorse, through the RDC, to the Department of Budget and Management, the annual budget for the Project, including that for the operations of the ADP Office;

f. Review and confirm the organization of the Project Management Unit (PMU) and the appointment of its Project Director;

g. Review and confirm contracts entered into by the Project Director;

h. Submit to the President, the RDC, the NEDA Board and Congress quarterly progress reports on the project and such other reports as may be required;

i. Formulate implementing rules and regulations pertaining to the internal operations of the ADP Office; and

j. Perform such other functions as the President may direct.

(b) Project Management Unit. The provisions on the powers and functions of the PMU are hereby amended to read as follows:

Project Management Unit . The Project Management Unit (PMU) shall serve as technical and administrative secretariat of the Board, and as such, undertake the day-to-day activities of the ADP Office. It shall perform the following powers and functions:

a. Provide technical support and assistance and coordinate with the City and Provincial Planning and Development Offices, regional offices of National Government Agencies, representatives of financing institutions, non-government organizations, the private sector and other concerned entities to facilitate the implementation of the major projects in SOSKSARGEN;

b. Enter into contracts, through its Project Director, as may be necessary for the technical and administrative operations of the ADP Office subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;

c. Undertake periodic review and evaluation of projects and shall, for the purpose, design and operate a program implementation and project benefit monitoring and evaluation system consistent with regional and national project monitoring and evaluation systems, and make appropriate recommendations to the ADP Board; and

d. Ensure the implementation of agreements reached by the ADP Board and perform such other functions and responsibilities as the Board may direct.

SEC. 3. The provision on the ADP Office Term is hereby amended to read as follows:

SEC. 7. ADP Office Term. The term of the ADP Office is hereby extended to December 1998, corresponding to the full operationalization of the flagship infrastructure projects, and the implementation of the second round of infrastructure and growth plan projects and Mindanao 2000 related activities.

SEC. 4. Executive Order No. 474, series of 1991 and Executive Order No. 480, series of 1991 are hereby amended accordingly.

SEC. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of May in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 440]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.