MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 393

ESTABLISHING THE SAJID BULIG PRESIDENTIAL AWARD FOR HEROISM

WHEREAS, there is a need to encourage and rekindle the virtues of heroism and courage characteristic of the Filipino race;

WHEREAS, individuals who have shown heroism and courage beyond expectations shall serve as good models for the citizenry;

WHEREAS, an extraordinary act of heroism and courage was demonstrated by a 12-year old boy named Sajid Bulig who lost his life in order to save other children from drowning during the Bocaue, Bulacan Tragedy of 2 July 1993;

WHEREAS, it is fitting to establish an award for heroism in honor of Sajid Bulig to give tribute to Filipinos who performed extreme acts of selflessness and sacrifice.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Award. The Sajid Bulig Presidential Award for Heroism is hereby established.

SEC. 2. Objectives of the Awards. The primary objective of the Sajid Bulig Presidential Award, herein referred to as the Award, is to accord official recognition to an individual who has demonstrated exemplary courage in the service of humanity, even at the cost of his/her life. Specifically, the Award seeks to:

a. Confer distinct recognition to an individual who risked his/her life in the service of the community, nation and humanity;

b. Reward individuals for exemplary deeds, outstanding feats or acts of heroism; and

Glorify exemplars of the virtues of courage, selflessness, gallantry, bravery, and patriotism worthy of emulation by all Filipinos.

SEC. 3. Constitution of National, Regional and Provincial Screening Committees. Screening Committees at the national regional and provincial levels are organized with the following composition functions and responsibilities:

National Screening Committee

The National Screening Committee shall undertake the following:

Initiate and coordinate necessary activities for the successful implementation of the Award;

b. Select the private sector representative/NGO partner of the National Awards Committee;

Set policy guidelines, mechanics and criteria for the selection of the awardee;

d. Screen regional nominees in accordance with the prescribed criteria;

e. Recommend to the President a possible awardee;

f. Plan and implement appropriate awarding ceremonies; and

g. Provide funding for operational expenses and prizes.

The Bureau of Local Government Supervision (BLGS) of the Department of the Interior and Local Government shall serve as the National Secretariat for the National Screening Committee and shall be the lead in the administration of the Award.

Regional Screening Committee

The Regional Screening Committee shall undertake the following:

a. Initiate and coordinate necessary activities for the implementation of the Award in the region; and

b. Screen, select, and nominate to the National Screening Committee a candidate awardee from cities or from the Provincial Screening Committee.

The DILG Regional Office shall serve as the Secretariat for the Regional Screening Committee.

Provincial Screening Committee

The Provincial Screening Committee shall undertake the following:

a. Initiate and coordinate necessary activities for the implementation of the Award in the province;

b. Mobilize support of the municipalities and barangays within the province in the search for modern-day heroes; and

Screen, select and nominate to the Regional Screening Committee a candidate awardee of the province.

The DILG Provincial Office shall serve as the Secretariat for the Provincial Screening Committee.

SEC. 4. Activation of Committees. The screening committees herein established shall be convened whenever necessary.

SEC. 5. Funding. Funding sources for operations of the committees and for prizes shall be identified by the National Awards Committee.

SEC. 6. Awards and Prizes. The Sajid Bulig Presidential Awardee shall receive a special Plaque of Commendation and other prizes as may be determined by the National Screening Committee.

SEC. 7. Conferment of the Award. The President shall confer the Award to a selected Awardee. The Award may be conferred posthumously, on behalf of the deceased Awardee, to his/her legal heir or nearest of kin.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 440]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.