MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 472

INSTITUTIONALIZING THE COMMITTEE ON FUEL CONSERVATION AND EFFICIENCY IN ROAD TRANSPORT

WHEREAS , it is the policy of the State to ensure adequate supply of energy through, among others, the judicious conservation, renewal and efficient utilization of energy, to meet the requirements of national development;

WHEREAS , there is a need to rationalize the present pattern of gasoline and fuel consumption in the transport sector to promote efficient utilization and thus, save foreign exchange expenditures on fuel and reduce fossil fuel emissions detrimental to the environment;

WHEREAS , it is necessary to enhance and sustain public awareness and consciousness on the efficient utilization of fuel in road transport;

WHEREAS , there is a need to establish a coordinating body to formulate and efficiently carry out a comprehensive, cross-sectoral and integrated information dissemination program on fuel conservation and its efficient utilization;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , president of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Establishment of the Committee on Fuel Conservation and Efficiency in Road Transport. There is hereby created a Committee on Fuel Conservation and Efficiency in Road Transport, hereinafter referred to as the Committee.

SECTION 2. Composition. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The private sector representatives shall be appointed by the Committee Chairman from the transport industry, consumers’ groups, non-governmental organizations and broadcast and print media, among others.

SECTION 3. Powers and Functions. The Committee shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate and carry out a nationwide information dissemination campaign on fuel conservation and efficiency measures in road transport, including the use of clean fuels;

b. Encourage active private sector participation and initiatives in fuel conservation activities;

c. Regularly monitor and evaluate the pattern and level of fuel consumption in road transport to serve as guide in the rationalization program; and,

d. Perform other tasks necessary and incidental to the implementation of this Executive Order.

SECTION 4. Formulation of Implementing Guidelines and Programs and Creation of Subcommittees. The Committee may promulgate implementing guidelines and devise appropriate programs to attain the objectives of this Order. It may also create subcommittees and task forces necessary for the effective discharge of its functions.

SECTION 5. Coordination with Other Government Agencies, NGOs and Other Private Entities. The Committee is hereby authorized to call on and mobilize any government agency and instrumentality, including local government units, government-owned and controlled corporations, schools and institutions of learning, for support and assistance in the implementation of this Order.

SECTION 6. Funding. The Committee shall enlist contributions from its members to fund its Program of Activities. For this purpose, a cost-sharing scheme may be adopted by member-agencies and the private sector.

SECTION 7. Reportorial Requirement. The Committee shall submit a bi-annual report to the Office of the President containing the activities, plans and programs as well as the accomplishments of the Committee.

SECTION 8. Repealing Clause. All executive orders, rules, regulations and other issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. Effectivity. This order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Executive Order Nos. : 441 – 488]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.