Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 10th Anniversary of Tenant Emancipation

[Delivered on October 27, 1982]

Year after year we have gathered without fail to commemorate together the promulgation of the Tenant Emancipation Decree on October 21, 1972; and today we stand here together to bear witness to the completion of a decade of land reform throughout the country.

By that singular act of our sovereign government ten years ago, we declared as a matter of national policy an end to the vicious system of land ownership which for centuries had kept millions of our countrymen in bondage to the soil, and proclaimed a new beginning for farming families and communities throughout our land.

As we recall today the hopes and expectations awakened by that historic moment, so do we take note with justifiable pride that what we decreed in law has taken root in fact. The audacious dream we shared together has found realization not only here at this site of our ceremonies today, but in hundreds of other villages and communities all over our country.

And it is a cause that goes on—alive in the efforts of all, of those of us in government and you who till the farmlands, who together strive to make land reform an authentic instrument for individual liberation and national development.

This is the meaning I see in our commemoration today—that on the one hand we recall here a landmark achievement of our people, and on the other we renew our commitments to the continuing challenge of land reform and national development.

For I do believe that no other piece of legislation in the entire history of my presidency, and no other program has been so crucial to our success, than agrarian reform. As we declared in that historic decree which as you all remember I penned in my own handwriting: “reformation must start, as a foundation, with the land and with the tiller of that land emancipation from his bondage.”

Without land reform, all our attempts to stem the tide of rebellion and restore peace to our nation would have proved futile, for the discontented millions of our farmers were fast falling for the false hopes and promises of subversive propaganda. Without land reform, a significant sector of our society would have been left impoverished and hopeless about their future. Without land reform, we would have perpetuated a social and economic system that gave the least reward to those who labored most.

But from the start, we always knew that land reform and tenant emancipation could only be the beginning, for our ultimate objective was not merely the transfer of land ownership to the farmers but to effect a total transformation in the lives of our farmers and farming communities. With the redistribution of land, productivity and welfare must follow. Thus, even as we began land transfer operations, we also set in train a number of complementary projects that would enhance our farmers’ productivity and income and therefore strengthen their hold on their newly acquired possession and allow them to buy the many little things that make life and living pleasant. Through the extension of liberal credit facilities, we provided funds for our farmers to purchase the inputs required to cultivate the land at maximum efficiency. We made the latest breed of rice and corn and the newest technology available almost as soon as they were being developed. We built irrigation systems so that our farmers would not be dependent on the seasons to provide water. We adopted a crop insurance system which will adequately cover the investments of farmers against losses caused by national calamities. We have provided price support to the produce of our farmers.

To further boost farm incomes, we have built farm-to-market roads to facilitate access to commercial centers and assure them better prices for their produce. And perhaps most significant of all, we have launched the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran, which is an integral part of our program for the uplift of people and communities throughout our country.

Today, as we look back to the decade just passed, we have reason indeed to be heartened and encouraged by the sight of these investments yielding bountiful returns, of our efforts and sacrifices being handsomely repaid, and of our faith being fully vindicated. And I do not mean only the bumper rice harvests we have now from year to year, but even more important, the dramatic changes that have come upon the lives of our farmers and farming communities.

During this decade of resolute agrarian reform implementation, we have demonstrated beyond doubt that we can have both social justice and productivity, and that as reforms take root, the prospects for the future become immeasurably brighter.

This is nowhere better demonstrated than in the fact that our national livelihood program—the KKK—has become at this stage a dynamic aspect of our total land reform program.

It is a well-known fact that long before the launching of the KKK, many of our farmers were already engaged in various livelihood projects to increase their incomes. Today this is a growing reality in our farming sector. With the new opportunities provided by the Kilusan, many of our farmers are embarking on ventures in addition to their work on the farms. Some are banding together to engage in livelihood ventures that tap their access to various raw materials.

This is a direction that we fully intend to encourage and support. For this is really the meaning of the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran—that it is primarily an instrument to awaken the sense of enterprise of all sectors of our society, especially the lower income groups.

We take this opportunity therefore to congratulate here the land reform beneficiaries who have lifted their eyes beyond the horizons of their farms and engaged in other productive ventures under the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran. These are the twelve individual and 3 group awardees who were awarded trophies by the first lady earlier. I would like to think that land reform has also had the effect of reawakening the once dormant spirit of enterprise among our farmers so that where once they would have been happy to enjoy the increased incomes from their farms they are now starting to venture into other areas of livelihood. It is our hope that many more of over a million farmer beneficiaries of agrarian reform will open their eyes to the new possibilities for further improving their lives that the KKK has to offer. By the same token, let me also congratulate Minister Estrella, President Basilio Estanislao of the Land Bank, and all their co-workers in the Ministry of Agrarian Reform and the other cooperating agencies for their devotion to duty, their perseverance and industry in implementing the government’ s land reform program. All of you have earned the gratitude of some six million men, women and children who have benefited from the land reform program and the rest of our countrymen for making this program a viable instrument of social justice, economic productivity and political stability.

But while we can certainly look back with pride to our accomplishments, let us remember also that we need to further improve on our efforts in the area of land reform. For this reason, I am now asking the pertinent ministries and agencies of government to accelerate their efforts to expand the land reform program through resettlement, land consolidation, compact farming, and cooperative farming. We should look into ways of opening up more public lands for possible cultivation by our landless farmers.

To further expand the benefits of the program to those who are not presently covered by it, I will sign before you today the following letters of instruction ordering:

First, the segregation of a seven-hectare portion of land owned by the Mountain State Agricultural College and the transfer of titles of the same land to the Igorot tillers or occupants at cost;

Secondly, the acquisition of the 574-hectare property of the Sagana Plantation in Kapalong, Davao del Norte; and

Finally, the acquisition of some 267 hectares of land owned by Rosa Cuenco and others in Anakan, Gingoog City.

To make this celebration of the 10th Anniversary of Tenant Emancipation more memorable for the rice and corn

Farmers, I am directing the Ministry of Agrarian Reform and other pertinent agencies of government to start giving emancipation patents to farmer beneficiaries who have made at least two consecutive amortization payments to the Land Bank. By this measure, we would like to reassure the farmer beneficiaries that it is the government’s intention to give them titles to their lands at the earliest time possible. It is our hope that in return, you, our farmers, will respond by fulfilling your obligations as new landowners.

Let me close by saying once more that our government, for as long as I am President, will never waver in its commitment to land reform and to all of you who constitute the vital farming sector of our country. Land reform has been, is, and will be the bedrock of our democratic revolution.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.