Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the annual conference of the Philippine Association of School Superintendents

[Delivered at Teacher’s Camp, Baguio City, May 8, 1972]

New Directions in Philippine Education

ALLOW ME TO extend to you my greetings on the occasion of this year’s conference of school superintendents and to express die sincere wish that the conference will come out with innovative solutions to many of die nation’s educational problems.

I am very happy to note that you have adopted as the theme of this conference, “Newer Directions in Philippine Education.” This is the thrust of the recommendations of the Presidential Commission to Survey Philippine Education which I created under Executive Order No. 202. We have now the report of the Survey Commission and I have asked the Secretary of Education to implement the recommendations beginning this coming June.

I am naturally elated by the report that our educational system has achieved almost universal education in the elementary level. This is a very important achievement inasmuch as the strength of a democracy depends to a large extent upon the general level of education of its citizens. However, I am aware of the fact that the school system still suffers from a high drop out rate. Out of every hundred pupils who enroll in Grade I only 55 are able to reach Grade VI. I appeal to the superintendents here assembled to look for solutions to this problem of school drop-outs. During this decade our goals should be to make it possible for our citizens to attain at least second year of high school.

The secondary level of our school system has often been described as the weakest link. I have been informed that the 2-2 plan, which is the curriculum setup in me secondary level, is not being fully implemented. I enjoin the superintendents to look into this problem to the end that more of our secondary students will opt for the vocational courses that will help in preparing them for gainful employment either in agriculture or industry. In this connection, I wish to stress the fact that our country, being essentially agricultural, the vocational stream of the secondary curriculum should stress agricultural pursuits, which incidentally do not require expensive equipment.

My attention has been brought to the Barrio Development School located in Masaya Bay, Laguna. This Barrio Development School is a joint project of the Board of National Education and the U.P. College of Agriculture in Los Baños. I am very happy to learn that the students in this development school are engaged in such supervised farming activities as raising poultry, swine and rabbits. I wish to urge school superintendents to study seriously the innovations being introduced in the Masaya Barrio Development School to the end that this setup be adopted wherever it is possible in existing barrio high schools all over the country.

We have a serious unemployment problem in the country today and any program be it in the elementary, secondary or tertiary levels that will increase opportunities for employment or self-employment deserves our utmost encouragement.

The Presidential Commission to Survey Philippine Education has made some vital recommendations to remedy certain imbalances in higher education and to raise the quality of the educational product. Mention has been made of the fact that close to 80 per cent of the enrollment in higher education are concentrated in three courses, namely: teacher training, commerce and business administration, and liberal arts. I understand that many of the graduates of these courses find difficulty in securing employment after graduation. In other words, they join the ranks of the so-called educated unemployed. This is a waste of very valuable human resources and I therefore urge that this be corrected as soon as possible. On the other hand, courses that are needed in national development like engineering, science and technology and agriculture, have very limited enrolments. I enjoin the Department of Education to take the necessary steps to correct these imbalances in education in the tertiary level. I urge that steps be taken to screen students enrolling in higher education to the end that only those capable of carrying the work be admitted.

I have certified to Congress the urgency of a bill entitled “The Educational Act of 1972. ”This bill has been introduced by the Committee on Education in the house headed by Congress-woman Tabiana and in the Senate by the Chairman of the Committee on Education, Senator Helena Z. Benitez. The Bill seeks to raise a total of P500 million within a period of ten years which will be used in undertaking projects in line with the recommendations of the Presidential Survey Commission. This amount will be supplemented by a loan that we seek to get from the World Bank and in the amount of a hundred million dollars. Negotiations have been going on between the Philippine Government on the one hand and the World Bank on the other towards the approval of this loan. With Congress approving the Educational Development Act of 1972 and the World Bank approving our loan there will be provided the needed logistics for educational projects designed to accelerate national development.

I close by wishing you a very successful and fruitful conference.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].