Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the closing ceremonies of the first Southeast Asian Convention on Planning and Housing

[Delivered on December 15, 1978]

The Housing Challenge

I HAVE COME all the way from the North to attend this closing-day meeting. I understand you extended it, and for this I am very grateful.

As you close your convention today with all these resolutions which General Tobias seeks to impress me, I have no doubt that he has been performing his job rather well. I would like to express of course my gratitude that the Philippines was selected to host this first meeting of planners and developers in Asia. It is our earnest hope that your conference, your discussions during these last few days, will lead to more fruitful dialogue and exchanges among the member nations of ASEAN and also among the members of the Philippine Council for Planning and Housing.

Your convention represents another vital link in the strong bond of partnership and cooperation which today joins the more than 200 million people of Southeast Asia. As one who has steadfastly sought with other leaders the emergence of a dynamic and cohesive regional community in our part of Asia. I know only too well the larger import of your initiative to develop interchange in the area of planning and housing.

It is, I believe, a development reflective of the tremendous progress we have made in ASEAN when our countries gather to consult and exchange with one another on a topic so germane to social development in our respective societies — the housing challenge.

When joined with the discussions and activities now taking place in the political, economic and cultural spheres, your conference on planning and housing provides a new and important dimension to the quest for answers to the problems of our societies.

As the first regional convention on planning and housing to be organized in Southeast Asia, your meeting may well have provided us a venue through which we can come to grips with the realities of our urban renewal and housing projects.

Those who have preceded me at this forum, both those representing the Philippine Ministry of Human Settlements and those representing the other ASEAN governments, have offered varied yet complementary insights on the housing problem in Southeast Asia. Some have spoken of the need for Southeast Asia to develop its own specialists who can fill the need for vision and expertise in developing effective housing programs for our populations. Others have talked of galvanizing the support of private enterprise in filling the critical housing needs of our millions today. And still there are those who have proposed that in the light of our remarkably similar problems, our countries should try to pool their resources in the development of the local communities in our countries.

One cannot miss in all that has been said that in our region today, housing must be regarded as a critical challenge before our societies, and that we ought to develop the will to undertake resolute effort together.

In a sense, the housing problem is but another face of the terrible duality which since time immemorial has always locked our societies in crisis: the gulf between the city and the countryside, between rich and poor, between industry and agriculture, between educated and uneducated.

It is a reflection of the duality of the developing economies that when the gulf intensifies or is extreme, the rural or poor sector falls into deeper decay, and this results in what the economist Schumacher once described as “the three giant evils threatening the life of all society: mass migration into cities, mass unemployment, and the specter of famine.”

Each of these evils represents a root cause for the terrible shortages we now experience.

It should go without saying that for any housing effort to be effective and availing, it must be woven into the mold of our strategies for transforming the developing economy into a dynamic and progressive one. We cannot abstract the housing effort from the other vital programs of any society or of any government — the programs that are vital to the changes or reforms of our societies, the programs, say, for employment, the programs for economic development, increasing exports and the studies on income and wages, balance of payments, per capita income — all the efforts at reform on the economic, social and political levels.

Thus we see, here in the Philippines at least, where housing would create its own problems if it did not go hand-in-hand with, say, economic development for the underprivileged. Even if government were to build free housing, even if government could afford to give away these houses free to the lowest members

in the economic level, the lowest members of our society, if those members are not given jobs or have no source of income, we will end up with slums in the cities or wherever we build these houses. At the same time, it is one of the earliest lessons learned by social engineers and political leaders that the least appreciated by any people are the things that are given sometimes too freely. And that in the housing program, therefore, the involvement of those who would utilize these houses and convert them into homes, their involvement must be guaranteed and assured.

And thus it is that in the Philippine program, I have directed and insisted that we not only maintain our identity as Filipinos in the housing, in the atmosphere, in the environment, but that the people themselves participate in, say, the ZIP program or the rural upgrading program. We have two models, for instance, one model is in Paoay, Ilocos Norte, the other model is in Tolosa, Leyte. In both-these programs I have insisted that if there be participants who have no jobs, we must first look for their employment or sources of income. And thus in the Paoay experiment we created cooperatives. And these cooperatives were operational before we upgrade it to a barangay, before we rebuilt the houses, before we put in the services. And thus we guaranteed not only the enthusiasm and the interest but the actual repayment of part of the investment of the government and of our society.

In the Philippine model, in both the Paoay and the Tolosa experiment, practically one-half of the amount spent goes into government expenditure for essential services—water, power, roads and the like. For this, the residents are not charged, but for the upgrading of the residences, of the houses where the government advances the money, the scheme under the Philippine experiment is that the people must participate and at the same time guarantee repayment over a long period of time under concessional terms. I understand the interest rate is still a little bit too high. And I have just directed the housing authority to lower this, by working out with the financing authority the lowering of the terms of these advances and repayment, their restitution to the government.

Past efforts in the housing field were precisely inadequate and ineffective in that they lacked this “developmental” dimension. Of course the ideal, from my point of view, would be if we could increase the income of our people quickly and allow the people themselves to build their houses with their own income and thus do away with all of these complicated procedures of advancing funds and credit. Government would, however, still have to plan the upgrading of a community and you would have to bring in the private sector to implement the planning. Government would still have to build the roads, in short, supply water, electricity, all types of essential services that come peculiarly within the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Human Settlements.

But, I repeat, in past development programs, housing was often treated as a completely isolated problem; and it is not an isolated problem. It is a part of this maze of problems in the entire .development program of a developing society like the Philippines. Unsupported by real efforts in slum improvement and jobs creation, our housing efforts in the past produced only housing tenements in our cities that soon enough decayed and deteriorated and constituted more serious problems to both the private individual and the government.

I think today we have learned our lesson. In our respective countries, we know much more about the housing challenge than we did before, and we have a little more resource to draw upon for energetic housing efforts. There is more ingenuity, more dedication and more unity as I can see from the gathering in this convention and your effort to establish a Philippine Council for Planning and Housing. Doubtless, this will lead to a more integrated type of planning and development. There will be tremendous changes in our approaches, in the management of our affairs of the nation as well as of this particular activity and economic enterprise. I have no doubt that success, will crown all the efforts of the dedicated participants in this program.

Our countries in ASEAN are more sensitive nowadays, aware of the need to plan housing programs, to acquire institutional, technological capabilities in the housing field, and also of course, a workable land policy to go with the housing effort.

The hope so richly expressed by this convention that we can pool our efforts in such areas as research, training and technical tooling at the very least deserves the earnest consideration of our respective governments. I would like to go on record here that on the part of the Philippine government, I am happy to be able to commit the support of the Republic of the Philippines for the resolutions that you have approved in this convention. And I cite especially your recommendation for the establishment of an ASEAN Association for Planning and Housing. Such an ASEAN-wide organization can serve as the nucleus of a truly cooperative and regional effort on planning and housing in Southeast Asia.

As recommended by the convention, we should bolster linkages among recognized educational institutions, research organizations and professional associations to have a continuous review of planning activities and sustain dialogues with planners and housing experts of ASEAN nations.

The spirit of kinship and brotherhood which dominated this convention should rightfully be nurtured and constantly renewed by incorporating its resolutions under the umbrella of ASEAN, working as a growing, unified community of nations.

We, therefore, look forward to the future dialogues and discussions that will follow your convention in Manila.

Before I close, let me say that the Philippine program includes the ZIP program, that is, the zonal improvement program for Metro Manila, the SIR slum improvement and resettlement program. These acronyms that General Tobias is so in love with make me wonder whether his military background is not going to involve us in more confusion than anything else. But, anyway, they sound good — the ZIP, the SIR.

Today, I am going to sign a proclamation in your presence declaring that all sites identified by the local governments as well as by the National Housing Authority, under the supervision and control of the Ministry of Human Settlements, be included in the zonal improvement program for Metro Manila and the slum improvement and resettlement program and shall become urban land reform zones.

Now, don’t be frightened by that term—Urban Land Reform Zone. When I proclaimed urban land reform, I received all kinds of inquiries from friends, from those indifferent as well as potential enemies. I informed them that the general idea is merely to authorize government planners to prepare a plan for an urban land reform area and to get everybody therein within the jurisdiction of that land reform area, to conform to the plan, or rather, to be guided by the plan. The intention is not to grab the land from the private owner and develop it as planned by government. No, it is to set the standards, the qualifications, the conditions, the terms, constraints and limits under which one can develop any piece of land. If you can develop it yourself, well and good. The government will encourage you to do so. There is no intention on the part of government to confiscate land which it does not need for public purposes.

You know, I am always astounded when our people applaud a reiteration of a constitutional provision. Well, that is a constitutional provision, and it is a policy and plan of government. However, many of you did inquire as to exactly what is meant by zonal programming, what is meant by zonification? Urban planning is a part of zonification. That’s all it is.

And so, before you today, I hereby not only ratify but make clear that the Ministry of Human Settlements is the ministry that will be engaged in the zonification of land and the preparation of the plans and programs under which land development may be undertaken by the private sector. And if the private sector does not wish to go into such development, then the government will have to come in. In these cases where the government comes in, usually there is a social problem. For instance, which of the ZIP programs are operational? Marikina or Bagong Barrio in Caloocan or Tondo? Now we had a social problem there. The land did not belong to any specific individual. So the government had to step in to take over the land and distribute the land to those who were residents there. But we had to impose certain conditions under which they would own land.

The same thing is true in the Dagat-dagatan project. We reclaimed the land and we started allocating the use of the land.

But where private land lies idle, we always say, if you are not improving your land then let us give it to somebody else who can improve it. And this is a policy of the Batasang Pambansa and the old Congress as well as the Constitution. and this is still the policy of the government. If the private sector can develop the land, the government will not step in to develop it for the private sector. No, government will instead encourage the private sector to develop that land but in accordance with the zonification program and the plans and the programs which the government has adopted.

And now, in the preparation of these programs and plans and zonifications and the like. I hear you want to be consulted. That is a surprise to me because all along I thought General Tobias was consulting with you. If he has not been, then Human Settlements will now also be consulting with you. You know how the First Lady operates. But in order to formalize this consultation channel, before I go any further, let me sign this proclamation about human settlements.

In carrying on this task of identifying the urban land reform zones and to prepare plans and appropriate studies, the National Housing Authority and the Human Settlements Ministry will necessarily consult with the local governments. Now in addition to consulting official quarters and the public sector, I hereby sign in your presence a memorandum circular which designates the Philippine Council for Planning and Housing as the official professional forum for the review and discussion of proposed government policies and major programs in the fields of planning and housing. I hand over these two documents to General Tobias and the members of the council.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].