Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the PHILCAG troops in South Vietnam

[Delivered on July 16, 1967]

MARTYRS FOR PEACE

BY

PRESIDENT FERDINAND E. MARCOS

I BRING with me the warm regards of our people. You are not forgotten; in fact, you are remembered with pride and longing. All of us pray for your safe return to the land whence you came:

Your government has sent you on an errand of mercy in a mission of peace. You left your homes and loved ones in the name of that Filipino tradition which is rooted in genuine compassion for all humanity, especially for those who, like our heroic generations, understand history to be the struggle for liberty. You are here to demonstrate the indivisibility of human freedom. You are witnesses to our people’s and our nation’s enduring commitment to the sacred ideals of peace, liberty, and prosperity as the grand pursuits of mankind.

The Poignant Question of our Time

It has been said that your presence here attests to our nation’s involvement in the Vietnam war. I would rather give its precise name; that the Filipino people, through your gallantry and courage, are involved in the agony of the human spirit in Vietnam. For the Vietnam battlelines follow the historical and moral demarcations of light and darkness, freedom and tyranny. These battle lines evoke the poignant question of our time, whether this world of ours can endure half-slave and half-free.

History has long ago condemned the exploitation of man by man; our own times demand the condemnation of the colonization of a people by their own kind.

There is for us no middle ground in the violent issues that rend Vietnam today. Our constitution rules out war as an instrument of national policy, but it does not forbid us to extend our sympathy with those who are in the midst of this beleaguered area of freedom. From our own historical experience, we know how despairing it was to be alone in the fight for freedom; for this reason, we do not wish on our brothers in Asia the lonely fate of the Philippine revolution.

Our Glorious Hour

In that glorious hour of our race, our forebears stood alone. The duly constituted revolutionary government, to put it bluntly, had to go begging for recognition in the embassies of the world. Let not the bitterness of that experience be the lot not of our Asian brothers.

It should be the obligation of civilized mankind to see to it that the bitter experience of history is not repeated in our time.

You were enjoined never to shoot in anger. You come to build, not to destroy; to give life, as it were, and not to take it. But you and I know that you risk your lives in doing so. There have been casualties. But it is a source of pride to our countrymen—and myself personally—that you have never been provoked to return measure for measure.

Indeed, your mission here is not without its sacrificial passions.

A Decision for Liberty

You have been sent by a decision lonely in its responsibility, even while its public discussion had been exhaustive, frank, and wide-ranging. Every Filipino who had anything to say about Vietnam was heard. It remained for me to weigh the arguments for and against; mine was the responsibility for exercising the persuasive force of the Presidency in behalf of what I consider the honest consensus of the Filipino people.

That consensus is a decision for liberty.

Martyrs for Peace

I will grant you that your mission of peace is a paradoxical one, for it imperils your life as much as the combatant’s. As the saying goes, you sheath your sword in a spot where swords clash in mortal strife. What does that make you then but martyrs for peace?

The critics, who advocate neutrality, do not see this shade, do not care to grant us the validity, the honesty, the delicate equilibrium of our involvement. Why should your very presence here indicate at once hostile intentions? Why should it be an “either/or” of combat or withdrawal? Except for the blood-thirsty, Daniel in the lion’s den is not obliged to be the gladiator.

No doubt, your position here is difficult, so difficult an ordeal, in fact, that only an understanding of the issues in Vietnam can sustain and console you. The Issues in Vietnam

The issues are clear, although by no means simple Rhetoric, propaganda, and historical questions have made the issues complicated for most of us. As an American marine is reported to have said once, “How do you tell the good guys from the bad guys?”

There are heroes and patriots on both sides of the barricades. The Vietcong guerrilla has a human face. As a human being he cannot be different from you and me. But as a belligerent, he offers a clue to the true menace, the authentic enemy in Vietnam. That menace the enemy, is the Marxist view of history; in sum, History as Mars.

This view of history divides mankind into hostile camps and people into hostile classes. The very term it uses is martial: “class war.” Its idea of peace is the complete dominance of an ideology which crucifies mankind in the cross of the state. Power is its worship. Tyranny its temple.

But its evil is sophisticated, unlike the diabolical evil of old. It disguises itself in the legitimate desire for self-determination of hitherto oppressed peoples. It pretends to champion the rights of those which it desires to dominate. And it is for this reason that even some men of good will are duped by this false messiah.

Freedom Is As Freedom Does

The Vietnamese people want to be free. They want to carve their own destiny. But it must be authentic freedom and genuine self-determination, and these they can only achieve through a government that reflects their general will and aspirations.

But we are properly informed about what a communist government is like. It styles itself “new” or “people’s democracy,” but we find no evidence of the institutions that make up a democracy. There are no free elections, no freedom of speech, press, and assembly, no machinery for the peaceful arbitration of political grievances. This could not be what the Vietnamese people want, weary as they are of war. The peace that must be restored in Vietnam cannot be a peace of the grave, nor freedom there be the illusion of the chained.

Freedom is as freedom does.

Commitment and Obligation

Our commitment, therefore, in Vietnam is a commitment in history. When we made the Revolution of 1896, we made it for all of Asia. We are obliged, we of this generation, to be faithful to that tradition.

Moreover, our own national interests dictate our involvement as peace-makers. We cannot live as an island of freedom in a sea of tyranny. For that would be the beginning of our own enslavement.

Thus, we are in Vietnam to pursue an honorable peace, a peace that promotes human dignity and freedom. Those who cry “peace” in Vietnam must bear in mind that there are certain conditions in which peace is not worth having.

You are here, my compatriots, to assure the future of freedom as much as for the Filipino generations yet to come as for the suffering people of Vietnam.

I am gratified that you have risen to this challenge without flinching, like the free men that you are, and, above all, like the patriotic Filipinos that you are.

I shall report to our people upon my return that the ramparts of freedom are manned by Filipinos too. Let them be inspired by your courage, so that they too will be courageous in facing up to the challenges that confront our nation.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1967). Address of President Marcos before the PHILCAG troops in South Vietnam. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 63(47) , 10581-10584.