Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the KBL Proclamation Rally

It is fitting that our party and our movement should open the campaign here at Bagumbayan, at the heart of our great metropolis, and within sight of the whole country and the world.

It is appropriate because these are historic grounds on which we stand tonight, here many an event of national life have taken place and gathered meaning and importance.

It is also appropriate because you yourselves, the people of Metro Manila have installed the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan at the helm of our government, and have led in giving us the decisive mandates in various elections, plebiscites, and referenda,

It is most fitting above all, because in this way, this party and its leadership, speaking from this platform can speak to the nation and the world, that we are proud of what we stand for in this campaign and these elections—proud of the record we have wrought during the past so many years, proud of the policies and programs we have pursued for the welfare of people and country, and honored to seek anew your mandate in these elections,

We have heard during the past weeks and months many voices clamoring for our people’s support, and offering themselves for the seats of authority and will in our government.

Now the time has come to put to test before the bar of public discussion and debate these claims, these promises, these hopes for the people’s mandate. The time has come .when all must submit themselves once more to the searching scrutiny and questioning of the national electorate.

We of this party and this movement, as ever, are ready to lay before the nation our case for the mandate to govern and lead.

We are prepared to submit ourselves—not just our candidates for the Batasan, but all who are of this party and who hold public office—to our people’s judgement, because we know that these elections are not just a question of choosing men and women to sit in parliament, but a matter above all of deciding between alternative approaches to the challenging tasks of government today, of deciding no less than the future of our country.

During the period leading to this election campaign, the air has been heavily filled by the shouting and breastbeating of many, but clarity of choice we have found. We have heard emotion and bitterness and even hate expressed, but thoughtful reflection on the issues of these elections we have not seen. And it will seem to many of you that only the KBL has truly stood clear and unequivocal about what it stands for in this time of national reckoning,

There are some among those who call themselves the opposition who can only speak with bitterness about their well-deserved fate in being out of public office for so many years, and have nothing more to offer than their naked desire for power. There are others who seem bent on merely kibbitzing during this campaign, on sowing confusion in the elections by calling upon our people to deny themselves the opportunity of electoral choice. And we shall no doubt hear more of these rancorous and shrill voices before our people judge and decide in May.

But let us not be deceived by either the confusion or division in the ranks of the opposition into abandoning the real task we face in this campaign and in the elections, however others may debase the political dialogue in this campaign, the primary task remains and we must see our way through to the real choices before us and to the determination of a popular mandate.

Whatever the confusion of others, we must ourselves be clear about what these elections must mean for us and for the nation. We must recognize and distinguish between opportunistic and cynical politics and principles of government, between ruthless partisanship and public service, between naked political ambition and authentic aspiration to serve public office.

***

What do we see as we begin the period of campaign in these elections?

The times and the challenges we live with have crystallized for us, i think, the real opposing forces in our society today, the forces bidding for our people’s mandate.

On the one hand, there is the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, tests party of the people because this is the party that has led in bringing a virtual tide of reforms to our society and has steadfastly sought to ensure the sovereignty of our republic and to bring dignity and pride to our people and our country.

And there is on the other side the party of betrayal, regression and reaction. We may see on the political horizon many political factions in the opposition bidding for attention, but in sum, despite their fratricidal conflicts and divisions, they stand for nothing more than these.

Betrayal, because they are the ones who during the recent period of national travail, have sought to make political stock of our problems and difficulties, and worse have gone to the extent of seeking the intervention of alien interests in our affairs.

Regression, because they want to go to the past, to the colonial 1935 constitution, even if this means the reemergence of the politics of deadlocks and stalemate.

Reaction, because they will not hesitate to roll back every reform that we have fought for and won,. In the interest of restoring the old society of privilege.

***

It is not however our intent in this campaign to ask for your mandate to lead on the basis merely of the shortcomings of those in the opposition.

We believe that we truly offer the better choice—the right course for the nation to take.

We believe that we stand upon a record of national achievement of which our people can be proud, and with which the nation can stay stable, secure and progressive.

We believe that this party and this leadership have lived up to the social contract we wrote in September 1972, when we embarked upon the dramatic course of national salvation and transformation, and which we have repeatedly renewed in many referenda, plebiscites and elections.

The first agreement in that contract was for the establishment of an effective and stable government to replace the impotency of democratic stalemate so pervasive in the old order. In the event, we had to turn to the extraordinary recourse of Martial Law, in order to gather the will and authority of the civil government and our military forces in one supreme effort to save our republic and meet the threats of the armed enemies of the state.

This part of our covenant, we have redeemed. The goal of a stable and effective government has been achieved. A new and truly Filipino Constitution stands today as the bedrock of our political ideals. And though this objective had to be delivered first via the aegis of Martial Law, we have proven that we can ride the back of the tiger and alight from it when the time was ripe. After the martial necessity was lifted, we returned with confidence to pull democratic government, and established in the process our New Republic.

The second part of our covenant covered the necessity for a broad program of reform for the transformation of society i2tself—to excise once and for all the vices of the old society upon which the chaos of national affairs had fed and festered. These basic reforms—basic to our hopes for a life of dignity, purpose and hope—have been introduced on a scale and scope unprecedented in our history.

These are now the very pillars of national life. There is first of all land reform, which freed our farmers from bondage to the soil, and to this day continues to open up new vistas for our farming communities and for the country as a whole.

There is secondly, government reform, which set forth the foundations for improved and effective public administration, and placed a major check on corruption in the civil service and in public office. Today, we are one of a few countries in the world that has a truly working ombudsman system, in our Tanod Bayan and Sandiganbayan.

There is thirdly, the reform of national economic effort as a whole, which decisively changed the whole approach to national development in laying the premise that to develop as a nation, we must plan and government must lead. During the time that has elapsed, our national wealth and our resources have increased many times over and productive capacities have risen. And there is no man who can say that the entire perspective of the country have not altered during this interval.

One salient statistic suffices to show the dramatic change that has taken place. In 1972, our gross national product stood at P55.5 billion. As of the end of 1983, National GNP stood at P377.7 billion, a rise of more than 700 percent during an interval of 11 years.

Fourth, has been the dramatic emphasis we have given to the delivery of basic social services—in education, employment, health, housing and social welfare.

In each of these we have ably demonstrated that we consider the social aspects of development as all-important to prosperity itself. We have invested much in the development of our young, in the transformation of our manpower, in the safeguarding of public health, in the provision of housing and other basic needs, and in making social welfare a means for the needy to help themselves.

The statistics are there in the record but they do not tell the full story of what has truly happened; the lives of people do. I am proud to say that here in Metro Manila, we see fully demonstrated the scale with which we have moved in the realm of social development, and the transformation that it has effected among our millions.

We believe that in sum the reforms which we have instituted have redefined the very meaning of being Filipino. They have given our people an identity as an: achieving and dynamic society;: and they have earned for our country a respected place in the family of nations. Our concourse with the world has grown , as our efforts at home have strengthened us in productivity, unity, and in peace.

It was around these two broad precepts—of effective government and economic and social liberation—that we wrote our covenant with each other 11 years ago. And I say to you, look upon the record now and consider how this leadership and this party have lived by its letter and spirit.

And while you are at it, be aware that it is these very precepts of national life that have been and are being put to hazard by a small minority of ambitious demagogues in our country today. They have done all to undermine our very system of government before our people and in the eyes of others, even as they now seek to use that same parliamentary system, we have established to come to power, supported by insinuations of violence. They have tried to coerce the present leadership and the people with violent demonstrations and mass action at a time when we could not take counter-action because of the economic situation and the negotiations going on with the International Monetary Fund.

No one may doubt that if these few should ever come to power, they will without hesitation and thought proceed to dismantle all the reforms that we have instituted. For they have not said at all where they stand on these primordial concerns of our society; on land reform, on economic reform: on social reform; on political reform. Indeed, they have said nothing at all about what they propose to do for the nation, should they be hurled by accident in to the seats of power and leadership.

What they have said insistently and noisily is to claim to speak for our people. Yet note well, that in no referendum, no plebiscite or election, have they ever won the right to speak for you.

But I will not accuse these political pretenders of being exactly idle. For they have been active in bargaining away our very independence and our freedom to alien interests. They have not been idle in journeying to foreign lands, to America and to Japan, and in begging these countries not to provide any aid to our country and our people. They have not been idle in smearing the name of our country before the world.

These men and groups today may quarrel about whether to boycott or participate in these elections. But they agree on one thing: their willingness to invite foreign intervention in the internal affairs of our country.

To the many questions raised by the media and by the KBL about this tack being taken by them, note well that in their replies so far, they have only gone as far as saying that they have not received funds from alien hands. The leadership of the opposition, whether for participation or boycott, have yet to disclaim our fear that they have sought the intervention of others in matters that are ours alone to decide and determine.

I put it to you then: is this proper conduct for men who aspire to serve in the high offices of government? Are these men and women worthy of your mandate in these elections?

Should we reward these acts of betrayal of the national interest with the scepter of authority of our government?

How shall we reply to the shame and humiliation they have inflicted upon our people, and indeed upon the very faith of generations before us, of men such as Rizal, Bonifacio and Recto, who breathed life and meaning to our national independence.

I say, reject them for the shame they have brought upon us and leave them their proper place of ignominy in the annals of our national life.

For if it ever comes to pass that such men should lead us, all the heroes of our country will probably rise up prom their graves and denounce this foul degradation of the race.

***

If they have betrayed national pride and honor shamelessly, they have just as zealously tried to turn back the hands of time and resurrect the ghost of the old society. They want us to return to the sterile deadlocks that almost proved fatal to our republic, and today continues to be the cross of nations. Which have adopted the presidential form of government, including even the United States.

What was our experience with this system?

It is symbolized by one simple statistic—to be found in the annals of our irrigation system. When a survey was made in 1966, upon my assumption of the presidency, as to the area already covered by irrigation, we discovered that although in the books money had been spent to build a national irrigation system covering some one million hectares,. In fact only 300,000 hectares of land had been irrigated.

Tins simple statistic tells all. Seventy percent of the money had been lost by this inefficient, corrupt and unstable system. For that system was marked by rivalry between Congress and the President, which usually stalemated decisions until they could arrive at compromises. And such compromises usually meant allocation of pork barrel funds to be spent at the whim and discretion of the politicians, without any accounting or auditing. Even the appointments of judges were at the disposal of politicians. And we therefore had justice by intimidation and corruption.

This is the record of the old system and the old regime which they want now to revive, to replace the new system which we have painstakingly built and tried to strengthen.

In this campaign therefore, the nation is presented two parties, two outlooks, two different faiths.

One party, those who call themselves the opposition, has its eyes turned towards the past, enthralled by the benevolence of strangers, pining for the discredited practices of a bygone time.

The other party, our Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, has its eyes firmly turned towards the future, firm in the faith that as a nation we can turn crisis and challenge into opportunity for making life better for all and for building the ramparts of a dynamic and achieving society.

Is there really any choice?

Do you really have to burn the midnight oil to decide which of these parties, which of the candidates, should receive your mandate?

I believe the answer is plain, for indeed it cannot and should not be otherwise. To turn back is to walk again the mean road toward deadends and disunion.

I believe the good sense of our people will prevail in this time of decision, for I know people long ago decided upon the well-deserved fate of the old society. And those who would resurrect it merely court our people’s rejection at the polls.

The Kilusang Bagong Lipunan sees this campaign and these elections as not merely a matter of electing its candidates, but as a crucial test for the very honor, the pride, and the future of the nation and the race.

The challenge to us is not just to win the elections. Just as important, if not more, is the restoration of the nation to its fully earned integrity and pride, which the irresponsible among us have sullied carelessly and selfishly.

Just as important is the need to renew ourselves as a people in our faith that whatever difficulties and adversities we may face today, our nation will surely survive and will prosper.

Finally, the elections must decide whether we shall continue to seek the mean shelter of undefendable allies and friends, or achieve our full national regeneration by looking to ourselves—to our resources and capabilities—to scale the heights of our visions and our dreams.

If we do justice at the polls to these paramount concerns of national life, then indeed will we do justice to the future and destiny of the nation and the race.

What the KBL presents to the nation is a roster of candidates who stand for more than just their personal desire to serve in public office, but for also a whole philosophy and faith in the capabilities and prospects of the Filipino nation.

They represent something more lasting than the temporal nature of elections.

They represent the republic and the society we are today, and the future that may yet be ours.

They are the men upon whom this leadership will depend in providing flesh in law to our aspirations and visions for people and country.

I say then take them into your bosom as you would your own flesh and blood, and give them the support worthy of men and women who aspire for public office with high ideals and purposes.

Let us take these 21 men and women whom we are privileged to endorse tonight as our unfailing partners in the quest for the glory of our city, our people and our country.

Together, let us carry this banner to every corner and district of our great metropolis, and in the larger campaign, to every hamlet and village of our archipelago.

United, providence will not refuse us the victory that belongs to a noble and mighty cause.

Thank you very much and long live you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.