Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 33rd congress of the Jaycees International

[Delivered at the PICC, November 5, 1978]

A Resurgent Asia

l WOULD LIKE to greet all the guests, especially the distinguished delegates to this international congress, first of all, the new president of Jaycee International and his lovely lady, Mr. and Mrs. Peterson. Let me also greet the governor of Metropolitan Manila, who, I think, has delivered the keynote speech.

I would like to have delivered that speech that she did — this makes me some kind of a redundancy. But seldom do we go to an opening or inauguration like this together. And seldom do we accept a speaking engagement together. This should be a lesson to me never again to accept such an invitation.

You have come to our country today and you do us honor for having chosen the Philippines as the site of your Congress.

You have chosen to hold the 33rd Congress here in the Philippines. Since the honor is one which, I am told, the Jaycees of Manila and the rest of the Philippines exerted themselves long and hard, by fair means or Jaycee, to win for our country this honor, we shall in addition, wear it as a badge of distinction for the competitive prowess shown by Jaycees bred and raised peculiarly in this country.

You come to a country which since 1972, as has been explained by Mr. Belmonte, now operates under a New Society. He, I think, failed or neglected to mention that martial law was proclaimed because the country was subjected to rebellion, violence, and anarchy. So I hasten to add that under our Constitution, the old as well as the new, there is what is known to classical constitutionalists a provision referred to as the commander-in-chief provision which provides, in case of invasion, insurrection, rebellion or imminent danger thereof, when the public safety requires it, the President may call upon the Armed Forces of the Philippines to meet such an emergency. It also provides that the President may, under the same circumstances, suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. The lawyers among you know what this means. It merely means that there is arrest and detention without recourse to the courts directing the release of such detained person.

And the last power granted by our Constitution is, under the circumstances—invasion, insurrection, rebellion, imminent danger thereof, when the public safety requires it — is that the President may proclaim martial law throughout the Philippines or any part thereof. This was taken from the old fundamental law approved by the United States Congress for the Philippines as a colony way back in 1902, what is popularly known in our country as the Philippine Bill of 1902 and subsequently, the fundamental law known as the Jones Law which consolidated the power of the colonizing authority to stabilize the status quo whenever it was threatened. Many other chief executives before my time have utilized it — both American as well as Filipino. And in this particular case, the rebellion was of such proportion as to threaten the entire stability of our society. It threatened to take over our government so much so that the palace of the people, Malacañang Palace, which is the seat of government was threatened with actual physical takeover by the rebels.

The matter of the proclamation of martial law was not mine to decide alone although the Constitution indicates that the President is the sole authority to determine when it should be proclaimed and when it should be terminated.

I submitted the matter of the proclamation of martial law first to the Constitutional Convention which, providentially, had been convened at the time our Congress was not in session. And this Constitutional Convention, sitting as a constituent assembly, then ratified and confirmed not only the existence of the power of the President but also the need because of such a proclamation, because of a rebellion. This matter was not enough to satisfy the opposition and the opposition demanded or rather suggested it be brought before the people. And so a plebiscite was called. In this plebiscite, the provisions of the Constitution, which ratified and confirmed the transitory provisions which ratified and confirmed martial law, was ratified almost unanimously by the people. Then cases were brought before our Supreme Court. Our courts were still operational and I appealed before that court to defend the constitutionality and the legality of this action. The Supreme Court decided that there was indeed a rebellion and therefore the exercise of martial law powers by the President was constitutional. The matter was debated upon repeatedly on various other cases filed before the Supreme Court. In all those cases, the powers of the government were confirmed as legally exercised.

We, therefore, submitted this repeatedly almost every year in referenda, or a referendum was called for the purpose of determining whether the people wanted martial law to be terminated. In every case, inasmuch as there was still fighting within our territorial limits, the people decided that we should not yet terminate martial law. Notwithstanding this, however, may I add that I think Mr. Belmonte should have added that I called elections barely several months ago. And then I submitted my party or aggrupation, including the position of the First Lady, to an election before the people. Fortunately, we won the greater majority of the members of Parliament. So, now, we have a Parliament, an interim National Assembly which is parliamentary in character. The more accurate statement would be semi-parliamentary, inasmuch as some members of the Parliament are members of the Cabinet.

So, in short, let not this proclamation of martial law deceive you into thinking that you are listening to a dictator. We have submitted ourselves to the people repeatedly on various kinds of votes, whether by plebiscite or by referendum.

But, anyway, the Prime Minister, meaning the leader of the party that won the greatest number of seats in the Parliament, exercises during this interim period the powers of the (old) President.

Now, let’s go to more interesting matters. Your theme — “Our Children, Our Future” — is, I am certain, an expression of that spirit of commitment of the Jaycees International to internationalism, brotherhood and progress, which from the beginning have always formed the central concern of its charter.

But your theme, I feel, expresses more than mere spirit and mere commitment. It reflects also the profound preoccupation of mankind itself as it approaches the end of the 20th century with many global problems such as energy, population, poverty, conflict, and development which assail the present and endanger the future of our children.

If we look at our world of the present as presaging our world of the future, we shall find much that will raise our hopes and also much that will arouse our concern. Our hopes, because we have today within reach the means to achieve peace and progress — a single family of man — and concern, because the sources of conflict and the formidable problems remain to be confronted.

Yet, if you ask us in Asia — for I believe that the honor that you have given us in choosing the Philippines is not an honor alone for our country but an honor for all of Asia, and I would presume therefore that the questions that are posed by your theme are posed in the context of Asia — so if you ask us in Asia, in the very seat of many of these global problems that I speak of, what the prospects are for our future, we shall say that our faith is strong that the world of tomorrow will be better, very much better.

And so the first message that I bring to you from Asia is a message of hope. It is hope that is founded on our recent experience in making peace and stability in our region and in the engineering of development in our respective societies.

Although Asia was the seat of two ancient civilizations and of several very old island cultures, most of the modern states of Asia emerged only after the Second World War during the 40s and the 50s, and some as late as the 60s.

These states rose from the ruins of empires, their frontiers in many cases artificially set by the former boundaries of colonies and their new governments burdened by the legacy of centuries of colonialism.

Asia became a major theater of the cold war; it became a very real question whether or not some of these states would survive or were viable at all; whether or not some of these governments could govern well or could govern at all; whether or not the integrity of some of these national territories could be defended or should be maintained at all.

The answer to these questions has become clearer and more certain in the present decade. The new states of Asia, their governments and their territories have survived because the decades of external pressures and foreign interventions, internal dissension and dissidence, as well as border disputes and conflicts were overcome to achieve in such a stability, with some anxious exceptions. This is true with everybody in the region. The independence of these states, the political authority of their governments and the integrity of their national territory have been asserted, demonstrated and confirmed beyond doubt or challenge. In some of these states, serious efforts at social reform and the integration of minority ethnic communities have also greatly advanced national unity and national integration.

The new stability of governments and states in Asia has been enhanced by a second political development in the region. This was the end to the cold war. Most of the Western world speak of the cold war as a theoretical matter of principles as terminated by detente. Detente came with the termination of the war in Indochina.

After a generation of being divided by their militant ideological allegiances into antagonistic alliances, the countries of Asia, socialist and non-socialist alike, have become free at last to regard each other with new appreciation and respect, to recognize each other’s sovereignty, to co-exist with different political creeds and social systems, and to explore the avenues of bilateral and even multilateral cooperation in the region.

This detente in Asia has made it realistically possible for us to organize the ASEAN which seeks to establish in Southeast Asia a Zone of Peace, Freedom and Naturality.

I do not make light of the tensions that today appear to trouble Asia’s socialist states, and hence the rest of the continent. The dangers of confrontation cannot be ignored, yet the problems are not such that they cannot be resolved by mediation, conciliation and pacific settlement.

I remember that the 60s was declared by the United Nations as the Decade of Development. The declaration was intended to signal a global and sustained effort to achieve a breakthrough in the underdeveloped regions of the world.

As we know, the decade failed to achieve its promise, and the failure produced much discouragement and disenchantment. But we know also from hindsight that it was in this decade that development took root in Asia which bore evident fruit in the following 70s.

Those who look for economic miracles now look towards Asia as the likely setting for the next economic miracle on the planet. After all the economic indicators and watchers will tell you that it was Asia during this decade that registered the highest rates of growth in trade and GNP. Even at a time of world recession, the countries of East Asia and the countries of the ASEAN remarkably maintained the momentum of economic growth and expansion.

But more important than growth rates, because they are more fundamental, are the emergent capabilities of Asian countries for the tasks and challenges of development.

We see these emergent capabilities in the increased competence of the countries of Asia to make development plans, implement them and meet their targets. We see them in the new ability to use trade and economic diplomacy to achieve development goals and to channel foreign aid and foreign investments for the long-term interest of the recipient and host country. We see them also in the enlarged capacity to provide for the basic needs of the masses of the population.

Perhaps the most remarkable of these emergent capabilities is the one represented by the ASEAN. It is the capability to engage in sustained cooperation to promote the peace, the stability and the development of Southeast Asia.

I have drawn for you a picture of a resurgent Asia. Asia is astir with a new wind of hope. And Asia’s children, the children of the poor, may look forward to a better and a more peaceful life.

It is well that we who live in Asia should know this; and it is well that you who wish us well should know this too. For it will give us fresh confidence and new vigor to confront the formidable challenges which have yet to be met.

I shall be candid with you. At the time that ASEAN was founded, very few could see that it would become a significant factor for stability and economic cooperation in this sub-region, but it has become such a stabilizing factor.

It helped of course that the political leadership in nearly all of the member-states which member states are Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines — nearly all of these member-states, the political leadership proved remarkably durable.

But if the contemporary ferment in Asia is to fully result in the improvement of the lot of our millions and in the rise of our societies to the hearthfire of development, it must be sustained and aided by an even larger in character is the movement of the whole world toward true international cooperation and interdependence.

For the conditions of our lives, the problems we face, the goals that awaken us today are interlocked with the life of the rest of the world. For humanity needs to be matched by equally responsive action by all other continents and other nations.

With the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, there has lately risen a meeting of minds and of concerns, which holds much promise for the future. We have seen within this decade the new dynamism of what we know today as the Third World, a dynamism that is expressed now in concrete programs of action and in concerted advocacy of international reform. It is our hope that such international reform will receive the support of all right-thinking men irrespective of what class of country they come from, developed or developing.

Many decades ago, in the face of the problems that beset the world of the 30s and the 40s, many writers and intellectuals took turns in dividing the future of man and human society, given the tendencies of that stage. Of these prophets of our lifetime, no one has been more influential in shaping outlook than George Orwell and his book, entitled 1984, which singularly impressed upon us the kind of society toward which man was headed in this century.

Today, we are only six years away from 1984.

Yet, if you ask us here in Asia and if we look together at the world we live in, at our societies and at our lives; and if we ponder hard upon the problems that beset us in our time, I do not believe that 1984 will turn out to be such a bad year as Orwell predicted.

I think 1984 is worth waiting and fighting for, and living for.

Let the Jaycees therefore then help build the future, for after all they are the young.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].