Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Farmers’ Day

I am pleased to be with the true heroes of our country, our farmers, once again on this occasion. Perhaps farmers are even greater than some of the recognized heroes of our nation, even though they do not participate in the field of war or in politics, farmers sacrifice their sweat and blood every day, they fight daily against the trials of nature, they risk their entire being so that our country will not be shaken by hunger.

As a developing country the economy of the Philippines is founded upon agriculture, upon the sweat and toil of the millions of farm workers who constitute the great majority of our people. Some so-called experts point out to the principally agricultural character of our National Economy as one of the major factors for our underdevelopment. Some know-it-all experts say that because agriculture is the main standard of our national economy, that is why the development of our country is lagging behind. These so-called experts formulated their analysis on the basis of a discredited theory of development that views progress in one country only in terms of steel mills, gigantic factories, petrochemical plants and all the other vestiges of industrialization. I say discredited because recent events have shown that in the present era it is not enough for a country to be able to produce so many millions of tons of high-grade steel to ensure the prosperity and well-being of its citizens. In this day and age when almost every country in the world is experiencing a severe economic crisis, it is clear that countries with sufficient capacity to meet their basic needs have an advantage. The severe economic crisis that haunts virtually every nation earth has only served to emphasize the importance of self-sufficiency. We in the Philippines are especially fortunate that we have been endowed by divine providence with a land so rich in natural resources. Our farms, our seas, our forests possess natural resources that are hard to match throughout the world. Though we ourselves have been adversely affected by the energy crisis, it is this same crisis that has dramatically demonstrated that many of the most advanced nations, the highly industrialized countries, like the many ancient civilizations that history has cast into oblivion, have feet of clay. It is easily proven that the situation of some of the so-called developed or industrialized countries is fragile: we only need to ask them if that oil can quench thirst? Can that steel or iron be made into a viand? Can those chemicals or plastics be made into something to fill the stomach if not exchanged for food? It is clear that they cannot. And a time will come, which seems to be gradually approaching, when the true importance of agriculture in the world economy will once again be recognized.

This is the reason why our government has made it a strict policy to lay greater emphasis on food production, an agrarian reform, on the development of our rural areas. For we foresee a future when the very survival of our nation shall depend almost entirely on the ability of our rural communities to feed the rest of the nation, to produce the raw materials required in the manufacture of our people’s most basic needs. The story of development in our country has for centuries had its focus in the countrysides. The first urgings of nationhood were most keenly felt by the millions of Filipino peasants who rallied around the banner of independence during the revolution at the turn of the century. Many of the soldiers and freedom fighters who kept alive the spirit of liberty during the dark days of the last war were young farmboys whose instinct for freedom and democracy tolerated no foreign invader. Our own movement for national reform, our new society, was fueled by our desire to redress the age-old injustices that once prevailed in our rural areas. Again, even with agrarian reform, we have been able to draw great pride as a nation from the concrete achievements that have taken place in our agricultural communities. After decades of being a perennial rice importer, the Philippines has become a net exporter of staples. Our various agricultural production programs have succeeded in raising rural incomes, such that during the bleakest periods of the current economic crisis it was the increased purchasing power of our rural populations that primarily helped sustain industrial manufacturing. We need only to remind ourselves of some of the latest developments in the rural areas to discover the collective confidence we need to face up to the challenges and the opportunities of the coming years.

Our agrarian reform program has liberated hundreds of thousands of former tenants from their bondage to the soil. As of March 1981 495,904 certificates of land transfer—covering 589,649 farmland hectares—have been issued, consequently benefitting 378,789 farmers. Realizing the fact that one of the causes of backwardness in the rural areas was the absence of adequate credit facilities we launched and are presently implementing a number of agricultural credit extension programs, including Masagana 99, Masaganang Maisan, Biyayang Dagat, Bakahan sa Barangay Ang Gulayang Bayan. For the Masagana 99 program alone we have extended loans amounting to P4.5 billion as of 1980. Contrary to what our critics have been claiming, the repayment rate in the Masagana 99 program gas reached 80 percent, surpassing even the repayment rate of collateralized industrial loans. With this revolutionary credit system, dependence on non-formal credit sources—meaning usury—in the rural areas has declined from 90 percent on 1961 to 35 percent on 1976. Taking off from the success of Masagana 99, supervised credit has been extended to other areas of agriculture, including corn, vegetables, livestock, fish, export crops and even forest products.

To ensure stable and ever-growing production levels, the government has been subsidizing fertilizer prices for the past seven years in order to shield farmers from spiralling world prices of this important input. As of the end of December 1980, the government has spent P2 billion in fertilizer subsidies for rice and corn farmers. In an effort to provide marketing and price supports to agricultural production the government in 1972 created the national grains authority, now the national food authority, to regulate the procurement and marketing of grains, especially rice. In 1975, the country had only 52 warehouses with a capacity of 3.2 million bags. Today, we have 792 warehouses located in strategic points throughout the land with a combined capacity of 36.2 million bags. As part of this program we have also established an adequately funded price support system for grains that has served to assure our farmers of profitable prices for their produce in case market prices drop during harvest time.

As a means of maximizing productivity in our farmlands, the government has been vigorously pursuing the irrigation program. In 1972, the entire country had only 780,158 hectares of irrigated land. By 1980, a total of 1,322,390 hectares of farmlands have been irrigated, representing an increase of about 70 percent in hectarage covered by irrigation. In the next ten years the government intends to put under irrigation a total of 2.47 million hectares of land, representing 73 percent of the estimated irrigable lands in the country.

In order to stimulate the development of alternative industries in the rural areas, as well as to make available to more agricultural communities the amenities of modern living, the government has set aside P500 million for rural electrification, with an additional assistance of P282,352,000 from USAID, World Bank, OECF and the Federal Republic of Germany. To date, 1,441,000 households in the countrysides have been energized through our Rural Electrification Program.

Only recently we promulgated PD 1467 launching the National Crop Insurance Program and creating the Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation which will provide insurance protection for 1.6 million farmers against losses due to natural disasters, plant diseases or pest infestation. the crop insurance program is the first of its kind in the country and it will cover all types of farm products, including the cost of production such as labor, fertilizers, pesticides, the farmer’s share of the insurance premium and other items qualified for financing under the government’s supervised credit program.

Of course, our efforts at increasing agricultural productivity have not been confined to the areas we have discussed. we are pursuing just as seriously other projects along the lines of agricultural research and education, the transfer or extension of technology, the building up of marketing cooperatives, export generation and import substitution, integrated area development, multiple cropping and dairy development. we are doing all this and we shall do more since we, perhaps, more than anybody else realize the deficiencies of our agricultural economy. If we are to continue adequately feeding our growing population, if we are to generate from the rural areas the capital required to sustain our thrusts toward modernization, if we are to do away with inherited economic and social inequities between the urban centers and the countrysides we must continually persist in our current efforts and, more important, devise new approaches to the general goal of countryside and agricultural development.

It is in this spirit that we have decided to announce on this day certain policies and actions that the government will take to insure the sustained growth of our agricultural sector.

For the grains farmers, who because of inflationary pressures have been denied a substantial part of their potential income, I authorize the increase in the price of palay to P1.55 per kilo and the price of corn to P1.30 per kilo to take effect immediately. I am certain that this measure would stimulate greater grains production. As additional support to our grains farmers, the government beginning this day shall launch a grain drying program with an initial fund of P106 million in order to enhance our capabilities in processing these vital staples.

One of the principal objectives of our food production program is to achieve self-reliance, food security and make available to our people high-protein food. There is however one area of food production where we have been unfortunately deficient; I refer specifically to dairy production. in order to correct this situation, in order to save ourselves millions of dollars in foreign exchange used in importing dairy products, in order to provide additional sources of income for our farmers, I formally announce the launching of the dairy development program with the appointment of three private sector representatives who shall complete and thus make fully constituted the board of directors of dairy development corporation.

Over the past few years we have succeeded in converting the Samahang Nayons into full-fledged primary cooperatives that undertake business and economic activities. There are now 21,000 Samahang Nayons throughout the country with a total membership of million farmers. In order to further strengthen this network of rural cooperatives I order the withdrawal of barangay savings fund in accordance with the relaxed requirements of the Central Bank. I also authorize the Land Bank of the Philippines to inject equity into these cooperative rural banks amounting to at least one million pesos per cooperative bank. Finally, I order that the cooperative development loan fund be constituted into a revolving fund in order that it could benefit and extend credit to more agricultural producers.

As additional supports to our efforts at cooperatives building I am authorizing the Ministry of Agriculture to make use of its P2 million savings for the training of field personnel on the organization of cooperatives. In addition, I authorize the National Economic Development Authority to make available an additional amount of P6 million to the Cooperative Foundation of the Philippines as seed capital. In order that the benefits of rural cooperatives be extended even to those who had once been misguided to rebel against duly constituted authority but have now pledged to return to folds of the law and render allegiance to the government. I order that the Amanah Bank be put into full operation in order that it can finance the building of rural cooperatives among rebel returnees.

Finally I order that farmers be given representation in the boards of government agencies dealing with agriculture, namely the Livestock Development Council, the Dairy Development Corporation and the National Wages Council to insure that the best interests of our agricultural producers are safeguarded and advanced in these bodies.

I hope you were not too overwhelmed by the series of policies and initiatives that I have announced. The welfare of our farmers is close to the heart of your government. We are striving to deliver to all of you the blessings, as well as the assistance and support that you will need to advance the state of agriculture in our country. You can rely on us to not stop our extensive efforts to achieve progress, to further improve the condition of our farmers because on your shoulders, with your strength, lies the life and future of our country.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.