Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the commencement exercises of the Philippine Military Academy

[Delivered on March 1, 1977]

Beyond the Challenge of Our Times

IT IS A tradition firmly kept and followed every year for the President to come to this academy to offer words of welcome and congratulations to its new graduates. In the years of my presidency, I have seen many young men pass through the portals of this institution from the year 1965 to the present. I have seen these young men come out of the academy to serve the nation, and it has been my great experience as President to see them rise to heights of leadership in our armed forces and in the Republic.

It was said once that “the service of institutions of learning is not private, but public.” In the case of the Philippine Military Academy, this is both a commitment and a mission. No other institution maintains so fundamental and unshakeable a bond with the nation; none has been directed, by charter and design, to prepare young men for national service more than the Philippine Military Academy.

I congratulate you, honored graduates in today’s ceremonies, for your deliberate and voluntary choice of this noble career in the military. For your life work and profession will be that which is devoted in the way of sacrifice, perhaps of life, of all ambitions, of youth to the country and to our people. There can be no more noble profession than this.

And so I may say on this occasion of your commencement that I welcome you today as my colleagues and comrades-in-arms, and if there be any advice or counsel that I as commencement speaker might impart to you, it is the counsel and challenge of the times in which we live.

I remember a year ago when I came for the commencement of the graduates who preceded you; I spoke of the urgent problems we faced in the sphere of national security and the problems of pacification and rebellion that we continue to face in the southern regions of the country.

I sought the transfer of this ceremony from February 20th to March 1st because we have been occupied by a crisis which confronts our country, and that is, the crisis arising out of the effort to settle the fighting in the South peacefully. Last year, I spoke of the policies and measures of government and the military to bring peace to the South. 1 told the graduates then, and now you who are graduating this year, that a military solution is insufficient and inadequate to bring about complete peace in the South. That year, very sadly, we could only speak of the peace that we wanted and not of peace actually reigning in the troubled areas.

Now a year later, the situation has changed. For the first time since the start of the conflict, hostilities in Mindanao have stopped under the umbrella of a ceasefire, agreed upon in Tripoli last December 23, Libyan time, and December 24, Philippine time.

This agreement entered into after the first round of negotiations in Tripoli was started by the visit of the First Lady on November 15. You are well aware that for the past three years, we have been trying to negotiate some kind of settlement of the secessionist rebellion in the South. For more than three years, we had sought an invitation, or we had thought to invite the leadership of Libya, which had openly declared support for the secessionist, to either come to the Philippines or for us to be invited to Libya.

Suddenly after the great earthquake in the South on August 21, the minister representing Libya in the Quadripartite Islamic Committee that visited the Philippines upon our invitation, also went to the South — where I had brought my entire family to give succor and sympathy to the victims not only of that great earthquake but of the tsunami that killed more than 8,000 of our people. He joined us in Mindanao and suddenly we received an invitation to visit Libya.

Since I was also in the middle of many urgent matters, I indicated that I, perhaps, would not be able to go to Libya personally for the meantime, and asked that it be postponed for a month or two.

During the International Monetary Fund-World Bank Conference in October, we received the formal invitation from President Moammar Khaddafy, the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Libyan Arab Republic for the President and the First Lady to visit Libya as state guests. And if the President could not go, for the First Lady to visit as the guest of President Moammar Khaddafy.

The First Lady was accompanied by the representatives of the National Defense Department including the major service commanders. I can mention the Commanding General of the Philippine Army, Major General Abat; the Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force, Rear Admiral Espaldon; the Chief of Intelligence and Security, Major General Ver; Metrocom Commander Brigadier General Olivas, and representatives of the Secretary 0f National Defense, as well as Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs Collantes.

I repeat, we did not expect the ceasefire to arise out of this formal meeting for a state visit is usually such a ceremonial affair where you go through the usual ceremonies of toasts and expectations and the amenities of wishing each other good health and success but actually achieving nothing.

However, on November 17, 1976, while I was playing golf on the Malacañang golf course, I received an urgent call through the telephone — a call from across the seas, from Libya. The First Lady was on the telephone. To my surprise, when the First Lady recognized me on the telephone, she said, “Hold on, somebody wants to talk to you.” And I heard the voice that said, “This must be President Marcos.” And I said, “Yes, it is President Marcos. Who is this?” And he said, “This is Colonel Khaddafy.” I did not realize that he spoke English rather well, because we had sent French and Arab interpreters for the party of the First Lady.

As you are well aware, heads of state, heads of government don’t talk to each other over the telephone without being introduced, but here we were. Of course, the First lady had broken protocol and thank God she did. She told me later, “I did not break any protocol because I do not believe that such a protocol exists. After all, he wanted to talk to you, so I gave the telephone to him.”

And we exchanged amenities but later on, we discussed the Mindanao conflict. I realized then and there that it was a God-given opportunity for me to immediately open the subject of the Southern fighting. And one thing led to another, I asked him, “Why don’t you and the First Lady now look into this problem of the impasse about the agreement and how we should settle the Mindanao conflict? I said, yes, negotiations should be immediately called. And I called his attention to the fact that Minister Ali Al Treki, his Foreign Minister, had agreed that if it were possible, the negotiations should be held in Tripoli, Libya. I repeated this suggestion and this led to the negotiations in Tripoli.

I have been asked by a number of voices to reveal the truth about the situation in the South. Am I optimistic of a continuation of the ceasefire and a final peaceful settlement of this conflict? I am certain in the graduates will be interested to know exactly what are they graduating into. Are you graduating into a war in the South? Are you going to fight more battles? My answer is: I am optimistic that the ceasefire, temporary and transitory as it my be, will graudate into a final, peaceful settlement of the Mindanao conflict.

You are well aware that we have signed what is known as an agreement in principle on December 23, 1976. This agreement provides that there shall be a ceasefire. We will negotiate the organization of a regional government which shall be autonomous to a certain extent without violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines. We also agreed that the constitutional processes and requirements of the Republic of the Philippines would be complied with. This is why we are now submitting to a plebiscite on March 17 the matter of what provinces will be included in the autonomous region to be organized in Mindanao.

This is the first step towards final resolution and reconciliation. Under the agreement of December 23, we must hold the second round of negotiations from February 5th to March 3rd. It is now March 1st. And the question has been asked: why has nothing come out of this second round of negotiations if it is true that you and President Khaddafy are both optimistic about the results of this second round of negotiations? My answer is: We have been exchanging communications. I have written to President Khaddafy through the Charge d’ Affaires, Ambassador Mohammad Dreiza, explaining that the plebiscite was necessary. His cabled answer which I received the other day indicates that he is also optimistic about the results of this settlement. He informs me that whatever the obstacles, he is aware that both parties are sincere in seeking a just and peaceful solution. And what with the sincerity demonstrated by both parties, the government of the Republic of the Philippines and the National Liberation Front as well as the supervision by Libya and the Islamic Conference of the Moro National Liberation Front, there will be a settlement.

So the second round of negotiations is in progress in Tripoli. We believe in the good faith of President Khaddafy. We believe in the sincerity of the members of the Islamic Conference and also of the Quadripartite Committee composed of Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Senegal and Libya. We believe that the participation of the Quadripartite Committee which has been appointed supervisors of the ceasefire will bring about a sincere implementation of the agreements.

What are the difficulties and obstacles to a final settlement of the Southern front fighting? The present obstacle right now is: The Moro National Liberation Front has made some demands. We are all aware that we have insisted that the integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of the Philippines be maintained. However, they have insisted that I issue a decree organizing Palawan and the ten provinces of Regions IX and XII which are Tawi-Tawi, Sulu, Basilan, Zamboanga Norte Zamboanga Sur, Lanao Norte, Lanao Sur, Maguindanao, Sultan Kudarat, Cotabato Norte, Cbtabato Sur, and Davao Sur – thirteen provinces to be included in one single region.

I have said that under our Constitution, we must seek approval of such a region, a regional autonomous government, by the people themselves. And so I have called a plebiscite for this purpose.

I just received a cable from President Khaddafy indicating the position of the Moro National Liberation Front. The Moro National Liberation Front has stated to President Khaddafy, and President Khaddafy has transmitted this to me, that if the provinces of Palawan, Cotabato Sur, and Davao Sur were not included in the autonomous regional government, fighting might be resumed.

It is my opinion, however, that this is a position that has been adopted as a negotiating position. It is now necessary that the leadership of both the Philippines and Libya as well as the members of the Islamic Conference, demonstrate the highest form of statesmanship to bring about a scheme under which there may be a regional autonomy without violating the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines.

This is the situation in which we are. This is one of the reasons why I could not come on February 20th. You are well aware also that on those particular days, we were going to call a plebiscite for February 21st, but on the petition of a great number of the residents and the voters in the Southern region, we have delayed the plebiscite to March 17 to give time for a proper information period.

During the past two weeks, we have endeavored to bring the issues to the people of Mindanao, in order to ensure that the plebiscite in the 13 provinces of Southern Philippines will fully reflect their mandate. All sectors in the South are now engaged in this particular effort, and the Commission on Elections has fully prepared for the orderly conduct of the voting.

Today, I come before you and announce that for purposes of this plebiscite—as of the day that I called the plebiscite, the effects of martial law are hereby declared lifted for the 13 provinces of Mindanao for purposes of the plebiscite. This will allow an open, free and honest ascertainment of the wishes of our people.

What will be the question that will be asked? Do you want your provinces to be included in a unified regional autonomous government in which shall belong the 13 provinces mentioned? And, if any possible solution to this impasse could be suggested by the voters, we will provide remarks sheets for the remarks of the voters.

Is there a plan for regional autonomy for the South? The answer is yes. What is this plan? This plan is embodied in a proposal by the Batasang Bayan which met last month on this particular subject. It provides for regional autonomy that in no way violates the national sovereignty or conflicts with the programs of government for development and administration. What does it provide for? It provides for the election of a least 21 members of a Sangguniang Pampook or regional assembly to be elected throughout the region.

This Sangguniang Pampook will recommend for presidential appointment the members of the Lupong Tagapagpaganap or the Executive Council that will run the affairs of the region. This has always been the plan not only for the South but also for the entire Philippines.

In all candor, I would like to go on record that I am fully in support of the plans for unification of Region 9 and 12 into a single autonomous region, provided that the leaders and the members of the Sangguniang Pampook as well as the Executive Council or the Lupong Tagapagpaganap shall be properly elected in accordance with law.

These two regions, of course, comprise ten provinces, five of which have extensive Muslim populations and the other five non-Muslim.

It is I believe, a necessary condition for the upliftment and development of our Muslim communities, so that their resources, knowhow, and initiative may be consolidated into a community of ideals and objectives consistent with the vision we also entertain for the rest of our country.

But my position on this matter is ever subordinate to the people’s will. I have guaranteed the free expression of this will, I have lifted the effects of martial law in those 13 provinces. I have provided funds for an information campaign. I have ordered the local officials as well as those in the military engaged in information to see to it that all information necessary for the settlement of this issue is disseminated to the public. The Department of Public Information of our government is engaged in such a campaign.

When I look back upon the plight and wayward course of our rural communities, it is not so much the neglect of government or the predatory impact of migrant classes that has stifled development in these areas including Southern Mindanao. More revealing is the evident insufficiency of local leadership and initiative to make the necessary efforts of social transformation. Government has never willfully neglected the need to develop these areas. Government has provided funds for these areas. Unfortunately, some of these funds have found their way to the pockets of local leaders in the old society. Resources channeled to these communities simply did not bear fruit in the circumstances of our rural inhabitants.

Now these regions — and I refer not only to Southern Philippines but all of the rural areas throughout the Philippines – these regions are now the focus of many developments. It is important that these programs be supported by an active, dedicated leadership, by effort at grass-roots level, by the consciousness of local residents so that by their own efforts they can change the whole spectrum of realities and possibilities in their own communities.

Beyond ending the estrangement of many Muslims from the rest of the national polity, we must also end the estrangement of Muslim from Muslim, of communities from one another. The consolidation, therefore, of the two regions provides a framework for the unification of goals, and we are confident that given the institutional support by government, it will result in the common development of our Muslim communities.

All Filipino Muslims must see in this an opportunity to gather around the common cause of their development. If in the past, they have been divided—some firmly in support of the Republic and others seeking to secede from it—today they must all look upon reconciliation as the only effective road to the progress they desire.

From my viewpoint as President of the Republic, what must be provided for? I repeat, we cannot settle the Mindanao conflict by relying on the strength of the military alone. This is neither desirable nor wise. It will be necessary to grant some kind of autonomy, but such autonomy as will not destroy the Republic nor infringe upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Philippines. We must see to it that our people are reunited. We must see to it that those areas are never utilized again as a launching ground to undermine the Republic whether from within or from without.

Because of the intensive efforts exerted by government and the military for the rehabilitation and development of the troubled areas, we need not be detained too long by the work of reconstruction. As a whole there is now in the affected areas the material and institutional conditions that make for a good staging base for the development process. Development, rehabilitation, autonomy, unification, reconciliation—these are the answers to the problem of the fighting in the South, and these are your government’s pledges to give not only to the Muslim and Christian inhabitants but to all the residents of Southern Philippines.

We must acknowledge, in this particular program, the signal role that the Armed Forces have played in this effort. For while the severity of conflict might have easily unleashed the might of arms, the military has shown restraint in dealing with an estranged segment of our society. And it has been fully involved in unification and reconciliation efforts. Besides the roster of lives lost by our Armed Forces — and there are many whom we have lost who came from the ranks of the graduates of the Philippines Military Academy, those brave and dedicated men who have gone to the life beyond in the service of their nation and their country during this prolonged strife — there is also another roster of men who aided in the work of reconstruction and reconciliation in projects to rebuild and create and in the plans to develop Mindanao.

This is not an isolated development occasioned merely by this peculiar urgent requirement and stresses of the conflict in the South. It gives expression to the overall broadening of the role of the military in our society, to the very evolution of the Filipino soldiery, in the tides of challenge and effort into which the nation has plunged itself.

Although it is an institution steeped in the ways of tradition, our military establishment has kept pace with the changing context and circumstances of international life, in undertaking its supreme mission of ensuring national peace and security.

Along strategic and theoretical lines, this derives from the awareness that the problem of maintaining security changes are the circumstances of life change We see now that we must view and understand security problems in their total context-not only the military aspects, but also the social, political and economic ones. And in seeing them this way, we realize the need to adapt a total systems approach in resolving these problems.

In the resolution of this problem, there has been a deepening of the bond between the military and the government and other institutions of society, in the consolidation of once separate functions under a single program, in the harmonization of civilian and military roles in our society.

We may see it as a natural consequence of the common conviction that the system we have sought to foster in our country can only survive if it truly repairs to its real strengths—its capacity for innovation. Rigidly adhering to the forms of democratic life as we had been tutored by the West, we might have proven our fidelity to theory, but clearly we could not have survived the tempests of ferment and revolution, which so lately have bedevilled us.

We cannot narrowly conceive of the police powers of the state as a function detached from the stream of effort that goes into nation-building. It must be involved in the making of change. It must secure order and stability because these are the keys to national regeneration and progress.

And so my message to you today is exactly that. We are in a period of regeneration, of rehabilitation, and the theme is innovation, ingenuity, and the utilization of the mind more than perhaps of the body. As you go out into the field to fulfill your responsibility to yourselves, to your God, to your country, keep in mind that it is necessary for the Filipino to innovate in order to progress and prosper.

And thus the settlement of the Mindanao question and all the problems of peace and order has required innovation. In innovating, we have had to utilize the peculiar services of a woman representative like the First Lady. I forgot to tell you that she has agreed upon my insistence that if no other recourse were available in order to settle the Mindanao conflict, she would have to return to Libya on a second mission so that we may finally settle that problem.

The challenge of insurgency compels us to build from within, and to be vigilant and responsive to the needs of the society. More than ever we must be sensitive to the principle that no force, whether military or civil, can be viable and can succeed in the attainment of its objective without the support of the people. I repeat what I have said in the past: No matter how strong the Armed Forces may be, and no matter how stable the political institution, the moment the people withdraw their support from such armed forces and such political institution, they are bound to crumble and fail. Your ultimate objective should always be, therefore, to retain the strength that arises out of the support of the people.

The challenge of competition among the major powers in our part of the world compels us to work towards a viable equilibrium of forces and influence in Southeast Asia that will not attempt one nation to impose its will upon the region.

It can be achieved in concert with our partners in Southeast Asia and in efforts to cooperate with those nations who subscribe to a different social system and ideology. And it goes without saying that such collaboration is most effectively fostered when the fabric of cooperation involves as well the steadfast effort to develop together.

This problem certainly will not bend easily to solution. The road to self-reliance is difficult. And difficult, too, is the task of winning nations on the side of peace.

But we can do much on our side, as we are in fact doing for ourselves and our region.

I would hold up to the attention of this graduating class no higher ideal than the understanding of problems in their total context, and the outlook which it implies of balance, of flexibility, of dedication, and, I repeat, of innovation.

The moving history of our nation during this decade testifies to the growth and the efficacy of this ideal. And I know of no institution that has so commendably fostered this ideal more than the Academy itself which prepares new generations for national service each year.

From here have come men with a clear conception of duty to people and country, and men who in the school of experience have proved their mettle.

As you and I journey further into the future, let us respond with vigor to the changing needs of changing times, ever ready to cope with the complex as well as the simple. The history of the Academy tells us that the years ahead will be different from its earlier years, and new coping mechanisms will be needed to carry on the tradition of this institution. As elsewhere in Asia, we must in this academy keep running in order to stay still. For this reason I ask that we make sure that we derive the maximum advantage from military training in this academy by reviewing the process by which we train our officers, closing no possibilities for innovation where it is needed, even at the cost of certain time-honored practices and traditions like the fourth class system which I ask the cadets themselves to study in order that we can determine whether we should retain it or not. I ask that the Armed Forces of the Philippines now also undertake a reassessment of the entire training program of those who will ultimately join the Armed Forces of the Philippines to include this academy.

For the Philippine Military Academy must grow, and it must grow beyond the challenge of our times.

Before I forget, I would like to announce in your presence today, that I will sign a decree increasing the base to pay of Philippine Military Academy cadets. This increases the base pay of cadets who at present receive P319.00 to P470.00 a month. It also increases the base pay of probationary second lieutenants.

In your presence, I, therefore, sign this decree. And I hand it over to Colonel Magsino.

Once again, I congratulate the graduates of Class ’77 as well as the cadets who remain in the Academy, the members of the administrative organization, and the members of the faculty as well as the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

I am confident that the graduates will rise to the challenge of our times and will succeed not only in war but also in the peace that we would like to win.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1979). Presidential speeches (Vol. 6). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].