Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of UNCTAD V

[Delivered at the PICC, May 7, 1979]

The Meaning of UNCTAD

I AM DEEPLY honored to welcome you on behalf of our people and the Republic of the Philippines.

It is indeed a singular and unprecedented honor for us, for from my point of view you represent all of humankind. I say advisedly that you are representatives of humankind, for naive as it may sound, I do believe that in your deliberations in this conference, you will act, feel and think, first and foremost, as delegates of a common human race and not as representatives of this or that country, or this or that group of interests, or this or that social or economic system.

Perhaps while in flight to Manila from your respective homes, you must have seen through the window that only the natural and permanent configurations of the earth are discernible — the land, the seas, the rivers, the mountain ranges, the green valleys, the yellow deserts, and occasionally the habitations of man, sad or proud, miserable or majestic. From that height one can no longer tell the outward difference of one man from another. One cannot see whether the man is brown or white, or yellow, or black. Nor can one hear the languages they use, or know the gods and the philosophies they believe in. One cannot say whether they are poor or rich, primitive or sophisticated, bound or free. For from that height, frontiers disappear, and disparate allegiances, the rancorous grievances, the ambitions, the failings and discontent — all these are lost. And one, single elemental fact of real significance remains, and that is the men and women who have an equal share of common fate and destiny.

It is this fundamental truth that I hope will inspire the deliberations of this conference. For I am certain that we are done with platitudes, with the angry demands and the arrogant refusals, the exhortations, the dramatic declarations, the sweeping programs. We are done with all of these, and after twenty years we must now settle down to some hard and strenuous bargaining.

It is our hope that all our preparations for this conference are to your satisfaction. For as has been said, we are a small and poor, developing country, but we have strained our limited resources in order to demonstrate to you the hospitality of our people, and also because we realize the crucial importance of this conference.

You also come in the midst of a resolute effort on the part of our people to restructure our nation and our society. It is our hope that you will see in this a paradigm of your own task to design and build a new world economic order. For not too many years ago, our people were enmeshed in a bitter and seemingly insolvable conflict between those who had too little and those who had too much and yet wanted more. We were slowly sinking in the morass of indecision, in destructive divisiveness, in arrogant hostility, until we realized it was bringing us to only one conclusion: disintegration and national suicide.

We decided then to put an end to this arid and useless anguish and struggle and arrived at a common consensus over and above individual party and ideological differences, a consensus to create a new society of social justice and nobility and dignity, with equal opportunities for the resources of our country as well as the obligations, and equal opportunity to determine our common fate.

A comparative vision is what I commend to the common interest of all the delegations, the nations represented here — a common interest in the restructuring of an antiquated economic order. For indeed, this is the very purpose of UNCTAD. This is the fifth conference, and the first four conferences have left a record which somehow makes it difficult for us to state the conclusion — that we are not moving anywhere after twenty years.

The less developed nations in their predicament are moving from bad to worse, and if there are any marginal advances by the other developed countries, this is due to their resolute, individual efforts against the handicaps imposed by an antiquated and mostly irrelevant and unworkable economic system. And now almost everyone must face this common difficulty of a resurgent protectionism.

Yes, this is UNCTAD V. We have had four before this. And the record may speak of ambivalence, nay, of ambiguity. Perhaps of slow, reluctant advances but more of stubborn stalemates, and the impression that there has been consistent frustration of the cogent plans and programs prepared by a dedicated and highly trained secretariat headed by Secretary General Corea and his predecessors, to whom I must now pay a well-deserved tribute.

Yes, notwithstanding all the constant reminders and all the gallant efforts of the other theoreticians and the activists of change, notwithstanding the deterioration of the national economies and the resulting international interaction, there seems to be some kind of a despondency, a mood of impotence. We are content to drift from day to day, from year to year, from one small emergency to another, from one local difficulty to another. If it is not currency, it is inflation. If it is not scarcity, it is stagnation.

And this is what UNCTAD is all about. UNCTAD is the instrument which was organized and created in order to attain and approximate some equality and balance in the international economic order.

The first UNCTAD was initially a success inasmuch as it established the instrumentality for the implementation of the policies seeking to attain this objective of equitable distribution of resources.

The second UNCTAD in New Delhi established the preferences or generalized scheme of preferences for manufactures and semi-manufactures of developing countries, which unfortunately will soon expire.

The third UNCTAD in Santiago de Chile established the charter for the rights and obligations of states. It was approved in the latter part of 1964 by the United Nations.

The fourth UNCTAD which was held in Nairobi in 1976, and which I personally attended, commissioned by the Group of 77 in the Third Ministerial Meeting here in Manila to present the Manila Declaration and the program of action, including the establishment of a common fund, an integrated commodity program for commodities on which most of the developing countries depend.

And now we have the fifth UNCTAD, and its agenda is impressively comprehensive. For it attacks a broad front. It looks into an assessment of the world economic situation as well as trading and, more particularly, resurgent protectionism. The commodities program, the monetary and fiscal policies, the diversification and increase in exports of the developing countries, the participation of developing countries in shipping, trade between countries of different economic and social systems. Even in the best of times, agreement on working arrangements or even on principles would have been most hazardous, and yet these are not the best of times. For every country feels this atmosphere of crisis. Slowly we are sinking and sinking. And I repeat, everybody feels the impotence that seems to bind our thoughts and minds, incapable of innovation, of working out practical solutions to our problems.

And yet UNCTAD V seeks to attach this broad front of problems. Barely a few weeks ago, after three years of strenuous and arduous negotiations, most of the countries have agreed on some kind of a compromise agreement on the commodity fund. As to function, as to objectives, as to finance commitments in the amount of pledges of $400 million and an expected $280 million — in this conference, I dare, I venture to hope for the fulfillment of these expectations.

UNCTAD was the answer to the panic that ensued in response to crisis. For UNCTAD has always meant the noble pursuit of an equitable system throughout the world. It also is a system which grants the developing countries an opportunity to demonstrate that the proposals that they have submitted do not mean an outstretched hand on which the benevolent rich countries may deposit their charity. But rather, it is a program of increasing self-reliance that can confer benefit even on the rich nations, that may have a corresponding benefit to give.

UNCTAD was the answer to the panic that ensued after every crisis, for it meant courage — courage on the part of every nation and every country. Courage to realize that the old order established by the victorious western countries after the Second World War is no longer working. Courage to face the reality of a new world that followed the disintegration of metropolitan relationships, and the entry of new forces into the traditional equilibrium. Courage also to participate in this inescapable and common task of dismantling the remnants of the old order and creating a completely new one, instead of shoring up this creaky world machinery with emergency measures that will merely prolong our agony and our common embattlement.

Yes, UNCTAD also means vision, the capability of everyone, rich and poor nations alike, to lift themselves from the common ordinary level of statements of immediate loss and profit to the disregard of immediate benefit for future stability.

And so I end with the same thought. Naive as it may sound, I still think you represent all of humankind. Naive as it may sound, I trust that you will act as delegates of each and every man on earth, not of any country nor any interest, nor any social or economic system. Naive as it may sound, I know you realize the urgency. For the great number of deprived peoples in this world can no longer wait. They cannot stand on quibbles and reservations and exceptions and further study. The weary and weather-beaten farmers and their wives and their children who sometimes feel cheated because of falling prices beyond their control — they cannot wait. And neither can the black-lunged and black-faced miners who seem impotent before industrial forces. Perhaps the rich can wait. And the powerful, they will wait; they will bide their time. But the impoverished, forsaken peoples of our nations cannot wait.

UNCTAD V must do its best to break this vicious cycle of crisis and impotence. And by one single pragmatic act of accommodation and not of arrogant confrontation, start a momentum of change and creativity which will solve our present distemper.

I am certain, I am confident that the delegates to this conference will be those representatives, born on the wings of the most exulted and noble aspirations of humanity. They will act with greatness, with courage, with vision, with dignity.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].