Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Sugar Club of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Intercontinental Hotel, March 18, 1971]

The Importance of Sugar

I AM ALWAYS very happy to come to conventions of the sugar clubs and sugar associations. I am always glad to be with you. We are kindred spirits, you and I, because the sugar industry is often blamed for many things which it is not responsible for, just like the President. I also like the way you conduct your affairs. I noted that you are much faster in passing legislation, unlike the Congress. And certainly this has been a very fruitful occasion. I am happy about the approval of these principles. I have just read the Declaration of Principles and witnessed the signing of these documents which initiates a fine movement in the sugar industry.

If you remember, I cried out for a democratic revolution on January 25 of this year, at the time when most of the prognosticators were insisting that there was going to be a violent revolution. One of the primary goals of the democratic revolution is the narrowing of the gap between the rich and the poor. It is to give hope to the helpless in our society. The democratic revolution is the alternative that I have offered, an alternative to violent revolution, a peaceful alternative. This actually articulates your position and the position of the responsible elements in our society, for a survey indicated that anywhere from 84 to 90per cent of our population are against violent revolution, but there are 10 to 16 per cent of our population toying with the idea of violence as a solution to our problems. It is not that there are 10 to 16 per cent who will join a revolution; it merely means that this 10 to 16 per cent feel that if nothing is done soon they may have to meet with a violent revolution. Out of this 10 to 16 per cent, perhaps only one per cent will join an actual revolution. But that would be enough.

The social question seems to be whether the privileged few in our society will help bring about a peaceful revolution or will refuse, thus leaving the option of restructuring the social order to the underprivileged. As I have asked in my State of the Nation address, shall the affluent change this society in order that they may have a place in it or will they leave the task to the small men, the people who are deprived? If this happens, they may create a society in which you and I will have no place.

Thus it is that I welcome the pioneering spirit that is symbolized in your Declaration of Principles, for it is to me an answer to the social question that I too have answered with the democratic revolution. It is pioneering because among all our agricultural industries, you are first in the establishment of this Sugar Industry Social and Economic Foundation, replacing, if you will remember, the old Social Amelioration Fund which I suggested to be established by the sugar industry sometime ago.

This is indeed a pilot project because it is an experiment in capitalism with a conscience, capitalism with a conscience which actually is the answer to most of our problems today.

I am very happy that the ambassador of the United States to the Philippines is here because I know that he has extended to us great assistance in this current crisis which the sugar industry faces. And I am very happy that he is here to witness all the activities of the sugar association, the refineries, the processing, the sugar planting. I am glad that he witnessed me pledge of involvement of every man, woman and child in the sugar industry in this new experiment.

I am told by those who are helping us out in the United States, and by our ambassador, that without in any way prejudicing the interests of the American government and the American people, the American ambassador has gone out of his way to help us maintain our present quota in the United States. Well, let us applaud him.

I understand that when our ambassador to the United States came before some of the officials who were going to make the decisions and started explaining the situation of the Philippine sugar industry, he was told that it was all right, Ambassador Byroade had already told them about the situation. So, you see, he is not saying very much, but he is watching and listening to everything.

If the sugar industry collapses, the Philippine economy collapses. Let me demonstrate to you, to our people, and especially to those who have made it a habit to attack the sugar industry and Marcos for supporting the sugar industry, the truth of this contention.

You know in 1954-1955, you had a production record of 1,324,857 short tons and in 1968-1969, 1,761,000 short tons; and then in 1970-1971 you reached a new record. In 1969-1970 you reached a new record of 2,124,314. The crop year 1970-1971 production is expected to go higher, to 2,362,894 tons, and in 1974-1975 2,700,000 tons. The percentage of sugar export earnings in relation to the total export earnings of the Philippines was initially 20 percent. By this year, it should be and it will be 25 per cent, or 1/4 of the entire export earnings of the Philippines, all from sugar. You can imagine therefore what would happen if this one quarter of the entire export earnings of the country should suddenly be lost.

Why are export earnings so important? Because export earnings bring in more foreign exchange or more dollars, and we need dollars to bring in goods. What kind of goods? Right now, we are bringing in capital goods. What are capital goods? An example is machinery for our industrialization program. And why do we need industrialization? Because we cannot absorb our unemployed in agriculture nor can we increase the per capita income of our people except by developing a balanced agro-industrial economy. But we will not be able to do so unless we keep on earning dollars. At the same time, from the monetary point of view, if we lost 25 per cent of our export earnings, then our currency will be eroded in value, externally and perhaps internally. Meaning, it will have less value and if you think that prices are very high now the prices will go higher, and I address this to the ordinary Filipino, the common man, the housewives, the employees, the wage earners, because they keep asking “what is in sugar for us?”

We have no connection whatsoever with sugar, we have no connection whatsoever with logging, no connection with mining, so why is Marcos so interested in these big industries? He says he is against the oligarchs and yet he is helping them? Well, of course, I am against the oligarchs who use their economic and political influence to advance their economic interest. But does that mean that I am against everybody who is rich? No. I am in favor of protecting the economy, but at the same time I want it so restructured that the benefits of progressive economy will not go only to the affluent, to the rich but, will go down, seep down to the level of the common man, especially the laborer and the agricultural worker. And this is exactly what we are all aiming at.

You are pioneers in establishing the Sugar Industry Social and Economic Development Fund, which will be set up from two per cent of the gross product. It actually is a good basis, for two per cent of the gross product given as an outright share is a fair share, with 90 per cent going to supplementary salaries, bonuses and other financial payments to those who labor in the sugar industry. Well, I would like to see this followed by other industries, not only in agriculture but also in other industries in the Philippines: two per cent of the gross products to go to labor in actual payments.

Going back to my theme, sugar, or for that matter logging or mining or manufacturing, has a direct effect upon the lives of every man and woman and child. If these sources of foreign exchange and dollars, are not encouraged, are not given protection, are not attended to, then the one who will suffer ultimately will be the small man.

The Filipina housewives and the children will suffer because the prices are bound to go up. Everybody is now talking about prices, everybody if talking about the cost of living, well we should count our blessings, because if we had failed in our efforts to attain monetary stability last year, there would have been chaos and confusion in this country. Very few people realize this but last year was a very critical year. You will note that last year, I was very quiet about the economic situation. I kept my peace, I even refused to answer any attack or charge because my mind was concentrated on the monetary stability problem. If we had failed there, in the balancing of Imports with exports, dollar earnings with dollar expenditures, my friends, the revolution that we have been talking about, might have come. I am not saying that the communists have given up, but they would have had a good occasion to start a revolution if we had failed.

All of you who are in the know realize therefore that we have reason to be thankful. I appealed for reason at a breakfast prayer meeting, where I spoke about praying and got lampooned for it. Some critics say that it is all that Marcos does — pray. He does nothing else. That is not exactly true, but there are times when we need a little prayer. I tell you, I prayed a lot last year and I intend to pray a lot this year.

We are facing this temporary crisis in the United States because of our quota. They have explained this to you and there is no further need to explain except to say that we expect understanding from the United States. I do not believe that the United States government, whether it is the Congress or the executive department, will easily disregard the persuasive arguments that we have advanced in support of the continuance of the quota, or if possible its increase. I feel that the American sense of fair play will give us our due.

I also wanted to come before you to assure you of two things. First, that after having explained the importance of sugar to our people I would like to Inform you that your government, your President, and all those who are helping him, are utilizing all the powers of the Presidency in order that we can surmount this obstacle, this crisis that we are facing now in the sugar industry. And we count on old friends to help us out in this predicament. Next, I would like to assure all investors whether American or of any other nationality, about fair treatment in the Philippines. You have demonstrated by your declaration of principles and by your various programs for social amelioration, particularly the fair treatment of the sacadas and the workers in the sugar industry, your new orientation, your capitalism with a conscience concept, and by the Declaration of Principles itself and the organization of the foundation.

Now, by thus taking this attitude and initiating these programs, you have answered some of the critics of the sugar industry, not only here but abroad. May I, however, say that perhaps now we should not think alone of this immediate crisis but of the other crises to come. And what are these other crises? One will be the crisis of surplus. In a year or two, you will have such a surplus in the sugar industry that quota or no quota you will have monumental problems. Therefore, it behooves us, as men with foresight, to now get organized on this propose, and I intend to immediately initiate the first step, I propose the organization of a Sugar Commission which will now look into those problems. I repeat, prognostications and projections say that by 1974 or 1975, your production will increase to 2,700,000 tons.

You and I know that your cost of production is higher than the world price even under present circumstances. This year it is 4.8 cents per pound, equal to the Caribbean rate, at the Caribbean level of 5 1/2 cents per pound, which is similar or equal to the domestic price. And your surpluses will therefore be a pressure upon not only the domestic market but also upon the world market. And it will constitute a problem which we must now start to solve. It is my hope that all elements of the sugar industry, from the sugar planters to the sugar millers and processors will join hands on this. I have faith and trust in the judgment and wisdom of your leaders. They have already, I understand, started studies on this matter. I called their attention to it many times in the past and they agreed with me that we must organize as soon as possible a Sugar Commission to look into the problems of the sugar industry, not only on a short range basis but on a long range basis.

And so, my friends, I am very glad indeed that we have met this morning. I am very happy that you have finally approved, in the most expeditious fashion, the Declaration of Principles.

I would like to say that in the Philippines today there are people who keep asking what the democratic revolution means. Well, this is one meaning of the democratic revolution: that instead of a revolution from below, a revolution at the top, among the leaders of our society, for you constitute that select group of leaders in this particular industry, has been generated. A democratic revolution at the top that is peaceful and within the confines and restrictions of the law. This is what I would like to encourage. And I call upon the other industries, agricultural or industrial, all the other economic activists, to now pursue this same line. I ask every industry leader group to sit down and look into the possibility of increasing the participation of labor not only in the profits but also in the preparation of long range policy.

Of course, you and I will have to await the Constitutional Convention, when this august body will determine the nature of our fundamental charter. But now, before the Constitutional Convention meets, it is necessary that the citizenry be appraised of the options and the alternatives that they have. It is necessary that we tell our people that there is hope and that they need not despair. It is necessary that we do this, specially in the urban centers of our country, for it is here in the midst of distressing conditions that you hear advocacies of an alien ideology. We are an open society and we encourage dissent, put I repeat, the government will not tolerate the continued use of violence, not only against the government but against society.

I hope that this step taken by the sugar association, the sugar club, will be duplicated, I repeat, by other sectors of our economy. And it is my hope that as we move forward there will be more leaders like you, leaders like those in the sugar industry, who can take it upon themselves to assume responsibility for reform and change. For indeed there is need for reform and change. We keep repeating this, we keep re-emphasizing it yet the movement is too slow. The movement in both agriculture and industry is slow because many of the leaders of our economy still seem unimpressed by the danger apparent, by the threat of violent revolution. There are some people who go to the extent of saying, “Perhaps it would be best if somebody started a violent rebellion so that the leaders of our economy would be shocked into realizing that now is the time to act, that we can no longer postpone action.”

Let me congratulate you again for your initiative in pioneering in this area, and let me end with the prayer that this act of yours will be emulated in every sector of our economy.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].