On the Status of Our Country

I GREET ALL the officers of this distinguished organization and greet the candidates of KBL who happen to be here as well as any candidate of the op position who may also be here.

I gather that they have been frequenting this organization lately, which is understandable. I would presume that this organization offers some kind of a respite from the confusion that now attends this political exercise.

You know, during the last five years, I believe I have appeared before the Manila Rotary almost every year. I am always fascinated by the guidelines and standards of your tax policy. I am certain that if any government followed the mischievous and almost, shall we say, unguided missile type of taxation proposed by Toting del Rosario there would be reason for the Opposition to take over the government.

Talking about the Opposition, there were some definitions here of states men and politicians which evoked lighthearted laughter and also might have reflected upon the present administration. You know, this reminds me of Churchill, in the latter years of his political career. He met a similar situation. You will recall he had been identified with the liberal groups, then later with the conservatives. Anyway, he said that he had to comment on what had been thrown about as a definition of statesman and politician. And he said: Well, a statesman is a man who is in power and wields power and guides the government for the people and very wisely. But a politician is a different breed; the politician is the man who is in power, is obsessed with power, wants to be in power, and will say anything to be in power. And he said: I have been both.

I, too, have been both. But I do remember we were a little elegant when we were engaged in opposition, as a minority floorleader of the House of Representatives and later on as the opposition candidate for President in 1965. You will remember. I left the presidency of the party that was in power to join the opposition party because of unimplemented promises which I thought were fundamental.

Well, today, we have the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan which is actually a movement, an umbrella organization, under which we had hoped we would be able to gather the majority party and the opposition party, and organized a joint responsibility group for government. Perhaps, I should tell you that this idea is, of course, not new. Way back in 1972 before I proclaimed martial law, I offered a coalition government to the opposition, the Liberal Party. I offered 40 percent of the membership of the Cabinet to the opposition party, and this was peremptorily disregarded. The reason given was that they were going to win the elections in 1973, anyway. I did not tell them that there would be no elections.

Now talking about consultations on martial law — I understand that some members of the opposition claim they were never consulted about martial law. I do remember that I called a caucus of the members of Congress, the Senate as well as the House of Representatives, to inquire whether they had any opposition on the matter of martial law. I went around the country. Everybody knew about this, I asked the members of the judiciary, some anyway, before martial law was proclaimed. And the answer that they gave me was: The legislative does not have the power to proclaim martial law. It can give you emergency power. But martial law can be proclaimed only by the President under the commander-in-chief provision of the Constitution. And the judiciary gave me the same answer. And this is why martial law was left for the President to act on. And naturally, whenever one now talks of martial law, one talks of the presidency. And this is the reason why I can come to an audience like this and speak of this from personal experience.

Of course, I am at a disadvantage here because I understand, the First Lady spoke in the national language. I would also like to speak in our own language, but there are so many foreigners here. They might think I am hiding something in what I am explaining to you. So, if possible, I will translate some things into our language and, likewise, I will speak in a borrowed tongue — English.

You know, in our own language, it is sometimes better to utter a word. English — that is really a borrowed tongue. There is nothing we can do.

Allow me to speak now of matters of interest to you. When we organized the KBL, we offered to the opposition party some positions in the 21-man slate for Metro Manila. This is the first time I will be revealing this. Because I have been watching from a distance to see how these elections would turn out. As you know, when the elections were finally decided and confirmed by the Batasang Bayan (which as you know was elected by the barangays to be the legislative council), I inquired whether any of the Liberals would want to join the 21-man state. I did so because we were sincere about allowing participation of the opposition. I believe the First Lady will someday, not now but probably later on, after the elections, reveal with whom she conferred. She was authorized to offer to the Liberal Party a participation in the 21-man slate.

The reason I am revealing this today is because of the claim that there is need for an opposition in the interim Batasang Pambansa. And it has been made to appear as if we were opposed to the participation of the opposition party whatever they may call themselves now, Liberals or LABAN or independent, whatever it is. But the thing is, we offered the opposition participation in the interim Batasang Pambansa. But instead of accepting this, they immediately organized their own group. Or rather, the Liberal Party decided now to participate and then organize a group similar to the KBL, which then proceeded to question the validity of the entire martial law or crisis government, and even the validity of the Constitution. While running as candidate under that Constitution, and running in accordance with the laws approved by that government, they deny the legal and legitimate basis of that government. They appeared before the Supreme Court when I was brought before the Supreme Court. I appeared before the Supreme Court and argued about the legality of martial law. They participated in the proceedings thereat. They have not participated in any other government proceedings except to bring me to the courts.

But just the same, even after the Supreme Court had made a decision and had ruled that there was no obstacle to the enforcement of the Constitution of the Philippines, now we hear their candidates saying they have taken the oath to support the Constitution but they don’t believe in the validity of the Constitution. This indicates, therefore, that there is some kind of an ulterior motive behind the actuations of those candidates.

But, anyway, while we are at this, I have notified the officers of the Rotary that perhaps the best way, the more interesting format would be that which we adopted for the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkasters sa Pilipinas two nights ago. I will deliver a main speech and then I will ask that anybody who has any questions should then address these questions to me. I will be ready to answer all the questions that many be directed at me.

I start out by calling attention to the fact that at the beginning of the campaign, they refused to make performance as an issue. Nowadays, however, they have come around to questioning the performance of the crisis government, the New Society. In the process they have questioned everything without offering an alternative. So I go along with them and now ask this question. We have run the government. I have run the government for the past 12 years as your President. You elected me in 1965. You reelected me in 1969. I proclaimed martial law in 1972. The plebiscite wherein we asked whether we should continue with martial law and the referenda of January 1973, July 1973, February 1975, October 1976, and December 1977 — in all of these referenda and plebiscite, the people’s vote was: continue with the present administration and government. For this, of course, I thank our people. I express my gratitude to our citizens for the power they have granted and entrusted to your humble servant. I acknowledge my debt to all of you, especially to the pillars of our business community, all of you, who are certainly the people most interested in the health of our economy.

And, therefore, let me start out with the statement that whatever we have done or will continue to do is in accordance with programs that were organized since 1967. In 1968-1969, I organized the National Economic Development Authority, you remember. We centralized all planning. And for the first time, we introduced rationality in planning. We adopted short-term and medium-term answers to all the problems.

So whatever plans we have now are not plans that were organized and prepared only a year ago or yesterday. They have been worked out since 1967. I became President in 1965. Why do I speak of 1967? Because it takes you two years to get used to the presidency. Any man who thinks that he can solve the problems of the country by being President for only one or two years is being over-optimistic. And I cast no reflection of course on Presidents who have been in office for only one year like the American President. No, I am merely saying that it took me two years to learn the ropes as President.

And so we started in 1967. Whatever plans we have now, we prepared in 1967. There were several factors that came into the planning though, and these were the economic crisis and the secessionist movement in the South. Two factors that we did not anticipate in 1967. In 1967 we knew about the new Communist Party being organized by the young group of Peking-oriented communists. But we could not anticipate the oil crisis of 1974; the worldwide grain deficiency in 1973; the floods of 1972 and the drought of 1972. But all of these were thrown in and worked out in the plans that ultimately came out with the National Economic Development Authority. In the Constitution of 1973, the National Economic Development Authority ultimately was institutionalized and became a constitutional body. This is the principal planning body.

Now when we speak of progress it is usually economic, social, and the political will is set aside. On political stabilization, I need not say anything. You, more than anybody else, are sensitive more to the questions of political stabilization than to anything else. I have here some notes on the status of our country and I would like to read them to you. They are taken from the book that I just wrote; it is entitled Five Years of the New Society.

For one thing, notwithstanding the low prices of our exports, foreign investments, as you are well aware, have continued to expand, creating work opportunities. Over the last five years, we opened up jobs to accommodate 600,000 workers every year. I would think that a total of about a little over two million jobs have been opened over five years and this is all worked out in the book.

The reason I wrote that book is because I know that in a political campaign every candidate says the most scandalous things and then disavows them later on. This is happening now. I gather that Comelec is looking around for the tapes of all the speeches of both KBL and Laban. KBL, today, I understand, will send in all the tapes of their speeches. But Laban denies saying anything scandalous, libelous, slanderous or seditious.

Whatever it is, I put down in writing and in book form all these points in order that in the deliberations in your private rooms or studies, you can review and check these figures. And this book has been serialized, I understand, in all the metropolitan papers.

Tax revenues alone reached an amount of P23 billion which is double or treble that of 1972. And the cost of government, meaning, what we refer to as current funds — you would probably call it operational expenses in your business, or your housekeeping expenses. These are for salaries, the things that you pay in one year. When you say capital expenditures, what we mean is expenditures for things that last more than one year — irrigation, roads, water system, flood control, hydroelectric power, etc., etc.

Anyway, the cost of government was brought down. Do you know that there was a time, after I took over, when the cost of government was 75 percent of the budget? This went to salaries. We reduced this, I imposed a compulsory savings of five percent. Then later on, another 5 percent, and we have kept it there. We have reduced it further, and all the savings we have put into capital expenditures — outlays for public works like roads, bridges, irrigation systems, power — have increased five times since 1973. This is the reason for the sudden flowering of roads and other infrastructures throughout the country.

We have shifted the emphasis from current expenditures to capital expenditures. Now, I have often wondered whether the Opposition had had time to study this particular aspect which is one of the changes in the budgetary system. I have waited to listen to any intelligent discussion of the new budgetary approaches, but nothing has been said about these.

Anyway, priorities now include power in view of the projections of the experts to the effect that there will be oil deficiency and scarcity, if not complete elimination of oil as a source of power about the end of the century. And all countries, big or small, developed or non-developed, are called upon now to exploit all sources of power. And so we have put power resources as No. 1 priority

Now there are questions in all these speeches about priorities being given to education and priorities being given to security, but nobody ever put a finger on power I have not heard any speech by the opposition questioning or seeking information on the power program of the government. It is because, I presume, they agree with this program.

Every country, whether the Philippines or the United States, Japan, England, or West Germany, any country whatsoever, must now look to other sources of power besides oil. This is exactly what we are doing. Of course, we are continuing with our aggressive oil search program. We have three oil strikes off Palawan. And we hope to be able to recover or take out oil within next year. I told the City Services officials that I won’t believe that they have any oil until I can use the oil or gasoline in my car. They assure me that by the latter part of 1979, we will be drawing oil from the Palawan discoveries.

Of course, one of the most important, if not the crucial change, has been in the agrarian program. The agrarian program, whatever anyone may say, is something which we are proud of. I am very glad to see that the Opposition agrees with our agrarian program. You see, the Opposition agrees with everything that we are doing. They only want change us in power. This, apparently, is the big difference.

This program doesn’t merely mean the transfer of land from one person to the other. The agrarian reform program is an entire package. It is a package involving infrastructure which means irrigation, flood control, farm-to-market roads. It involves agricultural extension. It involves credit. It also involves the establishment of cooperatives. It also involves human settlements. And when we speak of human settlements and cooperatives, we are referring to the effort to make the countryside so attractive that the people in the rural areas will not come to the urban areas like Manila. Manila has suddenly developed into a center for more than seven million people. And it now has a great number of slums. Undoubtedly, this is one of the problems of any city. But Manila has this problem to a disproportionate degree. This is why in Manila, you see us moving around in the slum areas. The First Lady, for instance, visited about 14 slum areas the other day with all the candidates. And the reason for this is, of course, that it is a part of the program.

The opposition has now come up with the statement that it is illegal and unfair for me to be releasing these lands just now at election time. But have they forgotten that I announced this more than six months ago? In fact, let us go back to 1971. In 1971 there was a fire in Barrio Magsaysay in the Tondo foreshore land. And I went to the 50,000 families who lost their houses and we were all in tears. We were crying on each other’s shoulders, because how do you take care of these families who have just lost their homes? So right then and there, I went over all the plans and I promised some people there in Tondo, that given a little more time, we would reclaim part of the land and we would then distribute the land to them. The First Lady was with me. And one of the first priorities of the First Lady when she became Metro Manila governor in 1975 was what is now known as the ZIP program, the zonal improvement program. Do you know that there are 450 depressed areas in Manila? We have made 44 of these as priority areas. And I am certain that if you were in our place, you would immediately attend to these areas.

They also asked: But why do you release all of these funds? My answer is: They should have been released last January, but the Budget Commission was working out the programs so that these amounts could be released. For instance, in the Tondo foreshore land area, we set aside the total of P400 million. We could not raise P400 million. The only amount that we could raise was P200 million. And so I released P200 million. And it went to the Metropolitan Manila Commission which has a special task force for this purpose.

For Bagong Barrio and Caloocan, I released P40 million. Actually, the total amount that we were supposed to spend for all these depressed areas in Metropolitan Manila was several billion pesos. But right now, we cannot afford the entire several billion pesos. If you will remember, we borrowed from the World Bank a total of $65 million. It is called a “slum upgrading program.” This slum upgrading program is the opposite of what the opposition party did when they were in power. You remember what they did when they were in power? They transferred some of our people to Sapang Palay and other places. And what happened? They deprived these people, the squatters as we refer to them, of their livelihood from the piers. They were brought to Sapang Palay. There was no water, no electricity, no source of livelihood, no employment. So before you knew it, they were back. Where? In Intramuros and in Tondo. I remember that I was at the time the president of the Senate. And there were almost violent demonstrations in Congress.

And so we have changed the approach. This is one thing about which we wanted the opinion of everybody. Would it not be the better approach to upgrade the slums without relocating the people? And that is exactly what we are doing in the Tondo foreshore land and in Magsaysay. Instead of throwing out the people from the land, we instead transform the entire community. We put in roads, sewage system, water system, electricity. And we put up a small chapel. We put up a high school, and then factory buildings for the labor-intensive types of manufacturing. And this is what is happening all over Manila now.

Again, I am a little disappointed to hear nothing but criticisms of why the President released this now just before the elections. Nothing whatsoever as to whether this is the right approach. Should we remove our people from the slums as what was done and bring them to Sapang Palay? Or should we continue with the slums upgrading program? It is the position of KBL, the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, and of your servant, that it is best that we now continue with this program of upgrading the slums instead of transfering or removing the inhabitants thereat.

Now, what are the other signs of progress? I will not go into the foreign exchange reserves. You know that more than I do. I will not go into the increase in the budget of our government. We have increased it. And the increase in the number of people who are declaring their income tax, from 1.5 to 4.5 million over a period of three to four years. These are matters tht you all know. Nor the increase in exports. We trebled our exports from about P1 billion to P3 billion in a matter of four years. And we created new types of exports, the non-traditional exports. From $ 150 million, we brought it all the way up to almost $ 1 billion. And, of course, the leading exports would be garments, electronics, textiles and the like.

With regard to other matters, you and I are aware of some of the reports indicating that there has been a shift from the low income group to the middle income group. This usually is the last economic or social indicator of how much we have increased the per capita income. Of course, we increased the per capita income from P1, 300 to P4,300 in a period of four years. And all of you know this since you are engaged in business and your market analysis would probably take into account the incomes of everybody.

I gather that the Private Development Corporation of the Philippines con ducted this survey. About the low income groups, the total countrywide survey indicated that the total number of households in the low income group —meaning an income of P1, 000 to P3, 000 — was 71.5 percent of population in 1971. In 1975, this was reduced to 49.7 percent in the entire country. And the middle income, of course, originally 28.5 percent has now become 50.3 percent, a doubling of the number of the middle-income households. When you say middle income, you mean, they earn P4, 000 to P9, 999.

Now, in the countryside, in the control area, this was even better. From 80 percent for households belonging to the low income group, it has now been reduced to 30 percent. In short, in the rural areas, you have reduced the low income household from 80 to 30 percent or a reduction of 50 percent.

Now, you who are in business know what this means. You know more or less what obstacles there are, the difficulty of a pervasive change in the income of our people especially because of the atmosphere that pervaded our country in 1972.

But this survey is still going on. This was a 1975 survey. I am certain that now the survey will indicate a higher percentage of shift from the low-income to the upper-income brackets.

Savings and time deposits increased from 1973 to 1977, from P6.8 billion to P17.6 billion. I understand that in 1978, this went beyond P25 billion. With all of this, let me also talk about the GNP: from P55 billion to P153 billion from 1972-77. and capital investments, from P1.1 billion to P46 billion, 1972-77. Now, these are figures that are known to everybody and can be checked.

I refer to them merely because, now the opposition raises the question of performance. And they are the best indicators of the manner in which our society and our government has performed. However, they also raised some issues of policy. And this, I think, is something in which you should be interested. Do you know that the platform of LABAN includes a plan which provides that it shall support and initiate a program of socialization of the major industries of the country? I bet you didn’t know that. That shocks you, doesn’t it? Well, they haven’t been talking about it, but it is Plan No. 6 of the LABAN platform.

Now, what does this mean? At least on this one particular point, there can be a competition for your loyalties and your beliefs between the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan and the LABAN. This merely means that it is the position of LABAN to adopt what is known as the classical socialist economic system.

Now, I raised this point before you especially. I have not talked about this at any other forum because I know that at any other forum this will be glossed over and not be understood but this is for the big businessmen of the Philippines. I think you will understand the implications of such a platform.

Let me go through this particular point in greater detail. There are all shades of socialism, but this is now the parent, shall we say, the standard, the classical type of socialism. It refers to the nationalization of major industries and public utilities. I would like to repeat those terms, “the nationalization of major industries and public utilities.” I am not against spreading the ownership of public utilities and major industry. On the contrary, the KBL is in favor of the owner ship of big corporations and public utilities being spread among the public so much so that we have directed the Meralco to go public.

You know the Meralco is now owned by 650,000 stockholders. And this again is one of the funniest if not most stupid charges of the Opposition. I hear some of them saying that Marcos owns the Meralco. They probably can’t read. But if they will look at the foundation that owns it, it is the Meralco Foundation, not the Marcos Foundation. They may sound a little similar to a politician who does nothing but shout at himself. That’s quite a big difference you know, for me to own the Meralco Foundation instead of the Marcos Foundation.

The Marcos foundation is the owner of all my worldly goods. And all these worldly goods are being utilized for the benefit of our people. I don’t own an thing except my two houses, one in the province and one here in Manila, for my wife and my children and a trust fund for their education. I don’t own anything else. And this is public property known to the public. It is part of the public documents that are open to scrutiny.

I am, and the KBL is, in favor of spreading the ownership of public utilities, for instance the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Co. F approved the proposal that PLDT subscribers be now converted to part-owners. And I have ordered that every public utility be now checked as to the complexion of the ownership of such public utilities. But we certainly are against management and ownership by government of the entire corporation. This we are against. I need not go into the classic questions about socialism and the like. We have had very engaging debates in the Cabinet about all these matters. There are some who before started out with wanting the government to take over all of the corporation, but we ended up with a definition of our economic ideology. The New Society believes in free enterprise. It is a free enterprise society. We recognize private property. We may regulate wealth and we will not allow wealth to be utilized to degrade anyone especially those in the lower classes of our society. And we will regulate and control the use of that wealth. But we will not take over wealth, for we believe that the cutting edge, the principal agent, of change even in an egalitarian society like the New Society should be private initiative.

Now, this is therefore clear. It is a position of the New Society. What is the position of LABAN? I’ve been reviewing all the documents pertaining to the platforms and principles in an effort to find out if they stand for anything. Now, I have come across this particular principle for which they stand. They now want to take over the major industries and public utilities to be owned and controlled by the government. On this particular matter, therefore, we appeal to all the businessmen of the Philippines to immediately discard this proposal of LABAN by refusing to vote for any candidate of LABAN.

I will take up only one more issue on policy. This is also a matter of policy. LABAN has also brought up the question of human rights. When they speak of human rights, apparently they don’t distinguished between economic rights and what are traditionally known as social and political rights.

Economic right pertains to the right of a human being to a decent ways of life, to proper housing — in short, everything that will make him a dignified human being. When LABAN, therefore, speaks of human rights they disregard this particular aspect. Even the United Nations declaration divides human rights into economic and social and political rights. But again I have waited to see whether any of them can discriminate between these two kinds of rights, and I notice that they keep talking about giving the social and political rights — the right to vote, free press etc. etc. etc. Now let’s disregard the fact that they have abused all of these rights. Let us assume good faith on their part. But it is our belief that in a small and developing country, we should give priority to economic rights and while giving at the same time a respect for social and political rights. It is the highest form of cynicism for any political leader to say that we should quarrel about the right to speak and the right to vote when the man to whom we are talking is dying from hunger. The man is more interested in surviving. How can you expect him to look to his government for the right to say, read a newspaper, the right to speak on the United Nations or the right to speak against martial law when all he is interested in immediately is, can he have a meal, please? The last time he had a decent meal was three or two days ago.

I say this in the simplest terms because I would like even LABAN to understand what I am saying. There are two classes of rights. The KBL pledges itself to protect those two classes of rights. But whenever the resources of government are insufficient, priority will be given to economic right. And subsequently, the resources will then be utilized for the protection of social and political rights. It has been properly said that when one attends to food first, this does not mean that he is not interested in the right to speak. No, he is merely attending to what is immediately necessary. This doesn’t mean that when he asks for a plate, a bowl of rice, he has given up his right to speak against an injustice later on. No, but since he can speak against that injustice after he has eaten the rice, then by all means eat the rice first. And this is what we are doing.

This must sound like an apology for the torture and maltreatment of prisoners. I’d like you to know that we have kicked out of the Armed Forces more than 2,000 men and we have put in jail more than 300 enlisted men and officers.

Whatever it is, it is not the policy of the New Society to be torturing prisoners. And I repeat, this is again one of the policy issues wherein we differ from the LABAN. They have not articulated this in the manner which I have. And I presume that they will not take sides on this again. They will avoid it. But I present it to you as one of the matters that I have noticed during the entire discussion.

I will conclude with the statement. You have some of the candidates here of the KBL, and you have heard and listened. You have heard the candidates of the LABAN.

Now you are corporate managers and presidents. My question to you is: Would you take the candidates of the LABAN as members of your board of directors? After you have listened to them, to their irresponsible statements, after you have heard them propose the assassination of the President, after you have heard their scurrilous and slanderous language denegrade not only the per son of the President but your own country, the Philippines and our people, now tell me, do you take them into your board of directors? I suggest that none of you would and neither should you vote for them.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].