Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Eight Anniversary of the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster sa Pilipinas

I would like first to express greetings and congratulations to the officers and members of the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster sa Pilipinas on this occasion marking the eighth anniversary of their organization. And I wish also to express my appreciation for this opportunity to participate in this nationwide broadcast which I understand is your way of celebrating this important event.

It is a happy coincidence that the KBP’s anniversary observance should take place at this time of fateful reckoning and decision for our people and our nation.

The service of this organization is the service of an institution that is essential and indispensable to the free flow of communication between our people and their government. And we find ourselves in one of those times when such service must do its part to assist our people in the historic task of asserting their sovereignty over their government, and of determining national leadership and directions for the years to come.

The Presidential Elections and Referendum set for Tuesday, the 16th of June, mark a great step forward along the road which the nation travels in its journey towards full political normalization. On this occasion, everyone among our people who is qualified to vote has both the right and the duty to choose who shall lead the country for the next six years, and to decide upon the critical question of barangay elections in the immediate future.

From the moment that our people make their mandate known by vote, the nation shall irrevocably move towards the full establishment of the system of government enshrined in the law of the land, and the beginning of a new regime of democracy in our land. Two previous steps have already been taken to prepare the way for this crucial change. First, on January 17, 1981, we brought to an end the state of national emergency in our country. Second, on April 7 this year, the nation decided on the critical issue of the system of government that will serve as the framework for normal democratic process and government in the country.

Now, we have come to the most important step of all: that of shaping leadership and government for the nation in their new period of national life.

It can never be said by anyone among our people, or anyone who watches this time of transition in our country, that for this crucial choice, we have not allowed for the freest play of public discussion and debate. Everyone has been enjoined and encouraged to participate: whether they be political parties or candidates seeking the mandate of our people to lead, or citizens seeking to make their will known in these elections. Every care has been taken to install the machinery for the orderly and democratic conduct of the elections.

Yet a few among our countrymen have not been satisfied with this earnest of the nation’s determination to normalize. For reasons that are plainly selfish and divisive, there are those who have made manifest their intention to boycott the elections, and to persuade others to do the same. Conscious that they do not have the support of our people at this time, instead of bidding for political power, they have decided upon the unfortunate course of impugning the integrity of the elections and of maligning those who earnestly seek the people’s man date.

But whose integrity in fact is impugned by this wilful abdication of the right and duty of democratic choice? In consecrating themselves to the course of non-participation, the sincerity and seriousness of this so-called opposition wing as a force for orderly and peaceful political change has stood indicted in this political campaign. Let us remember only that they were the very same people who had repeatedly called for the lifting of Martial Law and for the immediate calling of national elections. They have been the ones who blandished before our countrymen the need for reform of the Constitution and the need for the people to choose a President.

Now they ask for the unthinkable: that the nation continue for sometime longer the period of emergency and crisis government. They would have the nation wait—for two knows how long—until the time when they believe they will have our people’s support.

That such a position can be advanced by a group that seeks to be the voice of the opposition in our country is not only a grave distortion of partisanship in a democratic society. It is an offense to the credulity of the people. It is a stain upon the nation’s earnest quest for democracy.

But we have no reason to be detained, as indeed we shall be detained, by this sorry exercise of political extremism in our forward course towards the full establishment of democratic politics and government in our country. This infection of bitterness and hatred inhabits merely the margins of our society, while at its core our people’s real desire is to end crisis government once and for all, and install in its place a new government reflective of their mandate.

From the first essential step towards normalization—that of erecting a democratic machinery for popular government—we now manifest in the coming elections the national will to use it. By our people’s exercise of suffrage, we now proceed to utilize democratic machinery and institutions, for the singular purpose of advancing, promoting and fulfilling the cause of people and country.

To all our countrymen, I will say once more let us ever keep in mind the great importance of this electoral exercise. Let us not be deceived into thinking that because there are no formidable rivals to the movement of reform of the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, some of us can therefore reasonably sit out the elections.

We have already spoken of the clear and constitutional duty of every citizen who is qualified to vote. That is written in the law of the land, and what is written in law is beyond dispute until the law is changed or amended.

But more than the legal dimension of this duty, there is a moral side to suffrage, and especially to the exercise of suffrage now in this period of transition in our country. This is the fact that the democracy we earnestly desire, the institutions and machinery we seek to build, can only come to life by our people’s exercise of control and consent of government. The letter of laws, the charter of democratic institutions, would be bereft of spirit and reality, if the people do not bother to express their interest and involvement in public affairs. We move one step nearer into the impersonality and total control of government, whenever a single citizen abdicates his right and his duty of participation in the democratic process.

We must have in short both the machinery for democratic government, and the will—the will of all the citizenry—to use it. Without machinery, democratic desires are frustrated. Without the popular will to use it, democratic process has no value and meaning.

This is essence is the crucial and supervening issue in these elections: because this is both the first time since 1972 that full political democracy can truly reign in our land, and because this is also the beginning of a fresh stage in the growth of our national life.

We must never forget that beyond these elections stand the future of the nation: the amalgam of challenges and opportunities, of decisions that have to be made, of questions that have to be answered, of problems that have to be resolved.

To exercise the power of suffrage, we as citizens must choose between the alternative programs of policy and direction, proferred by the various parties bidding for popular support. Only the party that truly presents to us a course that will avail in this time of ferment and uncertainty in global and national affairs deserves the support and the mandate of the people.

The time when personal ambition alone could suffice as a platform for running for public office is past. I do believe that our people are deeply aware today of how greatly and deeply government affects their lives and their future, and of how policies relate critically to the fulfillment of their aspirations.

The clichés of the past do not wash anymore. Politicians who stand for election, parties who aspire to lead, must have something more to inspire popular consent. In a word, they must have vision and a concrete program of government.

Throughout this campaign, I have insisted within the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan that we must endeavor to disclose to our people the totality of our program of government. We must not be content to receive a mandate born of a passive and divided opposition, and of a less than involved citizenry. Our people must understand where we desire to lead them.

In brief, this is where I and the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan seeks to direct the course of the nation:

First and foremost, we emphasize that our task must be towards fuller and greater participation of the people in their government. Democratic process—its defense and its promotion—shall be a fundamental guidepost of our program of government.

If our people should ratify the proposal for the calling of barangay elections, it is our intent to push for the calling of barangay elections early in 1982. We believe that a new mandate for leadership at this level of government in our country will provide an important pillar for the work of reform and development.

Following that, we shall be unwavering in our desire to hold the elections of representatives to the Batasang Pambansa in 1984.

Subsequently, local and presidential elections will be held simultaneously in 1987.

The frequency of elections is in our view vital to the healthy buildup of our democracy. Put in addition to elections, we fully to intend to continue to submit to the nation important questions and issues via referendum and plebiscite. The success with these devices of national consultation which we experienced during the period of crisis government must also be attained during the period of normal democratic government.

The second strand of policy which we shall earnestly pursue is the progressive strengthening of the machinery of government, that will involve not only active collaboration with the Batasang Pambansa and the establishment of the Executive Committee and full Cabinet government.

I intend to give the fullest play to the interaction of the Presidency, the Prime Minister, the Cabinet and the Batasan Pambansa. Where this will involve greater delegation of powers from the Presidency to the Prime Minister and the Cabinet, I will do so.

We also envision major reforms of the Civil Service.

We have already studied the possibility of rotating Cabinet members in the different ministries as one responsive measure to the need for government reform.

We are considering as well the total retooling of manegerial and service skills at lower levels of the bureaucracy, matched by upgrading of salaries and wages, as vital inputs to the professionalization of the government service.

The third strand of policy relates to our unequivocal and unswerving commitment to national development. What we have seen as the salutary result of full national mobilization for national development endeavors, we shall now pursue with even greater vigor.

The programs that are underway—for industrialization, for agri-business, for agricultural development, for export expansion—will continue at an accelerated pace.

We have the momentum of our advance and the health of the national economy as an important foundation to move from. Regardless of the uncertainties of international life today, we are confident that the economy will continue to grow, and that we shall progressively attain self-reliance in our economic life.

And we do not forget the place of the citizen in the concerns of government, which is a major strand of our policies for the future. The object of development, we have repeatedly said and realized in fact, is man. No man, no family, will be left outside this advance of the nation to progress. In the achievement of social justice, in the sharing of the fruits of development, in the provision of vital social services–individuals and communities will be the focus of concern of government.

What has been achieved in the advancement of the well-being of our people during the last eight years will be further enhanced and promoted. We have no illusions that there are still many problems in this area—that there are many among our people who remain at the margins of society. For truly we believe that unless this task is fulfilled, we would fail as governors of the nation.

Finally, in our relations with the world, there shall be continued efforts to promote and secure our position in the councils of nations, and to advance the cause of international reform.

The growth of the ASEAN community will be a high priority in our diplomacy.

There will also be greater emphasis in our relations with the Middle East, as we perceive now new avenues opening to us for strengthening relations and for ensuring the sources of our vital energy requirements.

And there will be constantly an active joining of economic and political concerns in the conduct of foreign relations.

These goals by no means encompass the many directions and decisions that must be taken once a new government is formed after the June 16 elections. I have merely tried to indicate and anticipate here the broad thinking and approach of our party concerning the tasks of government, should it receive your mandate in the elections. For these are surely vital to the choice that you must make.

Fellow countrymen, as we near the close of the campaign and move at last into the fateful moment of decision, I shall say once more: reflect deeply and carefully on the issues of these elections, and only then choose the course that you wish the nation to take.

There is only one interest to be borne in mind in this political exercise: the interests and the future of the nation.

The task before us now is the building of the national future, and that will never be accomplished in a spirit of bitterness and hatred, in an atmosphere of extremism and disunity. Some may wish for their own reasons to deny the nation their participation in this important event; let history therefore pass them by and leave them where they have always chosen to be: uninvolved in the affairs of the country, mere watchers of the nation we are building.

The edifice of the nation is being raised stone by stone. And we know now far better than we did many years ago the shape of what we are constructing. We not only have the plans or the vision in our minds; we see now the nation we aspire to be rising in our land.

As one nation with one faith, with the world looking at us, let us then continue on this majestic task.

Thank you and good night.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.