Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Annual Convention of the Military Nurses Association of the Philippines and Foundation Day of the AFP Nurse Corps

I always look forward to every opportunity to address a gathering of military nurses. It is not too often that the President of the Philippines gets to meet members of the Armed Forces who are not as tough and fierce-looking as the men of our combat units. Although the duties they perform are very important, sometimes the stern faces of some of our soldiers can be tiresome. Looking at you, I can now understand how your warm and lovely presence serves to encourage and inspire our fightingmen.

Those of my generation who saw action in Bataan and in other engagements of the last world war can never forget the selfless devotion to duty displayed by the military nurses. In our darkest and most trying moments, when all seemed lost, the nurses where always there by our side — at times even at the frontline and the trenches — to comfort us, to treat our wounds, to minister to our health needs, to bring us back to fighting shape. Theirs was a sense of commitment that would not diminish or waver under the enemy’s fiercest assault. Their sensitivity to the suffering of others completed them to ignore the hazards of combat, even if it means submitting to the ultimate sacrifice. To them, humanitarianism and service to their fellowmen were not obstruct ideals. They, too, certainly deserve the nation’s gratitude as much as the men and women who actually bore arms in the country’s defense. The example set by those courageous nurses is no less heroic and worthy of emulation.

We are gratified to note that this splendid tradition of selfless service is carried on and kept alive by the AFP Nurses Corps and by the Military Nurses Association of the Philippines. It is only fitting that the President of the Philippines should lead the nation in extending warmest greetings to you all at this joint observance of the anniversaries of the corps and the association.

I think of your profession as one of those callings that truly exemplify the service of man to his fellowman. It is not at all surprising that Florence nightingale, who pioneered the development of military and civilian nursing, became a legend in her own time and that today, in many lands and on our own country, many women follow upon her footsteps.

What she pioneered has become an indestructible tradition. And this is nowhere better stated that in the code of ethics of the International Council of Nurses, which says: “Service to mankind is the primary function of nurses and the reason for existence of the nursing profession.”

As a critical component of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the nurse corps throughout its 46-year history has more than simply lived up to its share of the task of looking to the welfare of our men in uniform of securing the country’s defenses of ensuring the integrity of the republic. In countless ways, the corps has helped turn the AFP from a purely military establishment into a key factor in national stability and growth. While the last war may have occasioned some of the corps’ most shining moments, it continues to make itself in the unending challenge of nation-building.

Today, it may be that we are confronted with an enemy more sinister than the adversaries we engaged in battle almost 40 years ago. This enemy has a face not unlike ours, but its soul violates everything which we Filipinos value and cherish. It is an enemy who will resort to every ploy, exploit every real or imagined grievance, fabricate every lie and distort every fact to undermine our people’s faith in duly constituted authority. Many of you have experience in the field and stood by our combat troops in numerous encounters with this enemy throughout the country know what I speak of. Some of your comrades have fallen victim to this band of lawless schemers whose lust for political power is clearly measured by their blatant and merciless disregard for the safety and well-being of other Filipinos.

At a time when serious economic problems require all Filipinos to join hands and seek solutions together this enemy sows disaffection and disunity. The problems we face today are by no means insurmountable we have the capacity and talent to overcome them and emerge even stronger in the long run. Yet, these prophets of doom would have us believe that violence offer the only remedy. And through atrocities perpetrated against ordinary citizens, they have sought to challenge the authority and the will of government.

But you and I share a durable faith in the democratic instincts of the Filipino people, while some of our misguided countrymen may fall under the deceptive spell of these agitators, I am sure that the rest of us will not tolerate any further attempt to impose an alien ideology on our nation. And despite the disturbing tendencies that we have seen in recent months, we shall not distress from the path of peaceful political change we have set for ourselves. In the face of economic difficulties and a lingering insurgency, we stand committed to safeguarding and enhancing our democratic institutions. For the principal lesson of history for us is clear, only a vibrant and health democracy can withstand the assaults of divisiveness and disunity.

I share these thoughts with you today in the hope that you, in your own special way, will also do your part to nurture those ideals and beliefs that keep our people together. Your humanitarian work keeps you in constant touch with a large segment of the population, especially in the past several years when civic action and socio-economic development became important missions of the Armed Forces. Your sensitivity to our people’s conditions provides you with the rare opportunity to render all our efforts meaningful in their eyes. And your example of service is itself a call to others to serve our people and the nation in their own way.

In this light, there is much meaning and significance in the theme you have chosen for these joint anniversary celebrations. “The military nurses’ involvement in national development.” I am certain your organization will see to it that this theme does not devolve into an empty slogan. We in government are keenly aware that modern nursing is essential not only to hasten the recovery of the incapacitated, but also to provide our people with the knowledge that will improve their health and productivity. And since health possesses humanitarian and economic values, nursing has become a potent instrument of social progress.

Again, in behalf of a grateful nation, allow me to extend my warmest congratulations to each of you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library