Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 35th Session of the UN Economics and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP)

[Delivered at the PICC, March 5, 1979]

The Agreement to Cooperate

ALLOW ME FIRST of all, to add to my own welcome and the welcome of the people and the Republic of the Philippines to the distinguished delegates to this 35th conference of the ESCAP.

We are happy to be hosting this session. We are honored that you chose Manila, for the Philippines has been deeply involved in the programs of the United Nations development system since the organization’s inception. We have looked forward to this meeting as an affirmation of that commitment.

As a regional commission of the United Nations, the ESCAP represents, as we all know, more than one-half of the world’s population. This fact is both ennobling and sobering as it underscores the urgency of our work, particularly in the light of the past year’s critical events.

We have entered another period of global anxiety. It is a test of our relevance and responsiveness that we meet today against the backdrop of global political and economic crisis. At the same time, we are alarmed by the truth that the prosperity that we seek for our people cannot be had without peace in the world.

The reality of actual war, the persistence of subversion, the violent replacement of governments, the inclination of almost everyone to the use of force for the settlement of disputes, the apparent breakdown — and I say, apparent —of international law, all these seem to render man’s efforts at peaceful cooperation futile.

Asia has already known too many wars. The larger war, however, remains to be fought on the economic and social fronts. We, therefore, hope that the disputes that now confront the world can be settled amicably at the earliest opportunity.

There will be other and more appropriate venues for political debate on these questions. In this present session, perhaps the most that we can do is to continue to pursue concrete developmental work and thereby hope to strengthen in the long run the foundation of political and economic stability in our countries.

Thus, it may be said by history that while men of short vision mocked our good intentions, with faith and courage we persisted, and this helped to save our world from man’s irrational passions.

One observes that it has been the particular advantage of the ESCAP over three decades of its existence to provide a stable forum for important consultations on matters of regional concern. As a grouping of sovereign nations, its effectiveness was derived from the willingness of its members to cooperate on collective projects.

This meeting that we open today attests to the continuing viability of that agreement to cooperate, apart from which the ESCAP can have no separate identity.

Permit me to commend in this instance the many significant achievements facilitated by the ESCAP in the course of its work.

As memories tend to be short, we might be reminded of the fact, for example, that the ESCAP, then known as the ECAFE, as Minister Romulo has well explained, worked out the principles for the establishment of a regional development bank. The Asian Development Bank emerged from that initiative and has become an important institution serving the capital needs of developing countries.

The ESCAP has likewise assisted in the establishment of other regional institutions engaged in various aspects of economic and social development. Training, research and development activities are being undertaken by these bodies with the support of national institutions.

In infrastructure, the ESCAP has been instrumental in the coordinative planning of extensive transport and communications links across the region. The Asian highway project, the Trans-Asian railway network, and the Asian telecommunications network may be cited among these.

In development planning and policy, the commission can further enable its members to identify areas for collective action. The trade promotion center can help improve the trading expertise of member-countries. Technical cooperation among developing countries can be implemented more extensively as a means to achieve greater collective self-reliance.

Through the extension of advisory service, the ESCAP can continue to assist in development planning in agriculture, industry and in the social sectors of member-countries.

We look forward as well to the success of our programs in weather moderation and offshore oil prospecting, these being addressed to the serious constraints on our economic growth.

We recognize and appreciate these achievements and prospects not only for their intrinsic merit but for the indication they give us of what more can do. Much more indeed remains to be done, given the general state of development in the region and the adverse factors in our present environment.

Within the ESCAP itself, we shall have to rationalize certain training institutions that have met with difficulties in their operations. Measures will have to be devised to improve the use of resources invested in these institutions and monitor regional programs so that they might serve us more productively. This is one means to build concretely on the achievements of the ESCAP and improve its capacity to assist member-countries in their development.

Far greater challenges lie ahead for the ESCAP, for its members to contend with, collectively and individually.

Partly for this reason, it is important for the commission to take stock of its capabilities and shortcomings where they may exist in line with the prevailing and changing realities.

We face formidable problems on the economic front. In some respects these have been triggered by political developments of profound significance. The rude shock of the energy crisis has remained with us for the past several years. While the balance of economic forces has been changing through the many instances of currency and financial fluctuations in the world economy, the energy crisis is as real and potentially as difficult as the 1973 crisis.

Recent events remind us again of the vital interdependence among nations, especially in energy resources, and the important roles played by those countries whose fortune it is to be endowed with that basic wealth. The reduction of crude oil output through the closure of production in Iran — only temporarily, we strongly hope — has already led to a new round of crude oil price increases, over and above the prices agreed upon by them in their meeting last year. These additional price charges will hurt the development efforts of the oil-importing countries, especially of the Third World, and will further aggravate the position of the most severely affected developing nations.

Translated in international terms, these new crude oil prices are a factor towards pushing the world inflationary forces since commodities dependent on oil will also experience price increases. And we have not yet seen the worst consequences of the oil price spiral.

For our part in the Philippines, we are already bracing ourselves with a larger package of economic measures that will help us to adjust to these difficult realities. These measures will be seen not only in price adjustments for basic commodities dependent on energy products but also in compensating adjustments that we believe will relieve the general public, labor and industry alike. I can anticipate that the problems we immediately face mirror in some degree the new problems faced by other countries in this region and elsewhere.

We have been fortunate in being successful, albeit modestly at the moment, in our search for oil. This has been the result of a strategic effort to reduce our dependency on imported petroleum and achieve more self-reliance in our economic growth. Nevertheless we will continue to import most of our oil requirements for still several years to come, even as we have begun to produce oil this year from offshore wells. The energy crisis, therefore, remains as much a constraint on our development as with other developing countries.

While we are reminded that the great issues of international development are settled not in regional commissions but in specified bodies designed for their resolution, it is perhaps useful to mention those issues — where we are hopeful that immediate resolutions can take place — so that we can progress towards a new international economic order.

These issues center on the area of international trade. For many years the world at large has been lectured too well on the merits of liberalized world trade. Yet today, among the industrial countries that have espoused this, there is seen the specter of protectionism which is hindering the industrialization of the developing countries.

We are hopeful that the developed countries will realize that in encouraging trade, developing countries can develop greater self-reliance and dignity in their own development.

Surely, this is the best means of securing for the citizens of the world — in which Asia’s countless millions form the large component — their shield against poverty, ignorance and hunger.

The other area of great interest to developing nations is the Common Fund. We hope that the Common Fund negotiations to be resumed in Geneva will yield positive results. Hence, we can look forward to the 5th United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) to be held in May in Manila to solve the other numerous problems of international cooperation that are waiting its agenda.

To fail to agree to a common fund will dangerously expose UNCTAD to an atmosphere of recrimination and debate that everyone should avoid.

Permit me to refer to common issues of significance in the development of Asia and the Pacific. Here, the conquest of mass poverty, ignorance and malnutrition is a stark reality in the order of priorities. Each country may have its own specific strategy, but the priority essentially boils down to redressing the accumulated ills of thousands of years of underdevelopment in as short a time as possible.

We are at that critical stage where poverty and social injustice have made themselves so obvious that they cannot be ignored.

The common task that we hope the committees and organs of the ESCAP and the present and the present 35th Commission meeting will consider is to compare strategies learned from each other’s experience and develop common regional goals, institutions and programs where this is possible. These activities include the possibilities of sub-regional efforts. Indeed, because the ESCAP is by and large composed of nations that are heterogeneous in their political, economic, historical and cultural backgrounds, it is essential that sub-regional arrangements and programs first succeed.

It is within this context that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has progressively developed into a well-knit regional group. The economic cooperation among ASEAN countries is growing, and we foresee not only the expansion of common and related commercial communications and cultural links but also greater trade, industrial complementation and investments within the region.

Thus, with a strong ASEAN, the regional objectives of the ESCAP can be furthered.

We live today in an era of systematic interdependence among nations and peoples so that we are wont hear from everyone. This ESCAP session can be a fine opportunity for us to lend substance to that principle — through cooperation, fairness and open and frank discussions. Even against the tide of darkness that seems to engulf all of us, such commissions as the ESCAP must patiently and doggedly, with faith and deep resolve, pursue its goals.

Every bit of good done for our brothers in Asia shall gather value and dominance with the years. Of these times which some have referred to as “the new dark ages,” it shall be said that there were wise men who labored for the new enlightenment, and that shall include you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].