Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 74th Annual Convention of the Philippine Medical Association

[Delivered on May 13, 1981]

I am delighted to be invited once again to address this annual convention of the Philippine Medical Association; and I welcome the opportunity that this affords me to acknowledge anew the invaluable work that you perform in the service of our people and our nation.

The Philippine Medical Association observes this year its 78th anniversary, and this national convention is the 74th to be convened. Since its founding in 1903, we have seen substantial progress made in fulfilling the aims and objectives enshrined in the Constitution and by-laws of the association, namely, “to federate all medical societies in the Philippines, to promote the art and science of medicine, to improve public health, and to elevate the standards of the medical profession.”

And one of the most meaningful aspects of this record of service has been the intensive tieup of the profession of medicine with government’s own commitment to national health care. This sense of being in the service of a common cause has allowed us many a time to hurdle obstacles in the field of public health, and to override the problems that politics occasionally poses to the cause of medicine.

Your president, Dr. Laya, put it well I think when he said that “medical knowledge is meaningless unless it responds to the needs of our people.”

I know of no objective which more truly describes the nature of our health programs today than the recognition that our supreme aim must be the meeting of needs and the alleviation of human misery

In a developing country like ours, no goal can be more paramount, no service so essential, as the provision of health care to the population. Ill-health is a bitter scar on the lives of people everywhere; in a developing country, where it erodes the vitality of the people, it is a cruel roadblock to the pursuit of development.

In this of course we come face to face with the profound paradox that a nation which needs most quality and range in health care services is oftentimes the one that can least affordit. Every government in the developing world must always undergo a difficult battle for resources in providing for programs necessary to health care.

Of our country and of this government, it will be said, however, that we have always assigned high priority and importance to national health care. We may not always be able to bring in to our country every new development in medical science and technology; we may not be able to readily adapt every major advance in medical research—yet nonetheless we have reason to be proud of the quality of our health care programs, and the state of the medical profession in our country.

Of the state of the medical profession, we need only point out the fact that our medical training has had quite a reputation in the world for sometime now, although sadly this has resulted in the continuing enjoyment by other societies of the doctors and nurses we produce.

Of the thrust of our health programs, we may fairly cite now the high place of health care delivery in our national budget, and the priority we place on basic health services and needs today.

Today, government appropriations for health care is in the vicinity of P1.8 billion. This places the ministry 6th among all ministries of government. For 1982, the requested budget is P3.2 billion; evidently this is because Minister Garcia, who is a member of your association, is determined to bring up the rank of the ministry even higher, and determined to capitalize, on my intent to give even more emphasis to the expansion of health services, especially in the rural areas.

The totality of government commitment to national health care, in terms of institutional support, now comprises 362 hospitals of different categories, 1991 rural health centers and units, 7,099 barangay health stations and various special health service units serving our people. The specific services provided now encompass preventive, curative and rehabilitative medicine. At barangay level, we now provide one midwife for every 5,000 of our population.

I would emphasize before this Assembly the attention we must give to health care in the rural areas and at the level of the village. For I do not mind repeating that it is there—in our rural sector—where the decisive battle in health care must be fought and won. And it cannot be won by government alone, but by you and us in government acting together in the service of programs that can result in relief and amelioration.

In laying at this point the foundations for a more expanded and wide-ranging national health care program, we are giving particular stress today on the primary health care approach which has been developed in conjunction with the World Health Organization. This thrust is designed to involve the entire population to participate actively in health care and disease prevention; to be not just mere receivers of health services, but also codeliverers of basic health services and needs. This approach accentuates the promotion of health, the prevention of diseases, and the practice of self-care and self-help to develop self-reliance as a way of life in our local communities.

We believe that it is worthwhile to invest part of our available resources in institutionalizing this approach to health care, because over the long term this is going to prove decisive in the maintainance of health in our population. We need to try new approaches in our health programs for the very poor and the needy, and for the depressed communities, because it is simply imprudent for our nation to merely concentrate on the rehabilitative and curative aspects of health care. Communities must be encouraged to develop over the long term capabilities to cope and avoid the blight of ill-health.

As we endeavor to install these innovations in our national health care programs, we shall likewise take steps to enhance the overall quality of health care administration and revitalize our ministry of health and the totality of our health care delivery system. Where this can be done from within, this shall be done. Where this will need the assistance of others from outside government, we shall appeal for help.

But fundamentally we are committed to continuous innovation and expansion of our national health care program.

But let us not, I repeat, be in doubt that health care in a country like ours involves the totality of our population, and the totality of capabilities within our midst. Government is only one protagonist on the stage, and we cannot afford to neglect the vital dimension that private medicine and health insurance schemes play in the total health situation in our country.

The role of private medical institutions and private practicioners, let me say now, is an invaluable one. There can be no gainsaying the services that they offer and perform; there can be no quibble about their critical importance in our national life. If we appeal at times for greater social concern and greater selflessness from our private sector, that is not meant in criticism, but in the spirit of promoting a service already vital and widely acknowledged.

Unethical practices and uncompassionate behavior will certainly occur from time to time in a profession and a field where the needs are urgent, and the costs are high. But we all consider these the aberrations of a noble calling dedicated to the service of people.

Here in your association, we have always looked to the protection and preservation of the high ideals of medical practice, and we will continue to do so as we attempt to widen the coverage of our capabilities for caring for our people. It will require surely from time to time the strengthening of safeguards and the reformulation of the ethics of practice. This, I am certain, your association is aware of.

Similarly, we cannot turn a deaf ear to the stories and charges we have heard recently about dishonesty in health care delivery, and swindles in the sale of so-called fake drugs. Today, I would like to state that this government will definitely not tolerate this blight on national health care. We shall take every measure necessary to correct this blight. And we shall bring before the bar of justice all those who are perpetrating these misdeeds.

For there is simply no way that we can allow these contemptible practices in our midst. In a society where resources for health care are almost always taken from equally important programs, there is no excuse for their being squandered or eroded by graft. In a society where the majority of our population can ill-afford to waste their earnings on medicine, it is criminal for people to foist fake drugs on the public.

The start for action that can result in change and advancement must surely begin with us in government who man the national health care program. But it must reach and touch and involve the rest of the nation, and especially this community of medical practicioners upon whom we pin so much of our hopes for success in national health care.

I shall end with this appeal for your continued support and dedicated service; and I wish you once again a most successful convention.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.