Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the First Triparite Conference on Labor-Management Relations and Manpower Development

[Delivered at Pope Pius XII, Ermita, Manila, May 23, 1971]

Industrial Peace through Justice and Freedom

I AM HERE today not to talk of anything else outside your concerns, much less of the supposed candidacy of Blas Ople, which is never seriously talked about, although I may not entirely disagree with the idea, but to share with you my own thoughts on labor relations and manpower development which I know you will discuss during the next four years.

Last Labor Day, before representatives of organized labor, I pledged to uphold the right of the Filipino workers to self-organization and to free collective bargaining, but some events have intervened since then which set back action. Today, before this tripartite congress of labor, management and government representatives I am proud to reaffirm solemnly and reiterate the same pledge. All of us must unite in order to assure the Filipino workingmen the right to organization and to free collective bargaining.

I make this pledge and commit my entire administration to this, and as President of the Philippines. I make this policy commitment guided by two fundamental assumptions: First, that we have reached the stage where we must again reiterate the generally accepted assumption. This is perhaps necessary as all of us stand confused at the crossroads of our national life, that government, management and labor reassesses their respective positions and clearly state in all candor what those positions are.

I have come up with certain basic principles. One, we are committed as a people to a free and democratic society, and no matter what anybody says this is the principle to which all or at least a greater number, a great majority of our people, are committed. And that, secondly, the system of free collective bargaining which we adopted in 1953 has worked satisfactorily in the last 18 years.

That we are committed to freedom and democracy is not subject to question to my mind. But whether all our people enjoy fully the blessings of freedom and democracy is an entirely different affair. Our unorganized workers, for example, have no full access to freedom and democracy, not because our laws deny them their rights in our constitution but precisely because they are unorganized and divided.

This was the basic consideration which compelled me in 1953, during the debates on the Industrial Peace Act, to fight for the adoption of a national policy which guaranteed our workers freedom of association and free collective bargaining. And the same consideration moved me in 1964, as President of the Senate, to spearhead the fight for the inclusion in the Land Reform Code of a provision extending the right to self-organization and free collective bargaining to our agricultural workers.

I believed then, and I believe it now, that our workers must get organized if they are to integrate themselves into our free and democratic society, and that one of the most effective ways of getting organized is to form a union for collective bargaining and other lawful aims.

And what does our experience in labor relations under the Industrial Peace Act during the last 18 years say? I think that the answer vindicates my position.

First of all, the Industrial Peace Act has provided our workers a framework to reinforce and to stabilize our social order. Instead of joining the Huks or the People’s Army, or the Communist Party our workers have joined or organized unions all these years. Instead of seeking their own liberation through bloody revolution, our workers have actively sought a better life through the institution of free collective bargaining. In short, the workers of this nation have been utilizing the principle of democratic revolution which I spoke of in January 25 of this year.

Today, more than 20,000 Filipino workers all over the country are embraced by some 4,600 registered unions. No matter what their shortcomings are, these unions have raised the bargaining power of their members vis-a-vis their employers and the rest of society. As evidenced by their collective bargaining agreements, these unions have in one way or another, improved the terms and conditions of employment of their members, and through political action and other legitimate organized acts, they have tried, no matter how modestly, to prod society to reexamine its aptitude towards workers and succeeded. This is the most important part. In short, our unionists have become not only effective partners of their employers, but have also become change-seekers in society.

If you listen to some of the younger members of our society, it would seem as if they had a monopoly on the idea of reform. But long before they even thought of this, labor unionists and labor unions had already espoused the idea of reform. They had long started to actualize their own version of the democratic revolution, because of this freedom of organization and bargaining which they exercised.

But free collective bargaining has proved not only as an effective agent of social justice but also as a viable system of labor relations. Since 1953, under the free collective bargaining system, industrial relations in our country have been lively but stable. Compared with nation-wide and industry-wide strikes and lockouts, in Japan, the United States and countries in Europe, our own strikes and lockouts here are routine. In fact, our industrial relations have never really gone out of hand or assumed alarming proportions, our most serious strike being the 1963 waterfront strike in the Manila South Harbor. It was a costly, protracted and bloody strike but it was not due to the failure of our free collective bargaining system. Rather, it was brought about by partisan and trade union politics.

I have received a report from the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Secretary Romulo, when he came back from abroad, and he informed me that he has to carry his own bags at the airport in Rome. There was a work stoppage in practically all of the countries that he went to. There was a postal strike in England and several strikes of hotel workers. There were strikes everywhere in the entire nation of Italy which was all but paralyzed. And he informed me that he never realized that an entire nation could be completely brought to a standstill by a strike until he saw what happened in Italy. And I told him, aren’t you happy that here in the Philippines we have industrial peace, comparatively speaking, an industrial peace arising from the good relations between management and labor?

Moreover, the free collective bargaining system has absorbed and withstood for 18 years now the shocks of great economic and social readjustments. Now, let us go all the way back to the time of President Garcia, to the marginal fee; and to the time of then President Macapagal, the partial devaluation; and, again, the wage readjustment; and more recently, the floating rate as well as the new minimum wage. You think of all the things that could have happened with these possible sources of disturbance and disruption, these shifts in economic and monetary policy setting off tremendous difficulties and entailing painful readjustments in the field of labor relations. But our free collective bargaining system has proved equal to the challenge, thus amply demonstrating its resiliency and adequacy as a means of maintaining industrial peace.

During the last five years, there have been even more encouraging trends the field of labor relations. Up to 1965, according to labor department statistics the ratio between actual strikes and the number of strike notices filed every year was from 16 to 24 per cent. In other words, 16 to 24 out of every 100 strike notices exploded into actual strikes. Since 1966 the ratio has been cut down to 8 to 16 per cent. In fact, during the last three years, the number of actual strikes has never exceeded 9 per cent of pending strike notices.

However, the number of labor disputes or strike notices has more than doubled during the last 5 years — from 543 in 1965 to 1,083 in 1970. These are due mainly to (1) sheer economic expansion resulting in the rise of more establishments and more unions, and (2) increased confidence of trade unions in the conciliation service of the Labor Department, resulting in the filing of strike notices even when they were not required by law as in unfair labor practice cases.

These figures attest to the dynamism and vitality of our free collective bargaining system — a system which, by and large, has maintained peace through justice and freedom in our society during the last 18 years.

Nevertheless, our free collective bargaining system is faced by many problems, some of which threaten to defeat its purpose or bring about its breakdown. I am sure you will discuss these problems yourselves in the course of this tripartite congress and I hope you will come up in the end with effective and workable solutions. For my part, I will limit myself to the discussion of three major problems: first, union busting on the part of unscrupulous and tradition-bound employers; second, union raidings on the part of some labor groups; and third, the inadequacy of government response to these problems.

Now, let’s turn to the first. Union busting is an old management practice to prevent the formation of a union or to destroy an existing one. This is done mainly through either the setting up of a company union, or the employment of legal technicalities, or dismissal, harassment, discrimination, and other unfair labor practices against union officers and members. The Court of Industrial Relations is supposed to curb and penalize these unfair labor practices, but instead of doing so, it has reportedly encouraged in a number of cases the perpetration of such practices. I understand that before a petition for certification election or an unfair labor practice charge is resolved by the court, an unscrupulous employer has already succeeded in busting the union or in preventing the formation of one, often resulting in strikes and lockouts. Sadder still to note, some labor groups and their leaders have reportedly allowed themselves to become instruments of some employers in busting rival unions or in preventing their recognition through unfair maneuvers in court or at the picket lines.

But there are inter-union and intra-union rivalries which happen independently of management. These rivalries arise mainly from the overlapping jurisdiction of our major labor groups. Since they are all general federations, conflicts of interests and clashes of forces are inevitable among them. In the heat and bitterness of their rivalries, some labor groups wittingly or unwittingly play into the hands of employers who are waiting in ambush to divide and rule the labor movement for their own selfish purposes.

Again, problems arising from inter-union and intra-union rivalries are under the jurisdiction of the Court of Industrial Relations, which alone has the power to resolve them. Almost invariably, however, the CIR fails to act on time to resolve such disputes before damaging strikes can take place. How many times have the labor leaders come to me with this complaint? Where the employers themselves are responsible for creating a multi-million situation, then those employers deserve their own sad plight. However, where the rivalries are carried out by the unions independently of management, it is I think the urgent duty of the court to provide immediate relief.

But at the bottom of the problems of union busting and union raiding is j actually lack of labor education among our workers. If our workers are aware of their rights and responsibilities as employees and unionists, they will no doubt detect and withstand the evil maneuvers of union busters and union raiders. That is why, in the end, the only real solution to union busting and union raiding is the enlightenment of all our workers.

The manpower development program that we launched a few years ago has turned out to be a successful program. Under this program, some 200,000 unemployed citizens have been prepared through vocational training for employment.

It is now time, I think, to make the manpower development program serve the actual needs of industry; to train people for immediate absorption by industry. In this way, our manpower development program can become an active instrument not only of economic progress but also of social change.

We are now reforming the educational system of the Philippines. We are engaged in a reformation which will bring out graduates that can be absorbed by industries or who will fit into industry and will relate to the development program and plans of our country. It is now time for the manpower development program to involve itself as well in this new orientation, in this new; change.

Now, taking all this into consideration, I recommend the following proposals for the consideration of this tripartite congress.

First, I propose the inclusion of employer-employee relations as a required subject in all elementary and high schools as well as in all vocational and technical institutions. I am also directing right now Secretary Ople to include labor relations as one of the subjects in all manpower training classes all over the country. For as we all know, all pupils, students or trainees will end up as employees or employers, the only exception being self-employed persons.

Second, I propose the holding of a compulsory election in every establishment within 60 days before the expiration of a three-year collective bargaining agreement for the purpose of determining the collective bargaining agent of the employees therein. I also propose the transfer, from the CIR to an administrative body like the Bureau of Labor Relations, of the power to order and conduct an election to settle inter-union or intra-union disputes.

Third, I propose to empower CIR hearing examiners, especially in the provinces, to decide and rule on all unfair labor practices and representation cases subject to review by CIR Judges in Manila upon request of the aggrieved parties. In due time, I am certifying to Congress a bill which will merge the Court of Industrial Relations and the Court of Agrarian Relations into a single labor and agrarian court, adopting the present atomic structure of the CAR and eliminating the present collegiate structure of the CIR for the purpose.

Fourth, I propose the abolition of the present union registration system which is an unnecessary and cumbersome extension of colonial policy. In place of the present system, unions shall be merely required to submit their names and addresses to the Labor Department whose duty shall consist only of compiling such names and addresses and publishing from time to time an official directory of all unions.

And fifth, I propose to make vocational training compulsory for all citizens of the country.

I ask all of you to discuss these proposals and indicate your consensus about them at the end of this congress. I will be guided by the consensus of this congress.

This, I understand, is the first major tripartite congress to be held in our country. Previous labor relations congresses were attended by representatives of labor and management only. I hope this innovation will prove fruitful and thus set a new pattern for the future. I trust all of you will do justice to this new idea, this new approach, which we owe to the innovating mind of Blas, my Secretary of Labor. He has been a good Secretary of Labor, you must admit. Paminsan-minsan nakakawala, pero magaling na Kalihim ng Paggawa.

My friends from labor, management and government this is your first major opportunity to work together towards the solution of our common problems. Let us make it a great success — for peace through justice and freedom for all.

Everywhere we hear the cry, there must be reform! This is one of the areas where we must now bring about reforms, but not through bloody revolution. Continue along the path that you have followed since the adoption of the Industrial Peace Act in 1952. You are the innovators, you are the original leaders of reform. I look forward, therefore, to the Tripartite Congress leading the way towards the peaceful reform of our society and the alteration of the attitudes of our people. This congress alone is an achievement in itself. The fact that management and government can sit down with labor and discuss their common problems is a monument to the new perspective, to the new attitudes, and to the change of heart of our people, and this, therefore, is an augury of the happy resolution of this period of confusion. And out of this congress a new body like the Bureau of Labor Relations, of the power to order and conduct an election to settle inter-union or intra-union disputes.

Third, I propose to empower CIR hearing examiners, especially in the provinces, to decide and rule on all unfair labor practices and representation cases subject to review by CIR Judges in Manila upon request of the aggrieved parties. In due time, I am certifying to Congress a bill which will merge the Court of Industrial Relations and the Court of Agrarian Relations into a single labor and agrarian court, adopting the present atomic structure of the CAR and eliminating the present collegiate structure of the CIR for the purpose.

Fourth, I propose the abolition of the present union registration system which is an unnecessary and cumbersome extension of colonial policy. In place of the present system, unions shall be merely required to submit their names and addresses to the Labor Department whose duty shall consist only of compiling such names and addresses and publishing from time to time an official directory of all unions.

And fifth, I propose to make vocational training compulsory for all citizens of the country.

I ask all of you to discuss these proposals and indicate your consensus about them at the end of this congress. I will be guided by the consensus of this congress.

This, I understand, is the first major tripartite congress to be held in our country. Previous labor relations congresses were attended by representatives of labor and management only. I hope this innovation will prove fruitful and thus set a new pattern for the future. I trust all of you will do justice to this new idea, this new approach, which we owe to the innovating mind of Blas, my Secretary of Labor. He has been a good Secretary of Labor, you must admit. Paminsan-minsan nakakawala, pero magaling na Kalihim ng Paggawa.

My friends from labor, management and government this is your first major opportunity to work together towards the solution of our common problems. Let us make it a great success — for peace through justice and freedom for all.

Everywhere we hear the cry, there must be reform! This is one of the areas where we must now bring about reforms, but not through bloody revolution. Continue along the path that you have followed since the adoption of the Industrial Peace Act in 1952. You are the innovators, you are the original leaders of reform. I look forward, therefore, to the Tripartite Congress leading the way towards the peaceful reform of our society and the alteration of the attitudes of our people. This congress alone is an achievement in itself. The fact that management and government can sit down with labor and discuss their common problems is a monument to the new perspective, to the new attitudes, and to the change of heart of our people, and this, therefore, is an augury of the happy resolution of this period of confusion. And out of this congress a new nation perhaps will be born, as well as a new relationship between management, labor and the government. As far as I am concerned, as President of the Republic of the Philippines, I can assure you that I support the idea of management, government and labor coming together and giving to the lowliest man every opportunity to gain equality and freedom in our country.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].