Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the closing plenary session of the Third National Convention of Small and Medium Industries

[Delivered on February 12, 1971]

Assistance for the Small- and Medium-Scale Industries

THIS NATIONAL CONVENTION of small and medium industries, those who are involved in the promotion and establishment of small and medium industries, is a welcome contribution to the dialogue that we must sustain particularly in these times of social and political upheaval.

This convention may not be noticed by most of our countrymen, but because you are gathered here to discuss the role of light industries in the development of our land, you deserve the attention of the Filipino people. This is the reason for my presence here tonight. It is my hope that I shall be able to call attention to the vital role played by small-and medium-scale industries in the Philippines.

I understand that this convention is sponsored or hosted by the National Council, which I created under Chairman Gerardo Sicat sometime ago. The council is to be commended for bringing together various sectors of the government and the business community, for the purpose of exploring, assessing and recommending measures for exploiting all the possibilities leading towards the expansion of an important segment of our economy.

Over the past year, we have been reorienting domestic policy in order, as I said in my State of the Nation Message last January 25, to redress the balance on the side of the people.” In other words where before the emphasis might have been purely economic now the welfare of the working class must be taken into account in any development scheme.

With this objective in mind — that is, greater emphasis on the welfare of the common man — I have created a multi-agency committee which is now working on the acceleration of the establishment of export oriented cottage industries all over the nation. The country now has a situation where large orders for export handicrafts and other products have to be refused because the present marketing, financing and production structure of these industries does not allow such orders to be filled within a satisfactory period of time; nor is there quality control.

An answer to this problem is being planned. Government agencies will mount a massive effort to promote the formation of new small-and medium-scale cottage industries by providing worker training, assisting in establishing production units and-financing of the production units.

To complement this effort, elements of the private sector have volunteered to assist in the formation of centers to be established in the ten regions into which the country has been divided for this very purpose. I have been meeting with the businessmen and my last meeting with them took place only yesterday. It was agreed that big business would contribute to this effort. I spoke of the ten regions of the Country. The centers in these regions will be responsible for marketing and financing the output of cottage industries in their respective regions. In this manner, it will be possible to take advantage of the strengths of central management, financing and marketing direction in the regional centers, to strengthen these industries without loss of the independence in operation now enjoyed by the different operators.

This cooperative effort of business and government will be initially funded with P240 million. I have directed the government financing institutions notably the SSS the GSIS, the DBP and the PNB, to set aside funds to be used as loans for small-scale and medium industries. The present fund represents an increase of P35 million over the initial outlay of P5 million, which I directed the SSS to allocate last year for the same purpose. I gather that the financial aid that was given to small-and medium-scale industries last year amounted to only P10 million all in. The P40 million is just the beginning. It is our hope that these small-and medium-scale industries will be capable of absorbing the amounts that we intend to make available for these industries.

I call on each one of you to join the nation in this effort which is a part of what I referred to as the democratic revolution. This alternative and this option I have offered to our people in lieu of violent revolution, and should end once and for all the injustices, the abject poverty of the great masses of our people, and over-reliance on external sources for the sustenance of our economy.

In this connection, we have adopted an industrial development policy that contemplates “horizontal integration” of industry. This policy has been expressed in the amendment to the third investment priorities plan of the Board of Investments, which I recently approved. If you have been watching the development in industries you might have read about this. It calls for incentives to be devised, so that existing industries like machine shops, foundries, and similar small-and medium-scale enterprises will be encouraged to supply components to be used in the manufacture on products listed in the investment priorities plan. The result will be to encourage the development of a manufacturing network with greater emphasis on small-and medium-scale industries.

At this juncture, perhaps it is necessary for me to recall the National Electrification Program. We intend to spend in the next three and a half years a total of six hundred million pesos for electrification. But the reason I call attention to this is because it is our hope that you in the small-and medium-scale industries will be able to fabricate the various requirements of our electrification program so that we will not be compelled to import these requirements. I have inserted this into the program, and I have insisted upon its inclusion as an alternative or option to be granted to the small-and medium-scale industries, knowing that you, if given the opportunity, will be able to meet certain requirements of the electrification program.

In this effort the government and the Filipino entrepreneurs are together and together they can achieve much in the development of import substitutes and the development of export industries particularly those suitable for our country-side and the different areas of the country. This will mean the uplifting of the Filipino peasant, the laborer and worker, from a subsistence level of livelihood.

Last year, our efforts in this area reached a new plateau. As a result, our export earnings from one area alone, cottage industry products, for the first half of 1970 totalled P53,670,000. The over-all export earnings for 1969 was P79,690,604. These figures do not include export earnings by light industries not registered with the NACIDA. And the NACIDA industries are expected to export this year about a hundred million pesos worth of products, and again this does not include light industries.

We have involved more government agencies to accelerate the emergence of medium industries. In addition to the NACIDA, the following are actively participating in our promotion program: The National Manpower and Youth Council, the National Institute of Science and Technology, the Board of Investments and the U.P. Institute of Small-Scale Industries. Of course I have created the National Council for Small-and Medium-Scale Industries to coordinate government efforts in the promotion and development of these industries.

This year, we shall tap the resources of the Department of Labor, the Department of Education, the Cooperative Administration Office and other government offices.

In your resolution, I noted that you asked for the approval of the Senate Bill No. 595 and House Bill No. 1943, otherwise known as the Small Enterprises Act, which creates a new office around the Institute of Small Industries under Director Cataña. If this be your wish, I shall certify this bill in order that it may be acted upon by Congress.

The number of registered industries last year rose to 41,493. These producers employed approximately 127,595 regular workers and 671,722 casual workers. We expect this number to go up this year. It is my hope that the small-and medium-scale industries will outdo the cottage industries in the amount and value of export products, in overall production, as well as in the number of employment opportunities generated.

In the next three years, we shall accelerate our thrust towards the fuller promotion of our small and medium industries. This promotion strategy shall become a permanent component of the national planning and developing process.

The trouble with this country is that nothing moves unless the President pushes it. I have been watching the development of small-and medium-scale industries, and I specially after I created the National Council for Small and medium Scale Industries, I closely watched it move forward. Of course, I am content with the efforts of everyone but I am not content with the reaction of our people. It is my hope that the people will now hear of all these efforts, and I shall see to it that the government and our people will pay more attention to small-and medium-scale industries in the Philippines.

With respect to cottage industries an initial amount of P10 million has been set aside for, the national program, which seeks to tie together the various independent operating groups, 41,000 of them. There are also various other efforts throughout the land.

The National Manpower and Youth Council shall coordinate the organization and implementation of the project, and the National Cottage Industries Development Authority shall constitute the bulk of administration.

But, of course, the over-all coordinator will be the Chairman of the Board of Investments, Mr. Vicente Paterno. As I said, we have initial investment, that is on the part of the government, of P10 million and we also hope that the private Rector will contribute another P10 million. It is my intention not only to utilize the National Export Trading Corporation but perhaps to organize a new corporation to attend to the export of all your products. We expect the projects to generate anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000 new jobs within this year or next year.

We are well aware that the nation is undergoing the traumas of a developing society where the dispossessed are straining to break me centuries-old shackles of tenancy and freedom and the captains of industries are to some extent over-reaching themselves.

Even so-called affluent societies are faced with internal problems that arise from the concentration of their riches in the hands of the few.

We can therefore read as ominous signs the continuing unrest among our wage earners, students, and peasants, and we should all strive to eliminate all the vestiges of oligarchic rule, feudalism and bureaucratic corruption.

This is an objective which is not merely assigned to government. It is also the objective of the private sector. This can be achieved not through violence or armed uprising but through the distribution of economic wealth at the widest range to benefit more of the populace — through land reform, small-scale manufacturing, cottage industries, community development, self-help projects.

The small-scale entrepreneurs may well be in the vanguard of this revolution. Some of them may graduate into heavy industries. But I would like them to remember that so long as they develop and sustain in themselves an acute social conscience or a genuine compassion for their workers or employees and concern for the community welfare, manifested in concrete, terms, the revolution will not likely swallow them up. We used to say that the rich of this land should, for their own survival, help the poor. We dare say that they should do so because it is right. It is not only necessary for survival, it is necessary because it is correct and just and proper. The poor do not need charity, simply the opportunity to uplift themselves. This, then, is our common task—for you who are in industry and for us in government—to provide the opportunities for the less fortunate to make a decent livelihood in order that they will be in position to participate fully in the political life of the nation.

And so, my friends, I close with this statement — that I am watching the progress of the small-and medium-scale industries. And so long as I am President you can rest assured that the Office of the President will utilize its powers and prerogatives to help you in every way it can.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].