Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Inaugural Session of the Batasang Pambansa

[Delivered on July 23, 1984]

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen of the Batasang Pambansa:

To this historic inauguration of this parliament of the nation, I bring the hopes and prayers of our people that it will live up to its mighty charge.

All of us could wish that this moment might be marked in fitting celebration of its historic significance in the annals of our country. But we convene at a time of testing and challenge for the nation. Our agenda is long and will not wait on ceremony and ritual.

We could all wish too, that as in times past, I can report to you today on the health, the vigor and the prosperity of national life. But we meet today in quest of national recovery from crisis, of vitality in the face of adversity.

We can be proud and thankful that crisis has not found us prostrate and despairing, that adversity has not driven our society into islands of panic and fear, that purposive work continues today to dam the tides of crisis in our midst and to secure the stability and confidence of the nation.

But clearly we have only moved past the eye of the storm. Its tailwinds still lash at us. And there is much rebuilding to be done

In every time of ordeal for a nation, it is not so much the resources at its disposal as the quality of leadership that finally decides the outcome

We need such leadership now: the leadership of the government and the party in power, and the leadership of the opposition as well. Each has its duties and responsibilities, its own cause to pursue and promote. But in the survival and growth of the nation, we are not rivals but partners. We are all partisans for a common cause

This has been the way with us in every time of crisis and challenge for our people and our country. Throughout our history, through all the mutations of political parties and creeds, we have always instinctively understood and recognized that while we are servants of our political allegiances, we are the nation’s above all.

So let there be light and reason in our relations. Let us seek and find in creative debate and deliberation the way and the means to promote and advance together the national future.

II. Highlights of Developments, 1984

In such a spirit of collaborative effort, the common burdens we face today are less heavy than they seem. And the gains we have made by the mid-point of the year are touchstones for the vindication of our hopes.

We began the year embattled by the most severe economic crisis to confront us since 1972. And this was quickly abetted by new restiveness in our political life and the resurgence of insurgency and rebellion in the country.

We stand at mid-year assured of the stability of our Republic, strengthened by the successful holding of parliamentary elections, and encouraged by the revival of international confidence in our country.

But if the stability of our Republic has been assured, the progress of economic recovery has been slower and less tractable.

Relief and stabilization measures undertaken upon the onset of crisis at the turn of the year have succeeded in fortifying the economy from further stresses and in reviving economic activity. But the results as of the first semester of the year are not such as to wipe out the corrosive effects of the economic crisis and reverse the slowdown on the national economy.

The prospects for national economic recovery were brightened somewhat by encouraging developments abroad that suggested the beginning of a world-wide economic recovery.

Sustained levels of economic growth in many developed countries during the first semester of 1984, particularly in the U. S. (7.9 percent) and Japan (1.8 percent), are the first clear sign in years of a major economic turnaround. this has produced in turn new trade accommodations and improving terms of trade that were particularly welcome for the economies of the developing nations.

The strategies, policies and measures adopted in the national recovery effort have sought to maximize the effects of economic recovery in the industrialized world on the national economy. At the same time that austerity measures sought to contain the country’s balance of payments deficit.

These resulted in encouraging performance in some sectors of the economy.

For the first quarter of 1984, an actual surplus of $239 million was posted in the balance of payments position. When adjusted for arrearages in interest and other payments for the same period, a deficit of $155 million was incurred.

For the first five months of 1984, the value of exports posted a growth of 7.6 percent from $1,944 million to $2,144 million. Non-traditional manufactured exports posted a 20.5 percent increase in value, while traditional exports recorded a decline of 5.5 percent.

Imports in contrast declined by as much as 21 percent, from $3,036 million to $2,399 million. Capital goods posted the biggest decrease at32.1 percent as government effected cutbacks in its investment program. Consumer goods followed with a 25.9 percent decline. The oil import bill was limited to $703 million, due to a reduction on imports of oil and oil products to 25.1 million barrels.

In agriculture, the grain situation improved during the first three months of the year as rice and corn production increased by 1.5 percent and 10.5 percent, respectively. Major commercial crop production, however, particularly of copra and coconut oil, experienced a reverse trend during the first quarter. Notwithstanding favorable world market prices. Coconut production declined by 7.2 percent and sugar production, by 16.2 percent. Poultry production, on the other hand, exhibited a strong growth rate of 10.9 percent during the period.

In industry, the average value of industrial production grew by about 30 percent from the same period last year. The food manufacturing sector experienced a 61 percent growth over the previous year. Significant increases were likewise reported by the following sectors: miscellaneous manufactures (130.3 percent), microcircuits (80.7 percent), paper and paper products (72.2 percent), beverage (66.3 percent) and plastic and plastic products (55.6 percent).

Declines were recorded on the other hand in transport equipments (-83.4 percent), miscellaneous non-metallic mineral products (-48.5 percent), electrical appliances and housewares (-10.8 percent).

The improvement in industrial production was accompanied by the reduced consumption of commercial energy. Total primary energy consumption fell by 4.1 percent during the first semester under review. Electricity consumption, particularly in industry. Slightly increased by 2.5 percent, but this was matched by a hefty 15.5 percent decline in the consumption of petroleum products during the first semester.

In investments, paid-up capital investment in the industry sector increased by 25.7 percent, pushed up mainly by the 150 percent growth of the mining and quarrying sector. Investments in the agriculture sector grew by 2.5 percent. The growth in investments in these two sectors failed to offset. However, the decline of investments in the services sector (-19.6 percent).

The favorable developments of the first semester, however, could not reverse the perceptible slowdown of the economy as a result of the economic crisis.

A rise in consumer prices which started in the last quarter of 1983 was notable during the first four months of 1984. This development was largely influenced by successive foreign exchange adjustments and the continued speculations on the Peso-Dollar exchange rate. This was compounded by the reduced supply of imported inputs and the slowdown in production activities.

To hold the line against inflation, the government implemented strict monitoring of prime commodities, and improvement in the marketing and distribution system to protect consumers from undue price increases and supply shortages.

Likewise, the monetary authorities adopted restrictive measures to control liquidity expansion in order to contain its inflationary effects.

Along with inflation, unemployment was a major area of concern. The aggregate employment level reached 18.7 million as of the first quarter of 1984. This implies an increase in the unemployment rate to 6.3 percent from only 5.9 percent for the comparable period last year.

In view of the unemployment situation, the Emergency Unemployment Assistance Package was implemented full-scale in early 1984. This provides for P300 million to be earmarked for unemployment assistance. Of this amount, some P50 million has already been released, with a total of P20.2 million already loaned out to laid-off workers.

The general slowdown in employment has scarcely affected, however, the movement of average earnings. The index of average earnings in key manufacturing enterprises rose by 23 percent for the first five months of 1984. This was the result of continued efforts to adjust the legislated minimum wage in response to changes in the cost of living. The minimum wages have already been adjusted twice this year for both non-agricultural and agricultural workers. Thus. the effective pay now stands at P51.92 and P50.83 for non-agricultural workers in Metro Manila (MM) and outside of MM, respectively, and P42.50 and P32.00 for agricultural workers in plantation and non-plantation areas, respectively.

These developments at mid-year reflect the impact of crisis and adversity on the economy and our people. They also show the measure of our response—how resourceful, how courageous, and how resilient we can be in the face of crisis.

But the danger for us is not past. We have made only a start in the long road to economic recovery and stability.

The coming months and years will determine whether we can have development under the rigors of financial discipline and austerity, whether we can bring about not just temporary relief and stability, but sustained and authentic economic recovery and growth.

III. Agenda for Recovery and Growth

I come before you tonight to declare my faith that we have the fortitude, the resolve and the imagination to meet this challenge.

Let me turn therefore to the course that government proposes to take in meeting our agenda for recovery and growth.

That agenda calls for action on many fronts but our main lines of action are the following:

First, the adoption of a disciplined financial and budgetary program, that will stabilize our balance of payments position, exercise greater control on public spending, and channel resources to activities that will result in productivity and growth.

Second, the restructuring of the nation’s external debt to relieve the pressure of maturing foreign obligations and to encourage new foreign investments in the economy.

Third, the refocusing of economic priorities, to emphasize balanced agro-industrial growth which promotes the development of agriculture and agrarian reform side by side with industry.

Fourth, the acceleration of the structural adjustment program for the economy. To strengthen export production, energy self-reliance, industry dispersal, and tourism development.

Fifth, the implementation of a nationwide productivity effort designed to mobilize our people for productive and self-reliant activities.

Sixth, the promotion of social equity in the national recovery effort so that individual welfare is fully protected and enhanced and social services continue to expand and improve.

Seventh, the development of closer and stronger partnership between government and the private sector in the implementation of the recovery program.

Eighth, action to enhance the performance, productivity and accountability of all levels of government in development administration.

Ninth, action to ensure the peace and security of the nation in the face of insurgency efforts to derail the recovery programs and to sow social unrest and political instability.

And tenth and last, the continued strengthening of our political system and institutions.

In each of these areas of action, government shall forthwith ask the Batasan for appropriate legislative action that will enable us to meet our targets and goals.

Financial Stability

First on our agenda is financial stability.

We shall continue on the course of fiscal and budgetary prudence designed to stabilize the balance of payments position, to eliminate waste in government, to generate savings to generate savings for development activities, to strengthen comprehensive debt management, and to improve our tax administration and collection effort.

Improved debt management will be instituted through the adoption of a more comprehensive debt management strategy, better utilization of official development assistance, and better institutional arrangements for the efficient use of foreign exchange

To develop and strengthen the financial system, we shall encourage bank merger and consolidation, longer-term spending, the regional dispersal of financial institutions, strengthen the supervision and control of government financial institutions, and develop the capital market.

Finally, we shall shift the emphasis in financing development efforts from foreign borrowings to domestic resource mobilization.

In support of this financial stabilization program, we shall seek from the Batasan legislation to strengthen comprehensive debt managment, to tighten the coordination of government corporate activities, to strengthen the supervision and control of private financial institutions, and to improve tax administration and procedures.

Loan Restructuring

Our second line of action is the restructuring of the external debt to lessen repayment burdens on the country.

The successful resolution of the financial program being negotiated with the International Monetary fund and with private creditors will achieve two important aims: first, it will reschedule and restructure maturing foreign obligations; and second, it will provide the country with badly needed foreign exchange resources.

To make the restructuring program work for us, however, we must stress that every new inflow of financial assistance and trade credit facilities is utilized to increase the country’s capability to increase exports and reduce imports. This must be reinforced by a responsive and efficient domestic financial market.

Balanced Agro-Industrial Development

Financial prudence and debt management, however, answer only one aspect of our economic agenda. We need positive action to spur economic effort along lines that will promote productivity and economic opportunities for our millions.

We need, thirdly, to refocus our economic priorities in the light of new constraints. We must emphasize anew balanced agro-industrial development which promotes the development of agriculture side by side with industry.

Our program recognizes the strategic role that agriculture must play in the national recovery effort. We look towards increased agricultural productivity as the key to economic recovery and balanced agro-industrial development, at this time when industry must undergo structural adjustments to reduce its import dependence

In agriculture, sectoral reforms are now being implemented, and they focus on the gradual lifting of price ceilings and removal of market interventions which affect key commodities and agricultural inputs.

Self-sufficiency will be sought in various agricultural products, particularly the feedgrains sector, where recent production statistics for yellow corn have been most impressive. We envision self-sufficiency and the end of corn imports by 1985, and exportable surpluses by 1987.

In support of balanced agro-industrial development, we shall now seek from the Batasan legislation to strengthen land use management and control, and environmental protection including conservation of natural resources. We shall ask likewise for legislation to dismantle excessive regulations affecting various aspects of agricultural production, marketing and distribution.

Structural Adjustment

In industry, the structural adjustment program for the economy will be intensified, with emphasis on exports development, progressive energy self-reliance, industry dispersal, and tourism promotion.

We must develop world-competitive and agro-based industries and intensify selective imports substitution.

With economic recovery in the west on the upswing, we not only should expect improved export performance, we should aggressively promote the production of non-traditional manufactured goods and agro-based exports.

The country’s comparative advantage shall be exploited by putting emphasis on the development of labor-intensive, small-scale industries and on the promotion of industries with strong linkage with the agriculture sector. And the benefits of industrialization will be equitably distributed through the dispersal of industries.

The thrust in the energy sector will be the continued diversification towards non-oil, indigenously-abundant energy sources to supply the energy needs of priority economic and social activities.

As the contribution of domestic energy resources increases, the country’s dependence on imported oil will drop to 50 percent by 1985 and further to 42 percent by 1987. On the other hand, our national electrification program will be pursued to raise electricity coverage to 62 percent of total rural households by 1987.

Productivity and Self-Reliance

All these actions in agriculture and industry form part of our program for national productivity and self-reliance.

We have initially set aside P500 million pesos of national savings for our national productivity program. Another P3 billion is earmarked for 1985.

The heart of this program connotes in essence a shift from import-dependent development strategy to indigenous and locally-based development. It accepts the challenge for the nation to look within for deliverance, to tap the energies of our people for growth.

All that we have said so far concerning domestic resource mobilization, food sufficiency, production of agro-based exports, selective import substitution, progressive energy self-reliance, industry dispersal, and natural resource use and management—all cohere around this objective of productivity through self-reliance.

To this, I will add that the productivity effort requires not only the greater utilization of indigenous materials but the development and use of local technologies.

In support of economic efficiency and greater productivity, we shall seek from the Batasan legislation to overhaul economic incentives including fiscal privileges, in order to reduce fiscal losses to the government and induce better performance.

Social Equity

In our productivity program, social equity is our essential objective, we can only develop as a nation to the extent that we invest in our youth and in the well-being of our millions. No development can arise save from the talents, the energies, the labors of our human resources.

Individual welfare and social services therefore form a major part of our updated development plan.

Constraints in our budgetary program do not allow us to expand except in a marginal way our appropriations for social services; but maintenance of present budget levels and more efficient delivery of services will do much to improve the lives of families and entire communities, particularly those living at the margins of poverty.

First and foremost, we must, and we will, bring inflation down. Greater productivity will be for naught if incomes are shrivelled by high prices. We expect to contain inflation at 25 percent by the end of the year. And in the succeeding years of the program, we shall be relentless in cutting it down.

Second, we shall do all to protect and promote the welfare and rights of labor, and ensure a climate of industrial peace

Let no one doubt the depth of this commitment. Yet, labor unrest, let us also say, can only strain and undermine this commitment.

It is now, then, the principal resolve of government to institute a new regime of industrial peace. Towards this end, I believe it is time to create a Presidential Commission to look into the causes of labor and industrial disputes and to recommend measures for their prevention. Membership in this commission shall come from labor and management only. These are the principal dramatis personae in the labor situation, and the government is willing to step aside for the nonce. I call upon this commission to likewise recommend the revision, repeal, amendment and possible overhaul of our existing labor laws.

Third, we shall strive for a more efficient delivery of social services, to reach the nearest and the farthest regions of the country. And especially to alleviate the plight of the least advantaged.

Finally, we shall work for the further reduction of our population growth rate. Before the year is over, it is estimated that we shall be 53.4 million people in times of adversity like the present, there is need more than ever for the integration of population management and economic development efforts.

In support of social equity , we shall seek from the Batasan legislation for the implementation of urban land reform and for the clarification of the status of rent control. And we shall welcome legislative support aimed at fostering the well-being and morale of our workers.

Partnership between Government and the Private Sector

Next, we emphasize the high importance of an effective partnership between the private sector and government in the recovery and productivity program.

Government activism is essential for this program, but the dynamism of our business community is even more critical for its success.

We hold a common stake in this endeavor that transcends political sympathies, and the stake will not be won short of cooperation between the public and private sectors of national life.

It is in this spirit that I will forthwith create a National Productivity Council, which shall oversee the economic recovery and productivity effort, and in which we shall provide for representation of the private sector.

In the same spirit, to tap the full spectrum of advise and counsel in the economy, I shall form a Council of Economic Advisers from among members of the private sector, to complement the work of our Council of Economic Ministers, and to provide a second view of our economic directions and policies.

I believe such a council of advisers will go far in enabling us to achieve a clearer perspective on our problems, our options, and our programs. And it is just possible that we can arrive through consultation and counsel at a broad consensus of economic purposes and goals that will contribute greatly to economic recovery and growth.

Development Administration and Government Reform

As important as government consultation with the many sectors of our society, is the need to look into the health and vitality of our government machinery for the tasks of development administration. Our program seeks changes in outlook and commitment in men and institutions. It is unthinkable that this should not begin in government itself.

We have referred in passing to fiscal measures designed to eliminate waste and fat in government. We go further to say that we require a more comprehensive line of action that will include not only this, but address as well the corrosive effects of graft in the government service and the elimination of bottlenecks in government procedures and processes.

In support of these aims, we shall seek from the Batasan legislation to streamline government operations, including the corporate sector; to upgrade the civil service; and to improve accountability in the exercise of public functions.

Peace and Security

As we take purposive action to spur the economy to recovery and growth. We need to ensure peace in our society and the security of our Republic. This period of uncertainty and stress in national life has been also a time of intensive buildup of subversion and insurgency.

The peaceful pursuit of reforms, including demonstrations and protest, is a necessary part of our democratic life. But it is a very grave and disturbing trend when these are vilfully infiltrated and manipulated by subversives and provocateurs.

Likewise, the efforts of labor to secure worker’s rights and welfare have been warred often by subversive infiltration of its ranks. And this has led sometimes to violence at the picket lines.

Some of us imagine that much of this is simply of a piece with free expression and free association in our society, but the evidences of their linkage with urban terrorism and countryside insurgency have been mounting in recent months. And we shall recreant in our responsibilities if we tolerate this blight.

I believe the legitimate opposition has as much a stake as the government in removing this blight, so that indeed free and peaceful assembly in our streets and public places, open advocacy of the cause of labor, can properly serve their aims and objectives.

The dangers on this end would not be disturbing but for the heightened activities of communist insurgents in recent months. For the combination of both – of intensified urban activity and of countryside insurgency – suggest an expansion of aims and a build-up of strength.

The gravity of threats has therefore been met with the proper response by our government and military forces. And you may be sure that we shall be vigilant and resolute in our campaign to ensure the peace and security of the nation.

It is something else, however, to suggest that under these conditions, the proclamation of Martial Law is imminent. I do not know how speculations about this started, but it is mortifying to note that these have reached supposedly enlightened sectors of our society.

The fact of the matter is that the situation is fully under control. And even if the situation should deteriorate, we have adequate checks and responses in our system of government to cope with this, without having to repair to Martial Law. This is precisely what we had in mind when we sought to upgrade our laws for public order and security. And when we secured the authority of the President to legislate in times of emergency. We wanted in short to calibrate our responses to every danger to civil peace and national security, according to the extent of the danger and without recourse to Martial Law.

Political Stability

Our political stability is proven. And work continues to refine and strengthen our mechanisms for political change and our institutions for democratic government.

And nowhere perhaps will this task be more advanced and met than in this parliament of our people, where the system of contention and debate will exercise our political parties, and where new policies to promote political stability and change can be discussed.

There are no political issues in short that may not be reasonably debated and resolved here; no serious questions of national direction that parliament may not justly consider.

Much discussion has exercised our political leaders and members of this Assembly concerning the authority of the President to legislate under Amendment No. 6, and about imagined rivalries that it supposedly introduces between the Presidency and Parliament.

I will say again that this authority was conceived mainly as a device to serve us in time of need and in emergencies. It was designed to forestall deadlocks and introduce immediate responses to pressing needs, when the Batasan was not in session or could not act.

Our utilization of this standby power has evolved through the years in step with the development of our parliamentary system, occurring more during its infancy and less and less as our legislative deliberations have matured and developed.

Today, at this convening of the regular Batasang Pambansa, let me declare now that this Presidential authority will only be exercised upon the recommendation of the majority party in caucus, and only in cases where the Batasang Pambansa shall fail to act.

I shall look as our people will look, to this Assembly for the action necessary to respond to the needs of the nation for law and policy.

We look for action now.

IV. Conclusion

In the systems and processes of our government and in the mandate we have both received from our people, is the power to turn this time of challenge into a time of response.

I have sought to describe here today the dimensions of the problems we face—the travails of economic life today and the attendant dangers to civil peace and security. And I have presented to you the program of response that befits the hour and the need.

We cannot confront these problems and take up this program, divided in our councils, consumed by our hates, and half-hearted in our labors for recovery and stability.

To the opposition members of this Assembly, I say you and I are Filipinos alike. The problems we face if not solved may well wipe out our future and our Republic, and in their stead may rise an alien faith and a gruesome future in which neither you nor I will have place.

So let us suspend the petty political quarrels, the petty nit-picking and fault-finding, and join hands to save the nation.

If our Republic falls, it will not fall into your hands, it will fall into the hands of those who seek political power through the barrel of gun. I know that some of our wide-eyed and innocent reformers seem to believe that they can use the subversive-terrorists in our midst. But let us not be naïve. Past and contemporary history belies this illusion.

I appeal to the opposition now not to support this campaign of subversion and terror as a show of spite against me. If you have anger in your hearts against me, do not let our people and our country suffer because of it.

After we have saved the nation, after we have done all to keep it secure and stable, there will be time enough for us to quarrel and match political strength, in accordance with our political processes. The opportunity will come soon enough, with the Local Elections in 1986, and the Presidential Elections in 1987.

I make this appeal now although I am aware that the strength and stability of the Republic is fully capable of protecting our democracy, by force of arms if necessary. If we have been pursuing a policy of “maximum tolerance”, it is because the danger has not yet affected the stability of the state. But there is a Constitutional limit to legitimate dissent, violence, subversion and libel are not acceptable weapons of dissent in a democratic society.

And it will be a considerable setback, too, if after having elected and convened this parliament of the people, we fail to utilize its strengths to ensure the survival and stability of the nation.

The challenge is before us. The program of recovery summons us all.

Let us take up that challenge together, generous of our energies and our gifts, and in God’s good time, I believe that we will secure the blessings we invoke for our nation and our people.

Thank you and good day.

# # # #

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.