Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening ceremony of the 12th International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment

The Province of All Mankind

I WOULD LIKE to add to the words of welcome that have already been extended to you by our people and their leaders who have met with you, my appreciation for the honor that your distinguished society has bestowed upon our country in meeting here in Manila for your 12th International Symposium.

We in the developing world will ever regard with great pride and anticipation the instances when members of our international scientific community conduct their discussions and deliberations in our part of the world. It is an event not easily forgotten when we consider that here in our part of the world, scientific exploration and discovery are but beginning to unfold their boon to our uncounted millions.

Your coming here to our country affirms beyond words that the great discoveries of science and technology in our time are the common heritage of all mankind. Although not all nations and peoples today may possess that heritage, still we are persuaded by the sense of internationality of the scientific community to hope that in time all mankind will be able to possess it.

We understand little of what troubles so much of the world today — the conflicts and the divisions among nations, the persistent crisis in international economic life, the clamor for equality and dignity of peoples — if we do not perceive these problems as related to the issue of sharing scientific discovery and knowledge.

And we know nothing of the roots of insecurity in our human world if we do not perceive this to be rooted in the imbalances of power that arise when scientific discovery and knowledge are concentrated solely in a few nations, and fuels rivalry rather than cooperation among nations.

The spirit of this annual symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment — relating as it does to one of the most exciting scientific conquests of our time, and addressed as it is to the possibility of greater concert and cooperation among nations in the sharing of its boon to mankind — manifestly reminds us all that science may yet serve to unify rather than divide our world.

When the first man-made satellite — the Sputnik — was launched some 20 years ago, it was generally heralded as the beginning of man’s liberation from planet earth. At that historic moment, the larger universe seemed to open for all mankind new frontiers for exploration, and to add new dimensions and mystery to human existence.

Yet in another sense, borne home to us with ever increasing clarity in recent years, that historic breakthrough in outer space also brought us closer to the greater possibilities in our planet. For even as it began to prod man forward in the exploration of outer space, it also served to provide him a new vantage point from which to contemplate his home. It would seem that the awe of being in outer space renewed us also in the mysteries and wonders of our own earth.

For even as the powerful nations continued to compete with each other in setting new records and milestones in space exploration, what they brought to the view of man was the persistent and stirring sight of a world without borders. Instead of the divisions and boundaries that we daily live with, we saw instead the patterns of clouds, oceans and land masses, forming one contiguous physical entity — our planet earth.

As the history of this international symposium has so vividly recorded over the past so many years, the conquest of space and other achievements have ushered in the feeling and awareness of the interdependence of nations and peoples. And the technology that it evolved has progressively made us conscious of a whole new set of discoveries about the earth and of what sustains our existence on the planet.

Most of us, who are not scientists, will only dimly understand the complexities of the many discoveries that space satellite technology has produced over the last 20 years, and we shall perhaps never fully comprehend the full meaning and impact of space exploration on the life of mankind. Yet even in this realm of unawareness, we are aware and we perceive the possible applications this knowledge can confer on human life.

Largely because of satellite technology, we know more fully now than we ever did before how fragile is the system that sustains life on our planet.

Largely because of the discoveries beamed back by satellites, we understand more clearly how precious and limited are the natural resources of our planet.

And with every passing year, discovery is built upon discovery, new technologies are constantly being developed that today we have a virtual new science and technology for studying the world via satellite.

And it is in this light that your international symposium is justly viewed as perhaps the vehicle that may yet make possible true global partnership and co operation in the application and development of remote sensing technology.

I look at this symposium not merely as a gathering of experts, not only as a medium for the exchange of insights and ideas among scientists, but also as a mechanism for the sharing of human knowledge and beneficial technology.

The free flow of scientific and technological information has been a cherished tradition of men of science, if not of nations. The full flow of such information, under a system of exchange and cooperation among nations, will not only hasten the development of the Third World; it is likely to promote cordiality and lasting peace among all nations of the world.

So, we have this keen hope buoyed by the present international interest in remote sensing technology. This interest, I am informed, is shared by a surprisingly large number of countries which are not subscribing to landsat data. My report says that in 1975 alone, some 50,000 landsat frames were purchased from the United States by about 120 countries. This unusual and surprising interest in a technology thought to be quite advanced and too sophisticated could hasten its rapid diffusion to all comers of the world, as well as the diffusion of associated skills and equipment for remote sensing. More important, I believe this is likely to have a modernizing influence on the various sectors of society especially in the Third World.

I believe also that because of the global character of remote sensing, it could usher in a new era of partnership and cooperation in technology on a worldwide scale. Even now, there are already international projects in the application of remote sensing technology. One example cited is the “large area crop inventory experiment” of Lacie, whose main objective is to be able to provide worldwide crop forecasts for wheat with the use of landsat data.

I need not mention the potential impact of this project on the management of food resources of the world, for it is quite obvious. I am hoping though that a similar project will be initiated for rice. Since rice, as you know, is the main staple of most of the peoples of Asia, a landsat-based rice forecasting model for the rice-growing regions of the World would therefore go a long way toward averting critical food shortages in Asia and elsewhere.

In addition, the prospect is there for using remote sensing technology in planning transnational development. I am referring in this connection, to those resources that are commonly owned by a number of countries. In our part of the world, the shared marine areas of Southeast Asia could be the subject of co operative undertaking by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, with respect to the application of remote sensing techniques.

The technology, like many other tools of progress, comes with certain constraints in its use, however. It has become clear during the last few years, for example, that use of orbital remote sensing equipment should be governed by a framework of international regulations.

The open, continuous global view of the earth by sensors on orbiting satellites raises the issue of sovereignty of independent nations. Some zealous countries, therefore, may consider unrestricted satellite surveillance and the consequent dissemination of data about their countries as invasion of national privacy.

The protection of a country’s national privacy should, of course, be counter-balanced by the benefits of satellite sensing, such as those offered by the synoptic view of natural and environmental resources and the timeliness of the availability of needed data for dynamic policy decisions. Perhaps, it is high time that an International Forum on Satellite Remote Sensing is called by concerned authorities to resolve misgivings about its technology.

Such a forum could deliberate on the repercussions of remote sensing on national sovereignty, as well as on the formulation of guidelines for the establishment of an operational landsat system that would be financed and administered by an international organization.

The internationalization of remote sensing will not only allay the fears of some countries on possible infringement on their own sovereign slice of earth, but more important, it will assure the growth and continuity of the satellite remote sensing program as a viable instrument of international, as well as national, progress. The Third World, I should point out, stands to benefit most from the steady, continuous flow of resources and environmental data from remote sensing.

I say this because I believe that remote sensing technology is likely to create more significant impact in the developing countries than in the industrialized ones. The reason for this is clear: in most developing countries, natural resources are the primary base for development, but dearth of baseline information on the magnitude and location of their natural wealth is an immense restrictive factor in national planning for development.

Development planning requires up-to-date and reliable data on the extent and condition of, say, arable land, water resources, forest resources, mineral deposits, and the like. The dilemma of the developing countries is that their in adequacy in development planning is confounded by the rapid growth of their population. This phenomenon naturally calls for an equally rapid pace of development to keep up with the demands of the growth process. So then this is the big reason why developing nations must have needed resource data on hand and acquire new ones as quickly as possible.

Besides satisfying the urgent needs of development planning, remote sensing from space platforms also yields vital information on the environment. Our government is well aware of the proven usefulness of satellite technology to monitor the ever-changing conditions of our forests, the erosion of our soils, the pollution of our waterways, and the alterations in land use. Remote sensing technology, in other words, is an indispensable tool for forging our national development plans and in maintaining a desirable environmental quality for our people.

Within the next decade, satellite remote sensing is conceivably to undergo greater refinements with emphasis on faster transmission of a wider range of data. This accelerated improvement of the technology will result in an increasing volume of information available to its users.

However, the expected huge flow of natural resource data would be useless if they are not assimilated in the planning process, which implies, therefore, the necessity for an effective planning mechanism to grow hand in hand with such technological advances. The developing countries will be caught in this imperative, but this is really a boon for it will serve as an impetus for them to modernize and strengthen their planning agencies. Thus, the overall effect of remote sensing technology is to hasten the developmental processes involved in nation-building. In this light, I look forward to the enhanced capabilities of the coming generation of resource satellites, such as Landsat C and Landsat D, which will further reinforce our ability to manage our natural resources and environment.

It is in recognition of the crucial role today of remote sensing technology that we have, in our own country, sought to create new institutional structures in order to take full advantage of its benefits. Here in the Philippines, we have established the Natural Resources Management Center, which serves as the central agency of our government for developing remote sensing technology in our country. With a modest investment of funds for equipment and training of technical personnel, the Center has made rapid strides in remote sensing know-how and competence. Within three months after its creation, the Center has completed a forest inventory of the entire Philippines. Normally this under taking would have taken five years, using conventional surveying techniques.

I am proud to add that over and beyond the mere application of remote sensing techniques to resources inventory, the Center is now making significant and novel contributions to our accumulated body of knowledge in remote sensing. So far, the Center has undertaken research and development projects in the use of satellite data for geologic mapping, land use mapping, coral reef studies, bathymetric mapping of coastal areas, and the assessment of our man grove and wetland areas.

Several technical papers containing our research activities in this area are due to be read during your symposium. I hope that participating countries with similar problems and environment as the Philippines will also present their own experiences and we can all benefit from this presentation. We are ready to share with all the countries here present our technical expertise, modest as it is, but also our administrative and management knowledge in the field which we have acquired recently.

We address this offer especially to our neighboring nations. The global perspective of the earth satellite sensing program should encourage us to create regional cooperation schemes for our common advantage. It may be a good idea, for instance, to set up an ASEAN Remote Sensing Center. In this way, expensive equipment, like a ground receiving station, could be shared for the mutual benefit of Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philip pines.

Scientific endeavors are one of the more non-controversial ways of promoting cooperation and goodwill among men and nations, for it is rightly said that in science all differences in race, social creed and religion are transcended in favor of the objective truth. In this spirit, I dare to hope that your meeting serves to strengthen international and regional bonds, in keeping with the words enshrined in the United Nations treaty which bravely state that outer space exploration is “the province of all mankind.”

Albert Einstein said it for us all when he proclaimed that scientific discoveries are “supranational,” because “they are the products of the best brains of all countries and all times. In solitude and yet in cooperative effort as regards the final effect, they created the spiritual tools for the technical revolutions which have transformed the life of mankind in the last centuries.”

In a finite world with finite resources, in a world threatened by the wanton depredation of the environment, the science and the technology of satellite exploration represent for all of mankind a veritable means for both survival and growth. It will not serve us if our nations are distracted and divided by narrow ends and interests, for only in full and earnest affirmation of the commonality of our goals and the interdependence of our efforts, will the wonders of this technological achievement extend its full benefits to man.

In closing, may I extend to you my very best wishes for a pleasant and fruitful symposium.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].