Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the conference of the Asia Pacific Council of American Chambers

[Delivered at the Intercontinental Hotel, October 23, 1972]

Developing A New Society

I HAVE BEEN limiting my speaking engagements lately, if only because as the events have shown, this country could use fewer words and much more action. Words, like currency, are devalued by repetition without action. Today we can probably say that in the Philippines, the level of action is fast approaching the level of verbalized intent.

To that extent, honest communication as distinguished from false rhetoric has become possible again, among men of good will.

I accepted your kind invitation because I feel that we have something important to say to you, the businessmen from the richest capital-exporting country which also happens to be our close partner in security, trade and development—the United States of America.

I still believe that history did not create the special bond between our two peoples for nothing. Filipinos still deeply feel this mystical relationship although it is understandable that Americans in general, burdened as they are by world-wide cares as leaders or, as some put it less heroically, as policemen of world, cannot fully reciprocate this emotion. But I consider this providential. We, Filipinos, have a special obligation to become mature, to become self-reliant, to cease to depend even on friends, to begin to depend only on ourselves.

The events that have been taking place in the Philippines, since September twenty-first, may be construed as an expression of this new-born initiative the Filipino people.

In acting as we did, taking inspiration from the genius of our Constitution we have perhaps changed the course of history not only in this country by throughout Southeast Asia. We have struck a blow of great strategic impact This is a shattering, exact blow from which Philippine Communism as well as Asian Communism may not be able to recover in a long time. But having gained a military objective, we should have the wisdom to realize that what we gained was just a brief respite—a little more time to strengthen our society, our social and economic institutions, through overdue radical reforms.

This is why the other day, I issued a proclamation which transferred more than a million hectares of farm land to the tenants who cultivate them. Before this, land reform was merely a palliative, “a mere padding on the chain of the slave” as our national hero, Jose Rizal, once called such superficial reforms. But today land reform means genuine emancipation. The cultivator will own his land. He is enabled to rejoin his fellow citizens in the mainstream of the national community. In the end, it is through such measures that a nation ensures and increases its solidarity.

Land reform therefore has been aptly called the cornerstone of the new society that is emerging. It is certainly the major strategy by means of which we hope to bring to the masses of our people the benefits of economic and social modernization.

The other day, a respected American, Robert McNamara, who is President of the World Bank, expressed dismay over the fact that all progress in developing countries has bypassed the lowest forty per cent of the population. The distribution of income in the developing world during the last decade has not improved with rising gross national products. Poverty is worse than before. Economic growth has merely entrapped more people in worse poverty and inequality.

I think that contemporary history has one clear lesson that has to be learned and applied by any country wishing to escape from such entrapments. That lesson is — all attempts at economic and social modernization without land reform will fail, because only land reform can activate the large masses of the people and make them truly productive, truly a participating alert citizenry.

Economic growth can also be a trap if it does not promote the full utilization of labor. In many countries, rising levels of economic growth have been characterized by worsening unemployment and underemployment. The creation of employment must be in the forefront, rather that at the rear, of the economic plan. Again, massive unemployment represents a waste of resources beyond imagination and a major cause of social and economic inequality which, like a vicious circle, brings about more serious unemployment.

In the task of building a new society, these two objectives — land reform and employment generations — should define the orientation of the entire development strategy. If pursued with great vigor and dedication, such a strategy will ultimately bring about not only permanent prosperity but also a vital and vibrant democracy.

But at the same time, in building that new society, we hope to create a much better environment for investments in our country, both domestic and foreign. We hope to activate a much wider national market capable of absorbing more manufactured goods. We hope to create a productive capacity in both industry and agriculture and in trade and commerce that will assure the steady, significant progress not of a few but of the whole Filipino nation.

In this way we can make our own humble contribution to the building of a better world — a world of peace based on social justice.

We ask the foreign businessmen who are here to become our partners in this great undertaking. A significant proportion of the needed investments for realizing our aggregate and sectoral targets will have to come from foreign sources. We make this appeal not only because we need your help but also because we can assure better results for our common efforts on a reciprocal basis.

The record of economic development in our country has been encouraging. In spite of the various ordeals of foreign exchange crises and natural calamities our economy still sustained an annual growth rate of six percent in real terms an entirely respectable achievement for any developing country.

Also during those years, we laid the groundwork for progress through heavy government investments in transportation and communications network power and water resources development, to enable our domestic industries directly and rapidly to expand the domestic market for their goods.

Of course, most notable of the new changes under martial law is the peace and order situation, which has improved by more than 70 per cent.

There is, too, the revamp of the entire government machinery along guidelines prepared by the Reorganization Commission. This reorganization has made possible a government machinery which is more development oriented in structure, outlook and operations.

In the area of foreign investment, I would like to say this. While it is necessary to uphold the Constitutional ruling on parity rights, I want to reassure those concerned that this matter shall be pursued in the spirit of justice and fairness to all. If expropriation is to be undertaken, just compensation will be forth coming. In this connection, I want to say again we encourage and we welcome foreign investors to do business here in our country. We have provided liberty incentives and we are seeking still other favorable measures to attract foreign capital. I want to assure all those concerned that we will be fair and just into these matters.

In the industrial sector, we have already provided liberal tax incentives our industries within the context of the Investment Priorities Plan and the Investment Incentives Act. Let me reiterate that we will further look into other means of giving incentives as well as protection to our developing industries particularly export-oriented industries and import-substituting intermediate and capital goods industries.

We have recently put into effect the Progressive Car Manufacturing Program. This will rationalize the development and expansion of our automotive industry in order to achieve efficiency in production and economies of scale which should ultimately lead to lower prices for our consumers. There will be more of such programs to rationalize and integrate strategic industries. We are studying similar programs for our steel and shipping industries and also for the power industry.

It should be emphasized that these steps are necessary if we are to achieve efficiency in production, make effective use of our scarce capital resources, expand our domestic market and effect lower prices for our consuming public.

In our export promotions program, we have already taken the first steps with the currency reform of 1970 and with the passage of the Investment and Export Incentives Act. This act provides among other things additional and special incentives to registered export industries and exporters engaged in the exportation of finished products. Again let me say that we are exploring still other avenues of providing more incentives to our export sector.

For example, the Central Bank has underscored its policy to liberalize credit, through the commercial banks, for export activities. This is to encourage commercial banks to redirect their lending activities as well as to increase the amount of credit available to the export sector. The rediscounting facilities for exports will be strengthened. The law creating the Philippine Export Credit Insurance and Guarantee Corporation will also be implemented soon to enable our exporters to improve their credit terms with foreign buyers and at the same time be provided with insurance coverage against all types of risks. Likewise, the possibilities for establishing an Export-Import Bank are also being explored in order to beef up and facilitate the credit availabilities for our exporters.

To boost further the exports of our manufactured products, a medium-term program designed to train and advise local exporters on how to expand their exportable goods has been drawn up by the BOI-DCI and the UNDP. With technical and financial assistance from the UNDP, this program is ready for implementation.

These are just some of the domestic measures we are studying and hope to adopt and implement in order to improve our export trade.

At the international level, we will continue to explore all possible avenues to expand our exports. All efforts will be made to secure better terms in the markets of developed countries. In this connection, we will continue to actively participate in various international trade forums such as the UNCTAD and the multilateral rate negotiations going on in Geneva where our trade problems can be threshed out and access to the markets of developed countries can be negotiated.

All these economic investment policies will be implemented in the broad context of a social transformation that is our ultimate objective in the Philippines: the building of a New Society.

We place our hopes on investments, both domestic and foreign, to play the role of catalysts of growth. But at the same time, me main reliance is placed on our people themselves — on the capacity of a reawakened Filipino nation to overcome its own historic shortcomings.

I said earlier that by not hesitating to do the right thing, on September 21st, we have set back communism in Asia and dealt it a serious military and political defeat. But this is different from saying that we have won a lasting victory: that will be the victory of having brought forth a New Society. This is a historic enterprise which you, as long-time friends of the Filipino people, can assist by your trust, your sympathy and your cooperation. We shall be grateful for your trust as you should be confident that our mutual benefit and the good of mankind will be the true ultimate result.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].