Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines To the 27th Congress of the International Chamber of Commerce

[Delivered on November 23, 1981]

In its long and distinguished history, the International Chamber of Commerce has grown from an erstwhile exclusive Western club to become a truly global business organization, and it has travelled the continents for its triennial congress. And now today, for the very first time, it convenes here in Manila, in our region of Southeast Asia.

You may be sure, ladies and gentlemen, that we in the Philippines are fully conscious of the distinction that attaches to the convening of your 27th Congress in our part of the world. And more than the pride we feel, we share keenly the hope of many that your deliberations will be productive of those insights and initiatives that contribute to the resolution and relief from the economic travails of our time.

A Congress of this magnitude and scope—gathering as it does so many of the world’s leading lights in business enterprise—naturally raises hopes and expectations about the future of economic life in general, and of the prospects for business enterprise in particular. We should not be cynical or despondent about the gap between these brave hopes and the fact that at this moment the world economic situation is chiefly notable for the profound sense of crisis and embattlement. Our aspirations to improve and change the overall climate of economic life, and to marshall the will for greater international economic cooperation are there to incite us all to greater efforts—and I believe that there is much today that should encourage, not deter us, from the work of reform and change.

Had we met a month or so ago rather than today, I would have confessed to some skepticism about the practical impact of international forums such as these, and said along with others that its deliberations can only touch the peripheries and not the center of our human predicament today. I would have said that the initiatives of our combined business communities, earnest though they may be, cannot begin to lead the way towards economic growth and wealth creation, where the nations of the world are so divided and lacking of the political will to turn the global economic crisis around.

But meeting today in the wake of the recent Summit of Heads of State and Government in Cancun, Mexico, and of the glimmers of consensus and understanding that that meeting illuminated, I can express a little more optimism about the world economic situation and about the overall prospects for economic enterprise as a whole.

In saying this, one does not pretend to attach to a meeting of leaders that took all of two days in a distant resort of Mexico a meaning and import well beyond what it specifically produced. Cancun to be sure did not produce as we all know any specific set of agreements that would practically confront the problems and tribulations of our time. But I do wish to underline here, and suggest as a possible context for your deliberations, the broad implications of Cancun for the future of international economic relations as a whole.

What has changed in the overall complexion of global thinking on international economic problems can be suggested by a glance at the global prospects before Cancun and after Cancun.

Before Cancun, a seemingly irresoluble impasse had developed in the efforts of the developed and the developing nations to work out a common approach to the present disarray in international economic life. Underlying the impasse were profound disagreements about the causes of problems and about what approaches to adopt in the way of making reform and change, and the disagreements often expressed themselves in bitter exchanges between nations.

Consequently in the light of the stalemate nothing hopeful seemed possible in terms of resolving the real predicament we faced. I need hardly recite anew the precise terms of this predicament except to point to certain very evident facts: the fact that for some time now a few economies making up about a quarter of the world’s population account for more than three quarters of the world’s trade, production and investments; the fact that the other three-quarters of the world’s peoples have lived on the peripheries of our global system, gripped in varying degrees by the specter of underdevelopment, poverty, hunger and worsening conditions; the fact that for nearly a decade now this grave imbalance has resulted in pervasive instabilities and difficulties for developed and developing countries alike; and the fact that the structures and arrangements of our Global Economic System have of late failed to produce even a modicum of order and stability.

Some of these facts we already knew as far back as two decades ago, as will be seen in a review of the discussions in forums like the ICC. But in the interval, the contrasts have grown more vivid, the sense of embattlement more intense, and a period of prolonged disaffection between the so-called North and the so-called South set in.

To these, it should be added that countless forums were convened to discuss and frame solutions for the many problems. But though indeed these forums were productive of the various and specific technical solutions to the problems, nothing was done to turn them into a program which the nations could commonly support and implement. Instead, we fell into an endless haggling over the terms of cooperation, the degree and extent of reform, and the issues of self-interest.

Thus, it was not surprising that on the very eve of the Cancun Summit, there was considerable skepticism about its prospects for success, and even the very principals attending, including myself, journeyed there with no small amount of reluctance.

Cancun, however, surprised us all.

Notwithstanding the recriminations and resentments that had earlier attended the North-South diallgue, the summit transpired in a very cordial and non-confrontational atmosphere. And very likely because of the concern of all participants to listen to one another, we recognized for once the areas in which we could all agree and we realized too that in those which we couldn’t, further talks would not be irrelevant and fruitless. It made a great deal of difference as I had hoped, that the summit participants were leaders with the experience of high command, and that they could address the issues with a directness and decision that their ministers could not

In the preparations for the summit, it was agreed that there would be no formal agenda, no negotiations, and no communique at its conclusion. As laid out, there was exchange of views on four subjects: food security and agricultural development; commodities, trade and industrialization, money and finance; and energy. And at the end of the meeting, the Co-chairmen issued a joint summary of the discussions.

Given the format of the conference, and the great care to avoid conclusive discussion, it would appear surprising that the conference achieved consensus on many points and attained the degree of agreement that it did.

To recount briefly how the discussions focused the views of so many, on the subject of food, there was unanimity about feeding the hungry. It was agreed that there should be increased subsidy for food for that the hungry throughout the world, and that attention must be given to assisting agricultural development throughout the world.

On energy, interest was expressed on a proposal for framing a World Energy Plan. And there was unanimity for the establishment of an energy affiliate in the World Bank.

On trade, there was agreement on the elimination of trade barriers. There was recognition of the need to improve the generalized system of preferences for developing countries, as well as the need for continued efforts on the part of governments to resist protectionist pressures. The summit noted the contribution that the GATT Ministerial Meeting in 1982 could make to addressing various trade problems. And there was agreement on the need to complete procedures for bringing the integrated fund for commodities into operation.

On monetary and financial issues, there was consensus that there should be less conditionally and more liberality on loans by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Saudi Arabia committed itself to make available more funds to the IMF for financing the deficits on non-oil-producing less developed countries.

And finally, on the critical subject of global negotiations, the Heads of State agreed on a key statement that would form part of the conference summary, to wit:

“The Heads of State and Government confirmed the desirability of supporting at the United Nations, with a sense of urgency, a consensus to launch global negotiations on a basis to be agreed upon and in circumstances offering the prospect of meaningful progress. Some countries insisted that the independence of the specialized agencies should not be affected.”

This particular portion of the conference summary alone already reflects the degree in which Cancun had broken the impasse in the North-South Dialogue. For by this, it broke new ground, ended the old resistance of some countries to such negotiations, and indicated willingness of the participants to launch global negotiations. It should be noted of course that the Cancun summiters did not represent the whole of your human family; neither did they hold a summons from all the nations to meet. But this notwithstanding, the spirit of Cancun will be felt by the world in the years to come.

If we may assess what Cancun now will lead to, and what the prospects are for future cooperation in the resolution of issues, I would say that Cancun has paved the way for concerted effort and cooperation, but that much hard work lies ahead for all the nations in regard to fulfilling the spirit of the summit.

Now as we look upon the ensuing developments after Cancun, I can report to you that work has immediately proceeded under the auspices of the United Nations to follow up the Cancun initiative.

Specifically, there has been a decision to launch the global negotiations during the present session of the General Assembly, and actual negotiations are envisioned to start early next year. Significantly, it has been agreed that the areas of agreement recognized by the nations will form the main agenda of the negotiations. With regards to areas of disagreement, next year’s conference will decide how they shall be negotiated; there are indications at this point that this will take place in the form or pattern of the U.N. Conference on the Law of the Sea.

Beyond these, there are also forthcoming meetings that will have particularly important implications for the resolution of trade problems. The GATT Ministerial Meeting is due to convene next year, and at this meeting it is expected that many of the proposals raised in Cancun will be deliberated on.

It is our hope that a Philippine proposal articulated at the summit for a Cancun Round on Multilateral Trade Negotiations will be discussed and seriously considered. We made the proposal that in view of the continued sway of protectionism since the Tokyo Round and of the various problems that persist in global trade, it is important that a new round of negotiations should take place. In addition, we raised the view, to which many of the Cancun participants assented, that we must now fill the need for a mechanism to effectively resolve trade disputes.

On the basis of all these, I feel very optimistic about a major turning point for freer and more liberalized trade among nations. I am convinced that the nations agree with what President Reagan has said: that artificial barriers in trade don’t work in the long run.”

All these may be just the first faltering steps out of the mire in which we find ourselves today. But they are significant because they have now been taken, after a very long time of drift and irresolution. With this break in the impasse; in the North-South dialogue, we enter a new stage in that dialogue that is every bit as important to the future of the developed countries as they are to those of us in the Third World.

In turning more precisely to the precise implications of these developments to the prospects of the developing countries and their particular position today in the world economy, I would focus your attention on what I know best: the Philippine experience.

For much of the decade of the seventies, when the problems of the international economy were especially acute, our economic performance can probably be described as a case of dynamically reacting to what was clearly a difficult time for economic effort. In the words of the World Bank representative for East Asia and the Pacific, “our development record is one of the most impressive in the developing world and it was achieved in an external environment which can at best be described as difficult.” The other face of this verdict is a matter for wonder: the measure of development that might have been ours were world economic conditions better, and had the forces for reform of the international economic order been allowed to have sway during this period of instability.

With particular reference to an observation of the International Chamber of Commerce that sometimes we in the developing world tend to focus too much on the issue of “transfer of resources” and less on “wealth creation,” I would commend to your attention the policies and the programs that we have followed not just in terms of coping with global crises or agitating for international economic reform, but in terms of promoting the development of our national economy and the growth of business enterprise as a key engine of growth.

Let us look at the record.

In the seventies, the Philippine economy grew at an annual rate of about 6.5 percent annually, appreciably higher than the historical average of 5.3 percent a year in the stable world economic situation of the sixties.

In the same period, Philippine agricultural output gained an average of 5 percent annually—one of the highest rates in the developing world, and a fact underlined by our achievement of food sufficiency.

Industry recorded an even faster rate of growth of 8.5 percent over the same period. As a result, industrial output rose from 31 percent of GDP in 1972 to 36 percent as of 1980.

One major factor in this fundamental restructuring of our economy has been the falling of world prices for many of our primary exports. As the terms of trade for our traditional exports have deteriorated under the impact of worldwide recessionary pressures, there has been a noticeable development of our non-traditional exports. Intensified export promotion and the development of industry enabled us to reduce the reliance on the four products that have traditionally been our major exports—sugar, coconut products, wood products and mineral ore—from 80 percent at the end of the sixties to only 45 percent today. Significantly, new products, including electronic items, semi-processed food chemicals, garments, and other non-traditionals, account for nearly 60 percent of our exports today, and contributed nearly $3 billion dollars to total export earnings in 1980.

This is by no means to neglect the plight of our distressed export sectors, which have been hard-hit by falling world market prices. In addition to seeking relief in reform of the International Trading System, we have moved decisively into measures to provide assistance to these sectors. Specifically we are setting up a fund to support the operations of these sectors during their present period of distress, and which they can consequently repay when world prices for their products improve.

On the investment front, it has been our happy experience to find the foreign sector matching the steady rise of our domestic efforts to save and raise development capital. Last year, when foreign investment more than tripled to $306 million, was a banner year for new foreign investments in our economy.

These new investments have flowed into a varied complex of projects in industry, for which we have formulated as of two years ago a comprehensive long-term development program. Central to this program are 11 major industrial projects which are designed mainly to rectify an imbalance in our industrial development. Until this program came to being, there had been little effort to develop the basic industrial infrastructure for our national development, which would allow us to establish backward and forward linkages within the economy. These projects have a five-year timetable, and the program was initiated two years ago. Significantly, all are conceived as joint-venture projects with foreign participation.

At this time, four of the 11 projects are now fully under construction, and these are the copper smelter, the phosphatic fertilizer plant, the diesel engineering manufacturing factory, and the cement industry rehabilitation project.

In addition, 2 projects—the Integrated Steel Mill and the Heavy Engineering Workshop—are at present undergoing detailed engineering studies, and they will be up for bidding by early next year.

The other five are in various stages of joint-venture negotiations and feasibility evaluation, and these are the Pulp and Paper Project, the Coco-Chemical Plant, the Aluminum Smelter, the Petro-Chemical Complex, and the Alcogas Project. For each of these projects, a number of foreign companies have already expressed their interest in participation. All in all we expect to be able to meet our timetable of launching these 11 major industrial projects by 1985.

It must be remembered, however, that although the 11 projects are today the most talked-about aspects of our industrial development program, our support for industry covers broadly and intensively all industries, including the small and medium scale sectors.

We have recently established a $100 million fund to support cottage industries and a National Livelihood Program. In an important way, we conceive this as a critical measure to meet possible difficulties in the domestic front and to promote the growth of entrepreneurship at the level of the grassroots in order to achieve the two-pronged goal of raising productivity and expanding income opportunities. The National Livelihood Program is actually a mass movement designed to mobilize the productive and entrepreneurial energies of our people at local levels and to internalize a discipline of industry and self-reliance. As a program, national livelihood identifies possibilities and opportunities for specific, productive and profitable enterprise. It implements projects that are compatible with the resources, markets and capacities of the communities, and structures and manages these in accordance with the objectives of productive efficiency and economic viability, while providing employment for many. The National Livelihood Program will transform each community into a vibrant and productive entity that plays a more active role in the creation of employment and generation of income for our people. In establishing livelihood centers throughout the country, the government will provide infrastructure, credit and other assistance to small and medium scale businesses with products that utilize the indigenous resources of these mainly rural communities, and that have bright marketing prospects. It will be noted that the ultimate success of the National Livelihood Program as with all our other efforts to encourage private enterprise and maximize productivity, to a great extent, depends upon our ability to export, and this is one main reason why we intend to produce mainly products for which we have prepared markets abroad.

One cannot overemphasize the great importance of trade to a growing economy like the Philippines. The path of development for our country lies in the tapping of a global market for what we produce.

Internally, we have done much to write and implement those policies that would promote growth and entrepreneurship in our country. Fourteen key industrial sectors—from iron to steel to furniture—are now in process of rationalization to promote greater competition. Tariff protection is being reduced on many items. Inefficient industrial operations are being encouraged to consolidate to achieve economies of scale. Regulations that hinder growth and enterprise are being consistently cut down. And we have moved decisively into the construction service market abroad.

In our foreign investment policies, and with regard specifically to trans-nationals, we have mainly opted for the regulation of transnational enterprise rather than banning their operations in our country, believing that they have a contribution to make to our national development. Specifically, these regulations cover three areas:

1. Limiting of trans-national borrowings from local sources

2. Training of local replacements of managers and technicians over a period of time

3. Regulation of pricing of raw materials from parent or associate corporations.

You will understand the care with which we approach the need to regulate the operations of trans-national corporations, for many are the problems that a developing country has often faced through neglect or default of safeguards. In the light of this care, there has been no difficulty for the successful operations of such companies in the Philippines, to whom incidentally we guarantee the remittance of profits, non-confiscation, and repayment of indebtedness which may have come from abroad.

In our export efforts, we have enlisted the veritable backbone of Philippine Business Enterprise—our 12 Leading Business Conglomerates—to provide an overseas sales network for our products. These efforts at export promotion have already done their bit to shore up the level of our trade, but again and again we come up before the formidable trade barriers that work to constrain the upward movement of our trade.

Over and over again after we survey what a developing country can do on its own to promote its development, to raise its productivity, and to husband its resources, we eventually return to the complexion of the world economic system as a whole and how it works to diminish its prospects for advancement.

In a memorable observation, the British economist Barbara Ward once suggested that the travails of our world community derive from the fact that rich-nation philosophy and outlook have still to get past 1840. She writes: “the market will provide. Economic life will generate energy and direction. The growth of the rich will pull up the poor in its wake. Political, social and moral principles of solidarity are irrelevant. And if the result turns out to be not progress, but misery for the many and well-being for the few, that is simply the way in which the laws of economics work. For a century or more we have been modifying this stupid, unworkable and dangerous philosophy within our economies.”

Alongside this view, there is still another extremely myopic view: that in the relief or assistance of the poor nations, no vital Northern interests are at stake.

This continuous display of shortsightedness and complacency has marked for the most part rich-country perception of the North-South issue, but now at last it appears to be changing. At long last, I think, it has irreversibly dawned on the rich nations that they—as much as the developing countries of the South—need new relationships, wider markets, new opportunities, a better global management of resources, and cooperation among economies and nations.

It is not finally for reasons of charity, but of self-interest, that we really must all pull together to reactivate again the world economy and create growth for all.

With such a vision of the real reform that can be done in the international sphere, of the kind of cooperation feasible between the developed and developing countries, it should be possible to finally create the hospitable international environment that will favor, and not frustrate, the earnest efforts of the developing nations to modernize and develop.

The spirit of Cancun—to return to the point with which I began—may well be a kind of signpost in history wherein the misfortunes of our global system began to point in more auspicious directions.

And if I understand and remember correctly the basic spirit of enterpreneurship, a time of change as this is a time for enterprise.

Thank you and good day.

-oOo-

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.