Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of the Annual Convention of the Philippine Medical Association

[Delivered at the De La Salle College, Bacolod City, April 26, 1972]

Medical Care for All

THERE IS NO profession more socially involved and more exalted in popular esteem, or a force more vital to national progress and welfare, than that of medicine. This is the reason a good part of the nation must focus its attention today on this gathering in Bacolod City—the 65th annual convention of the Philippine Medical Association. This is an occasion not only for the warmest congratulations but also for a direct, courageous confrontation of the role that the medical profession must accept in the life of our nation, now being convulsed by change.

In the past few years, the PMA under new and aggressive youthful leadership has been engaged in this kind of confrontation with itself. This speaks well of the new leaders who have emerged from the ranks of the profession in response to the challenging times. Certainly, the outgoing set of officers this year, headed by President Caparas, deserves our warmest commendations for having shared the initiative and the leadership of the movement for a medicare program. And the incoming leadership will be chosen, I feel sure, with a full awareness of the need for first-rate leadership in the association at a time when the profession as a whole must respond to the challenge of implementing Medicare, the success of which must now fully depend upon your initiative and support.

For the first time in our history, every worker involved in this program, through the SSS or the GSIS, has ready access to the life-saving power of modem medicine. This is the real principle of Medicare. It is a radical step to bring the benefits of modem medicine to the masses. And it does provide the long-missing linkage by means of which the medical profession can effectively reach the bulk of the working people.

I used to say that in some parts of Mindanao, as many as 60 per cent of the people died without seeing a doctor. This is hardly an exaggeration. As a result, in the minds of many of our people, modern medicine is thought of as a luxury that only the rich and the influential can afford, a boon that is beyond the reach of the ordinary wage-earner and his family. It is not seldom that thoughts of social discrimination in medicine, with its power to save lives, rumble in the breasts of the poor and even the not-so-poor.

With Medicare, specially at its beginning stage, we cannot hope to reach every one yet, but at least the workers in the wage-systems, who are already covered by the SSS and the GSIS, can immediately take advantage of it. But the extent to which this already can be done— the proof that the medical profession can be made available to the masses of workers and their families—must await the complete response and support of all doctors everywhere in our country.

As you will recall, it was on our joint initiative that Medicare came into existence. I supported the passage and eventual enactment of a law, R. A. 1611, that established the Philippine Medical Care Plan and created the Medical Care Commission prescribing its duties, powers, and functions and recommending the appropriation of funds therefor. This has now become the Philippine Medical Care Act that embodies the government’s policy to gradually provide total medical service for our people by adopting and implementing a comprehensive and coordinated medical care program based on accepted concepts of health care. This law was enacted in 1969. I have been criticized by some sectors for my hesitancy in the immediate implementation of this law. If I hesitated, it was not because I doubted its benefits and value. We needed time to prepare the machinery of government to insure the effective implementation of the plan. Even then I was not alone in my caution that a precipitate and hasty action would endanger the successful implementation of the plan.

A few offered the opinion that it should first be tried on selected pilot areas to test the methods of operation and learn the mechanics of reaching the people. This view unquestionably had its merits. On the other hand, there was the urgent demand that every one needed to avail of the benefits of this plan. The critics of the administration have always harped on the alleged deprivation of the poor of the benefits of modern medical care — that the progress in science and medicine is only for the rich who can afford to pay for medical care service.Other detractors even pronounced the whole plan as a failure even before it was tried or implemented.

In my desire to insure successful implementation of this plan, I asked the cooperation of the Philippine Medical Association to work out with the Department of Health an interim program to gradually introduce the medicare system into operation. For this purpose, I promulgated Executive Order 337 on May 12, 1971, which authorized the organization of the Medical Assistance Program (MAP) Task Force consisting of nine members (four from the PMA, three from the Department of Health, one from the Philippine Hospital Association, and one from the Presidential Economic Staff). The Task Force is to conceptualize, materialize, and implement the medical assistance program. This joint undertaking of your association with the government health service is conceived for the purpose of improving and increasing the health care of the people by:

1. Coordinating the efforts and resources of the Department of Health, private practitioners, and the community;

2. Assessing and improving existing medical facilities;

3. Providing station field hospitals in remote and isolated towns to take care of serious and emergency cases before transport to regular hospitals; and

4. Developing an insurance scheme whereby medical expenses of the community will be borne through community mutual health funds.

You will note that the objectives of the MAP coincide with those of the Medicare Program. It could be therefore the analogue of the suggestion that the total program of medical care be first tried on a pilot setting. The MAP has, however, the feature that from this transitory status, it will eventually develop and fit into the total mechanism of the medicare program.

On August 10, 1971. I officially constituted the Philippine Medical Care Commission. Despite the official organization of the Commission, the MAP continues to operate to lay the general ground work for the full implementation of the Medicare Plan. The Medicare started to collect premiums as of January, 1971. Three months later, this April, the members are already availing of their benefits from the plan.

There is a multitude of problems to be faced before we can ensure the smooth operation of the program. There are still many unclear aspects in the scheme. Both the government and the private sector have yet to consolidate the participation of each. The Department of Health must review its policy to enable it to integrate its functions and activities into the program.

The Philippine Medical Association, being one of the pioneers and aggressive sponsors of this plan, has an inherent responsibility to espouse it to a successful implementation. This is our own medical care program designed and organized in accordance with our needs as a people. No one will argue that the medical care of the common man is of inestimable value not only to himself as an individual, but also to his family, to the community where he lives and to the nation as a whole.

It is not for nothing that the national hero of the Filipinos is not a warrior, but a healer, of whose profession it was once said by Jeremy Taylor: “To preserve a man alive in the midst of so many chances and hostilities, is as great a miracle as to create him.”

Truly, Philippine medicine today faces its greatest opportunity yet to serve the people and therefore, humanity. The medium by which this unparalleled,noble service will be rendered by you is Medicare, and in this annual convention you will, I am sure, bring to bear the highest the statesmanship of which you are capable to make sure that program will be a complete success.

Then this convention would be a milestone, indeed, not only for Philippine medicine, but also for the Filipino nation.

May I end on the same note with which I began: my warmest congratulations and best wishes for your success.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].