Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the fifth anniversary celebration of the Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research

For A Dynamic Research System

I endeavored to participate in the fifth anniversary of the Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research today to inform the entire nation that one of the most important programs of our national government is the PCARR.

You know that we are always rushing during November and December, the last two months of the year. This year, the turmoil in Mindanao, Basilan, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, and Palawan was added. And the “referendum” was added. And also the current debate about the various things that resulted from the “referendum.”

But anyway, I have come here. If possible, allow me to apologize to all of you for “pulling” you all here.

I brought you here. Unfortunately, I am rather hard up for time these days. You will note that I came from other appointments, which I could not cancel, before I could come here. And then many other appointments have suddenly come up which I could not avoid.

Thus I am happy that you are here in Maharlika Hall where I usually meet the most important personages. In this hall we receive the high-ranking leaders of other countries — kings, emperors, ambassadors. But I think that the experts in “research and science” who are here now are even more important.

I call on the citizens to recognize the debt of our country to all of you and to your expert assistants.

We recognize this indebtedness. This is the reason why when the invitation was extended to me, I immediately realized this was an occasion to call the attention of the nation to the efforts of our national government to coordinate and synchronize research in our country.

For a dynamic research system is an imperative for every nation seeking to develop and modernize. It is to the Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research and the entire national community on research that our country must turn for the development of our research capabilities and programs.

Many people think of researchers as absent-minded professors working in a dusty laboratory just for the sheer curiosity of looking for the ultimate wisdom, without any connection whatsoever with our daily requirements. And of course, this ivory tower conception of research has been somehow dissolved by the now dramatic advances in agriculture. For once, the country is self-sufficient in rice. The term probably should be self-reliant, not self-sufficient, as I explained to some during the meetings in Los Baños. You know, Bong Tanco came to me and said: “ We are now self-sufficient in rice.” That was 1975. I am like the apostle, Thomas. I do not believe anything until I see it or feel it.

But anyway, I looked at the figures and I realized that we were indeed self-sufficient in rice because part of the rice that we had imported sometime ago had not yet been consumed. But now, we are producing. And that is a different thing. We are now producing more rice than we require. From 1972 to 1977 we have increased our production by about 42 percent. To you, statisticians, this is part of your discipline. But I merely wanted to point out to our people exactly what research means to a country. Research makes up for many deficiencies in resources — natural and even personal — in a small developing country like ours.

This is the reason why I think all of us should pause and consider the value of research in the country today. Unfortunately, the matter has not received too much attention. And now, I intend to call attention to this synchronization that is going on.

When I said I would go to the PCARR, I was asked what the PCARR was. Is it the one that gives out “dole-outs?” You know, these acronyms are very confusing. But just the same, it indicates the low level of knowledgeability of our people on the meaning and importance of research. And yet, we are a people that must depend on research if we are to progress and modernize, for that matter, if we are to survive.

Anyway, the only problem in the modern world is that when you speak of research there is also the other aspect of the coin. You speak of research on the weapons of war. When it comes to the weapons used in war, that is something everyone knows. We must try and do away with this mental block on research on agriculture and other aspects of economic life.

Five years have passed since PCARR was created by Presidential decree that was meant to coordinate and consolidate research efforts in the fields of agriculture, fisheries, and forestry in our country. And I still vividly remember the various reasons which prompted me to create this Council.

It was the view of the Presidential Review Committee that the agricultural research policies and programs of the government were in grave need of re direction and planning. Despite the enormous amounts being annually spent on agricultural research, the level of research output was having no substantial or palpable impact on the agricultural economy: there was little planning and co ordination of research at the national level. And most revealing of all, the little that was being achieved by various research agencies and projects was not being effectively utilized in the critical sphere of agricultural development. Instead — perhaps I should quote the study itself— as the study sadly noted, most research efforts in the country appeared to be more earnestly directed “to satisfy the curiosity of individual researchers.”

Is that not an interesting aspect of the problem? Here you have dedicated individuals who, from sheer curiosity, are in search of wisdom and of nuggets of knowledge that could be of value to the nation at large. Yet, these are kept away from those who could utilize them in order to implement the noble objectives of modernization and advancement.

It would be an understatement for me to merely say that I was shocked by the results of that review by the Presidential Review Committee. For I knew only too well how much attention had been given by the government to agricultural research, and how many agencies and bureaus had been created by legislation to service research requirements. Again from shock, I was alarmed that in the midst of an intensive push in food production in 1972, the country did not have a substantial research base to rely upon for its sustained support.

To make a long story short, the Presidential study concluded with the re commendation that a national agricultural research program be formulated, and that a mechanism to streamline and coordinate agricultural research activities in the country be created.

It was under those circumstances that the Philippine Council for Agricultural and Resources Research was created — to serve as the central coordinating agency and spur the development of a dynamic national research system.

It takes, of course, more than half-a-decade to develop and erect such a dynamic national research system. Today, at this anniversary, we will say at once that we have not arrived at any magical formula to replace methodical construction and effort in this area. But if we have not produced miraculous remedies, we can at least claim now that we understand our problems better, that we are moving in the right direction, and that given time our research policies and programs will have their real impact on the national economy.

I notice with interest the outline of problems that were presented by Dr. Madamba here. He was sort of apologetic when he came to the last item as if he had caused all these deficiencies and these defects. But actually this was an alluvium of weaknesses and failures over the past several decades. And we are happy that now PCARR is doing something about it and succeeding. This is the important thing. We are doing something about it, and we are succeeding.

And the truth about it is that in the last five years our achievements in research are not at all insignificant. Whatever may be our reservations, the level of our research output has been very high. And it is justly regarded in Asia as one of the most advanced and progressive, particularly in the area of food production.

Looking back over its first five years, we can be gratified by the speed and dispatch with which the PCARR has moved to assist in accelerating our country’s development. Three months after it was organized, for instance, it convened the First Agricultural System Research Congress in Los Baños. I am certain that some of you here were among the more than 500 research administrators, policy-makers, scientists, researchers, educators, and producers from both the public and private sectors who attended that convention.

The main output of the February 1973 Congress was the first national agricultural research program we have today, the first to be formulated in the history of our country. This has set into motion the research mechanism of our entire government. For what followed were regional congresses that tackled research programs that were relevant to their own particular regions. Convened with the cooperation of the National Economic Development Authority, these congresses were capped by the Second National Research Congress held in Los Baños about a year ago.

It pleases us considerably to see government agencies, like NEDA and PCARR, pooling their expertise and resources in mapping out development programs for the agricultural sector. Knowing fully well our scarce resources and the seemingly formidable constraints that impede our development thrusts, this move is indeed very essential, especially at this stage of our development. This is one approach for maximizing the utilization of our resources towards the achievement of meaningful results.

The NEDA-PCARR collaboration has chalked up another “first” in that experts from the research and planning sectors have, for the first time, joined hands in formulating a relevant and meaningful development plan reflecting the country’s requirements at both the national and regional levels.

PCARR, I understand, has also been extending a most welcome assistance to the Budget Commission task force in agriculture, fisheries, and forestry. I take this as a healthy manifestation of the sincere efforts of members of the research community to inject relevance in government operations. Through such endeavor, they can share their own innovative ideas with the government in its budget restructuring scheme with the end in view of rationalizing support for research. Through such efforts, financial assistance for research has been identified. And this will make it easier for us to monitor research inputs as well as outputs.

The process of streamlining the total research effort has opened the eyes of government to the tendency of its budgeting and auditing procedures to become cumbersome for almost the entire spectrum of the research community. Re searchers believe and, perhaps, justify that they should not unnecessarily be detained by such things as red tape. This is one persistent problem that the government is trying to do away with in order to facilitate the smoother operations of research institutions and thus render them more productive. Of course, this problem does not appear only in research. It appears in almost every other area — the question of red tape, bureaucracy. We are now engaged in a series of training programs. Yesterday, I met with 40 governors, mayors, treasurers, executives, and the like. And they are going through this local administration development program. We are teaching mayors and governors how to run their municipalities and provinces and do away with red tape. We are also putting the civil servants through a series of educational and training programs in order that they may do away with the old bureaucratic attitude towards paper work.

You know, I receive more than a million communications in my office every year. And every communication has to have a long-winded transmission letter. What does a transmission letter say? Nothing. Yet, it is a whole page and it takes one day to write it. Can you imagine all the waste? So I have done away with all these transmission letters. I have told some of the people who are engaged in transmitting communications to me: If I see nothing contained in a transmission letter to me and you put in it more than three words, you better look for another. This waste of time in the bureaucracy is appalling. I do not know where we got this inclination towards paper work. No wonder we spend so much on stationery, typewriter, typewriter ribbon. You would be surprised. One time, I checked on how much money we were spending on typewriter ribbons and pencils.

Well, you know I am an llocano at heart. It is not only because of the money spent but the time. Money, you can earn. But where are you going to get the time?

Anyway, this is a problem which affects the entire government. And I am very happy that the researchers — because they are personally affected — are beginning to work on this. In view of this, government policy makers are taking note of this problem. I, for one, am spending time on this particular aspect.

There are many department secretaries and high-ranking officers in government that are taken aback when I call them up by telephone and say: The decision on this particular matter is as follows. Take your pencil and paper and take it down. I will sign it tomorrow when you put it down in writing. And they take it down. They often complain that I have reduced them into clerical aides. But that is the fastest way to go about it.

I have here some kind of a decree. Let me see. There is a proposal that as part of the administrative reform to promote efficiency and productivity of scientific and technological research, there should be special provisions for the hiring of retired scientists and technical personnel, hiring them through contracts and exempting them from civil service rules especially on nepotism, sabbatical leave, honoraria, and travel insurance as well as other provisions. And then without benefit of public bidding. I have not read this very well. This even includes authority to purchase large cattle. Is this going to research? Yes, it does. Construction, repair of infrastructure.

I am going to sign this, subject to amendment. But I want to emphasize the fact that I am ready to give all possible incentives to all our researchers under the NSDB and PCARR combination.

Therefore, to remove you from the red tape of the civil service and the bureaucracy — this is the principal purpose — as well as to give you the leeway to move fast in the procurement of both equipment as well as raw materials needed for your research and the needed expertise, I hereby sign this decree in your presence.

Now also worth considering are the people that go into research — both from the public and private sectors. We must create the environment. It is all right to speak of giving the proper incentives and the like. After all, man does not work for dollars and cents and pesos and centavos. But the mere fact that their work is appreciated is often sufficient for many of the dedicated public servants.

In the past, many members of the research sector had opted to cling to their ivory tower and work independently of one another. There was too much duplication in research work arising from the absence of a coordinating mechanism.

Now, I know that the PCARR has started to work on this. The advantage of working within a research structure is very obvious, and I need not go into this. The government is not alone in providing resources for the strengthening of the country’s research structure. We are tempted to conjecture that our initial success in setting into motion a viable national research system must have encouraged assistance agencies to help us in his endeavor.

Now, to cite an example. Early last year, the plan to enhance our country’s agricultural research capability received a big push when the United States Agency for International Development granted a $5 million soft loan for the development of four of the 14 centers under the national network of agriculture and resources research centers in the country. While the loan may not be as substantial as the others we have received for other sectors of our economy, I took time out to personally sign the loan on behalf of our government. I found it vital in view of the novel and unique purpose for which it has been granted.

This loan — usually the corresponding counterpart from the government is at the very least on a 50-50 or 60-40 basis— is now being used to upgrade the La Granja Agricultural Research Center in Carlota City, Negros Occidental: the Bicol Agricultural Research Center in Pili, Camarines Sur; the Southern Min danao Agricultural Research Center in Kabacan, Cotabato; and the Central Luzon Agricultural Research Center in Munoz, Nueva Ecija.

At present, we are negotiating another $ 10 million loan, with a counterpart fund from our government, to improve the research capabilities of seven research centers in the Cagayan Valley region, Mountain Province, Ilocos Norte, Los Baños, Palawan, Eastern Visayas, and Davao.

We have no doubt that the capabilities of these centers will soon be bolstered because considerable resources are now being poured into them. Furthermore, these centers can now count on the expertise of some of the best scientists and researchers in the country.

Again, I presume this is the time I can take advantage to say that so long as I am President, we will continue to build up research centers throughout the Philippines, and the national government will support it.

Talking about research centers, I probably should not miss this particular proposal that I have just received from both the PCARR and the NSDB. This refers to the research center on tobacco in my own province. To be frank with you, I did not know about this. I think this was their way of saying that this also affects you.

Anyway, there is a proposal to implement the originally approved program to establish a tobacco research center in a college that has been named after my late father. He graduated from that high school. He was actually inclined towards agriculture and research — and so was I — except that I got derailed somewhere along the way.

By this decree, we now hereby create a tobacco research center in the Mariano Marcos Memorial College of Science and Technology. And before you, I sign this decree.

Since this was also proposed by Dr. Magno, I presume that this means that he will support this project with the funds of the National Science Development Board.

There is one aspect that I wanted to talk to you about. And this is the fact that there is still a wide gap that exists between what is being chalked up by researchers in experimental and field-testing stations and the actual output of our farmers and producers. In the 60s, the high-yielding rice varieties initially developed by scientists of the International Rice Reseach Institute as well as the University of the Philippines at Los Baños, the Bureau of Plant Industry, and the Philippine Atomic Research Center promised just about the best that our farmers could hope by way of increasing their harvest. Yet after more than a decade and many research advances, the members of the scientific community are still at a loss to explain why a good percentage of our rice farms is not planted to the new varieties. Moreover, while researchers are producing as high as eight tons per hectare in experimental farms, farmers, planting the same strains can only produce a yield of a little more than one ton. The experimental results, eight tons: The actual results in the farm, one ton. And I have always asked the question: Why? I know that you are engaged in checking why this is so. And you point out to me many of the variables. You scientists always use this flexible term “variables”. There are many variables.

All right, we will patiently wait for the results of your researches. But the same is true with other farm products, like carabeef, root crops, vegetables, and fruits. Likewise, aquaculture and reforestation are major research areas that require priority attention. And doubly disconcerting is the fact that not much attention has been given by researchers to these commodities notwithstanding their potentials as food and cash crops.

You know that I came from Sabah. While working on this problem in the South, I decided I might just as well go to the very root of the problem. We talk about Sabah, North Borneo, the Muslim question. And so I decided to go to Sabah and find out what was happening there. What is its atmosphere? How are its people? Are they really antagonistic towards us? And perhaps I could talk to some of these leaders. And I did. But one thing I also found out: They claim that they produce the best cacao throughout the world. And you know what they told me? They even suggested that the best cacao peels could be found in the Philip pines. And yet we do not produce cacao. I was taken aback, I was shocked. They produce the best variety of cacao which they say is resistant to disease and pests better than the Ivory Coast coco, as they call it among the English. And so we took some of the seeds.

I am sure that the Bureau of Plant Industry is listening — is Director Panganiban here? — with a little concern. You know what they told me? They grow best in volcanic soil under the shade of coconut trees. And where are the coconut trees? In the Philippines. But is there any cacao? None. Why? Here again, we are met with some of your variables.

Whatever it is, I think that it is about time that we look into the differences between the results and experiments and the actual production in the field. You know, we always figure that what we produce in Los Baños, we will produce in Nueva Ecija, Bulacan, Pampanga, and Pangasinan. But you and I know that it is not so. Of course, the question of rice, that is a little extreme— one to eight. That is a little bit too much. But it is true in almost every crop, and we must look into this.

I present this to the PCARR. I know that you are already working on it, but 1 want you to know that I am watching you on this particular aspect. It is a very disturbing phenomenon. It is one of the things that I am looking at. Talking about cacao, I think you better take note of the fact that I want to know why you are not planting cacao under the coconut trees. Of course, you are going to tell me again that cacao cannot stand the strong winds and typhoons in Eastern Philippines. Well and good. How about Mindanao? How about Davao? There is no strong wind there. How about Western Leyte? How about Biliran? There is no strong wind there. Typhoons do not get there. How about Quezon, Batangas, Laguna? Batangas used to produce a lot of cacao and coffee. Then, what happened? Now, they are producing other crops. Let us look into this again.

But whatever it is, we must now bridge the gap. This to me is one of the most searching challenges before the research community and the government today. We should move into it as fast and with the same intensity as we have moved into other areas of research. We must always think in terms of the needs and problems of the farmers. And this we cannot overemphasize. For they carry the burden of producing the food needed by our rapidly increasing population.

We have, of course, always set up the small farmers as the measure of all our efforts. If we can help the small farmers, then we have succeeded. If we have helped only the big fellows, whether they are farmers or not, we have not succeeded. This is the measure of our success. And when I say we, I mean not only government, I mean you. I mean the PCARR and the researchers. For he is our target. He is the symbol of all our effort at diligence, discipline, and sacrifice. It is for him that we are doing all of this.

We launched the Masagana 99 in May 1973. This was followed by the Masaganang Maisan and the beef-carabeef program. And now a recently launched emphasis on fisheries production to complement our recent success in achieving self-sufficiency in rice.

Therefore, in the name of the small farmers and the marginal fishermen, the government must now pour more resources, more attention, more time to this problem.

I am certain that the PCARR on its fifth anniversary has this in mind.

I am happy to note that the small farmers are now represented in the planning of the country’s research efforts through PCARR’s commodity research teams as well as its Technical Program Planning and Review Board. Never before have farmers been given the opportunity to involve themselves in the planning of agricultural development programs.

We have to marry more and more the thrust of research projects to actualities of farming conditions. And the descent of the scientist from the ivory tower which we now see happening more and more is inevitable and, of course, necessary.

Only last month, at an international conference in Italy of scientists and research administrators from the developing countries, the historic Conference Declaration stated the challenge succinctly and I quote:

“While concepts and basic research material can be adopted by one country from another, the precise technology will have to be developed locally and tailored to the conditions of each area in such a way that the ecological strengths of an area are maximized and the ecological risks and handicaps are minimized.”

We cannot resolve the agricultural challenge by simply repairing to the achievements of scientists in other lands. We have to work within the mold of our conditions, and from there attain our deliverance. We must depend upon our indigenous talent.

That we accept this now is a credit to our research community. That we have the capacity to gather our efforts in one concerted push forward — this the PCARR has demonstrated.

Nothing could gratify us more than to learn that at the Bellagio Conference in Italy, our national agriculture and resources research system was singled out by this international conference for its proven viability. The verdict is an augury of what we can legitimately hope for from research efforts now and in the years to come.

But as we claim this achievement for the nation, let us make it our common resolve, the resolve of the PCARR and the research community, and we in government — never to let up in our efforts to improve, to strengthen, and to develop our national research programs.

Your efforts, I assure you once again, will be matched by the assistance and support required of the national leadership. May I say again, so long as I am President, you will have the complete support of the national government.

I have today received from the Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research two proposals designed to accelerate our programs in this area. A proposed decree providing for incentives and administrative reform to promote productivity of scientific and technological research. A proposed decree granting authority and incentives to the PCARR in its generation of foreign funding for research.

At the same time, I close by providing for the completion of the PCARR membership. As of now, you have two vacancies in the PCARR. The vacancies are for the membership of the private sector. Upon the recommendation made by not only the NSDB and PCARR but also by the private sector and the research community, I hereby appoint the following as members of the private sector in the PCARR. I refer to Mr. Manuel Lim, Jr., and Mr. Francisco Y. Panolo. And this finishes the work that I have set for myself this morning.

I am sorry that the First Lady and I could not come to cut the ribbon for your new building. I understand it is a very impressive building. I will go there to have my picture taken later. I will go there and inspect the premises, possibly with the First Lady. Or, in all probability, it will be the other way around. The First Lady will go there without me. I am sure you will like that better.

In the meantime, may I direct Dr. Magno to do the honors of cutting the ribbon on my behalf so that you can use the building. And once again, I congratulate the PCARR. I look forward to the continuing advances of our country in research and in science, principally because of the efforts of the PCARR and the NSDB.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].