Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On AFP Loyalty Day

The Loyalty of the Soldier

I express my gratitude to our Bishop Escutin and his assistants for the mass we witnessed this morning, in commemoration of my 61st birthday. But the truth is, when a person reaches their 60th year, one would wish to forget their birthday altogether.

We are gathered here today to once again present to the media the strong ties of good relations that bind our Armed Forces and the highest office that can be attained by an elected official in our country, the presidency of the Republic of the Philippines.

In accordance with our previous practice, tradition, this is like a part of the duty of the Army to its commander-in-chief. But for me, this day is meaningful and unparalleled.

Once again, in keeping with practice, we gather here today to reaffirm the bond between our Armed Forces and the highest office within the gift of our people, the presidency of the Republic of the Philippines, the incumbent of which by order and mandate of the Constitution is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.

Tradition may have made of this testimonial day an obligatory ritual and a routine for the corps and their Commander-in-Chief, but for me it will always carry a very deep and personal meaning. For my relationship with the corps, with the Armed Forces of the Philippines, perhaps, since I took my oath of office as President of the Republic of the Philippines on December 30, 1965, has been deeper and more lasting than any other Commander-in-Chief in the history of our country. More than any other Commander-in-Chief, I have depended upon the Armed Forces in order to bring about the transformation of our society. From the time I took office on December 30, 1965, I told the Armed Forces that it would be necessary for it to be utilized not only in order to maintain peace in our country as we understood it, meaning meeting the threat of rebellion coming from the leftist-rightist conspiracies, from the criminal syndicates, but also to utilize the Armed Forces for a new role, that of development, that of participating in the social and economic development program of our country.

We did not anticipate in 1965 the threats of the 1970s, the secessionist war of 1972 and 1973, and the new subversive movement organized in 1968 and 1969, and which was to explode in violence and outright rebellion in the years that followed.

The sum of those years—of the trials we have weathered, of the work we have undertaken together, the perils that we have confronted together, as well as the achievements that we can offer to our people—deepens the meaning of your pledge today in a way that I cannot describe in words. And it will always be with a deep sense of gratitude and affection that I shall come here to receive your salute and salute you in return, for so long as I embody the will and trust of our people.

The bond between the Presidency and the Armed Forces of the Philippines constitutes an essential fabric of our national life. For not only because of crisis but also because of the very nature of a developing country, the national community feeds on the necessary cooperation and union of many institutions and forces in our society. National development depends upon the unity of the civilians and military forces in the land. National advancement is only possible where these bonds are well maintained in harmony and unity, and you and I are the custodians of a unique and irrevocable trust. If either of us, either the presidency or the Armed Forces of the Philippines turned traitor to this trust, then the country must fail. Our system of government may permit differences between various branches of government, between the Legislature and the Executive in the old system. That may be the meaning of democracy. There may be rivalries between political leaders, between ministries, between offices, but the country cannot survive a situation where the national leadership and the Armed Forces are divided in their purposes and objectives.

Today, I have come to salute the Armed Forces of the Philippines, for during the entire period of my presidency, from 1965 to the present, the Armed Forces have kept a meticulous adherence to the Constitution, in that the military shall always be subordinate to the civilian authority in our government.

How often have I invited the military leaders, the field commanders to cabinet meetings and meetings of the National Economic and Development Authority, in order that I may watch and see the atmosphere under which the military would cooperate and work with the civilian authority; and how often the military have submitted to the wider counsels of the civilian authority, notwithstanding the fact that it would prejudice, say, the finances, the resources available to the Armed Forces.

This year, for instance, we brought down the level of the appropriations that are available to the defense establishment and to the Armed Forces of the Philippines; notwithstanding the fact that we are still facing a secessionist and tumultuous situation in the South; and notwithstanding the uncertainties of international relations, as well as the results of the experiment known as the New Society and the Democratic Revolution.

The Armed Forces have asked for an increase in the number of officers and men at their disposal. But upon the advice of the civilian authority regarding the limited resources of our country, they have succeeded in continuing and maintaining the same proficiency and efficiency, the same astute-type and wise-type of relationship even with the subversives, in order that our country and our people may utilize these funds, say, for economic and social development.

We are wont to congratulate the civilian authority, the national economic planning groups, the business managers of both the government and the private sector, as well as the decision-makers in our civilian government for the many symbols of our economic advancement — the irrigation system, the power sources, the energy and other power stations — geothermal, hydroelectric, and the national electrification program which goes into every barangay and barrio, into the farthest corner of our country.

We congratulate the Ministry of Agriculture for the increase in the production of agricultural products, as we became self-sufficient in staples. And as we move to self-sufficiency in almost every area, we congratulate the Ministry of Highways and of Public Works for all the infrastructure that symbolize the movement of the Philippine society. And yet, you and I know the sacrifices that we have had to offer to our motherland in order that we may give the civilian government and the civilian authority more resources to spend for this economic and social development. How many lives have you, the Armed Forces of the Philippines offered in all of this fighting? How many times have you restrained yourselves from the acquisition of more arms, more equipment and the training of more men, because the money was needed for irrigation, for electrification, for agriculture, for fertilizer, for the factories that are needed? How many lives of our soldiery did we pay in order to attain this kind of advancement in the economic, social and political field?

And so, when we celebrate the establishment of the housing unit, the establishment of the new Ministry of Human Settlements; when we formally grant accolade and citation to the men of the civilian authority, we remember you, officers, men and civilian employees of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, that at the back of the mind of your Commander-in-Chief ran the same things, that were it not, first of all, for the courage and the persistence, the patriotism and daring of the Armed Forces, as well as the restraint that they have shown in the exercise of the power granted them even under martial law, all of these would not have been possible. And therefore, if there is any achievement of all of the New Society, then this, too, is part of the achievement of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

You have before you, officers and men, civilian employees of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the members of the Pansamantalang Batasang Pambansa, the Interim National Assembly. After seeing a new era in our democratic life, we have moved towards the establishment of a legislature, even during the continuance of the crisis government in order that our people may participate in legislation.

Why was it possible to hold elections to choose these men and women in the Interim National Assembly or Batasang Pambansa? Why was it possible for all the parties, whether it is the KBL, the majority party, or the Laban or the Pusyon Bisaya or the Young Philippines or the Mindanao Alliance or other opposition parties to run for elections? Why were they able to put up their candidates and present to the people the platforms of government in such far-away places like Tawi-Tawi, Sulu, Basilar, Cotabato, Maguindanao, Sultan Kudarat, Palawan, Batanes in the North, Cagayan, Mountain Province, Kalinga-Apayao, Ifugao — why? Because the Armed Forces of the Philippines had succeeded in breaking the bonds of the rebellion and the secessionist war. And there is a comparative bill that allows a free and democratic election to choose the members of the Interim Batasang Pambansa.

More than just a pledge of loyalty coming from the Armed Forces of the Philippines, therefore, I have come to you today to recognize your achievement and commend you for it. We have kept the bond, I believe, through all these years of my presidency, especially during the last five years of crisis and challenge.

As great as those achievements may be our common burden does not permit us to be detained in recollection of what you and I have accomplished. Our responsibility is to the present and the future to build on what we have accomplished, the structure of security and instability in our society. There is never a moment with which our nation can feel completely secure or can afford to be oblivious to dangers. Internally we do not see any threat to national security with which we cannot cope or successfully surmount. But nevertheless, we must not be oblivious to the various internal developments which to my mind can conceivably deteriorate.

The deterioration, for instance, of the secessionist movement into terrorism has resulted in new threats to the safety not only of the Republic but also of the civilians and communities. The problem of law enforcement is all too real, as incidents of ambuscades, raids and kidnappings have mounted in recent months.

This, therefore, requires continued aggressive police action. We must take care that it does not deteriorate into a massive threat against our society, or resuscitate the ambitions and the capabilities of the secessionist movement. I deeply fear that if the present terrorism is not checked outright, there will be a weakening in the civilian communities that will allow the rebel forces to grow and gather strength.

I am certain that the Armed Forces of the Philippines recognizes the effectivity of the forces in the South because the Southern forces commander is the troop commander in today’s ceremony. This recognition of the pivotal, the critical role of the Southern forces certainly can find confirmation in my words today.

I congratulate the officers and men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines for having succeeded in fighting in more than two fronts: fighting in the front to the North and fighting in the front to the South. I congratulate the Chief of Staff and the Major Service Commander as well as the Minister of National Defense on today’s ceremonies.

I recognize the difficulties that they have had to confront. In 1972 and 1973, when we were fighting in Luzon against insurgency and rebellion that was mounted by the leftist-rightist conspiracy, we did not have enough men to send to the South. Many of our detachments were annihilated; we suffered reverses, communities, provinces; cities were occupied by the secessionist rebel. Not only that the number of displaced civilians was increased from the original 100,000 in 1972 to about 500,000 in 1973 and in 1974 today, I understand, civilians have been returned, most of them anyway have been returned and peace is once again reigning over the southern provinces.

Today, the secessionist movement does not control any of the provinces or towns other than the portions perhaps covered by some of the most remote jungles of Sulu, parts of Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur, and perhaps their lairs in Lanao and Cotabato.

Let us not delude ourselves that the insurgency is over. Whatever may be its temporary difficulties, we must recognize the real capability of these rebels who may continue to receive support from outside, and therein lies the danger. Therein lies the reason for my insistence that we maintain an attitude not only symbolized by what we call the left and right-hand policy of winning back to the folds of the law those rebels who are not really ideologically allied with the rebels, but who because of varied, sometimes personal reasons, have joined with that rebellion. Win them back to the fold of the law and support the efforts of government to maintain peace not only in the South but in the North — this policy of the left hand supported further by the policy of the right hand — that those who are irreconcilable and continue to utilize violence in order to attain political power must be met with the strength of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, much of course to our regret.

I know the difficulty of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in implementing and applying the left-hand and right-hand policy which I enunciated in 1967, a policy which was further regained in 1972, when in addition to the incentives and attractions that we offered to the rebels, not only in the form of amnesty and in the form of employment, we also immediately prepared plans for the economic and social development of the areas that were infested with rebels. This included, of course, the two basic regions wherein the Muslims reside, Region No. 9 and Region No. 12. These two regions that are composed by the provinces of Tawi Tawi, Sulu, Basilan, Zamboanga Norte and Zamboanga Sur for Region 9. And Region 12 composed of the two Lanaos, Lanao Norte, Lanao Sur, Maguindanao, Sultan Kudarat and Cotabato proper or northern Cotabato.

There was an attempt to start some kind of violence in Palawan and in southern Cotabato and in Davao, and even as far north as Bukidnon. But thanks to the vigilance and courage of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, although always outnumbered, they have kept these provinces peaceful and available for the socio-economic development program of the country.

I have said before and today I repeat this, our greater security challenge is internal and not external. Insurgency is the problem that threatens to undo the developing societies of Asia and the Philippines is no exception. This will continue perhaps for the next five to ten years. The events in recent years have not altered the regional climate for security; we cannot be indifferent to certain problems in the international sphere, and to initiatives that can be taken multilaterally to keep the situation under greater control.

What then do I see in the major external threats to our country? Rivalry among the superpowers continues to be the greatest single threat to peace in Southeast Asia. We need to be watchful of current developments in mainland Southeast Asia, which have thrown our neighbors into confrontations and conflict. These developments are matters of grave concern to the members of ASEAN including the Philippines, because they could conceivably deteriorate and imperil the entire region.

We place great emphasis therefore on multi-country efforts to establish an equilibrium of influence in Southeast Asia, and on international mediation to defuse the present hostilities in Indochina.

How can we contribute to easing the pressure on regional peace and security?

We, the Armed Forces of the Philippines and your Commander-in-Chief, can help in the security of our country if internally our country can be secured from threats against our stability.

Taken together, the internal and external threats to national security require the soundest assessment of the situation, and prompt and effective action on our part.

What then do I recommend we do? First, we must sustain military operations in the form of police action to meet internal threats; and secondly, we must continue to improve and refine our organizational capability and our techniques to combat internal insurgency and crime.

The recent reorganization of the Philippine Constabulary, very well represented in these ceremonies, and the Integrated National Police into Regional Commands, conforming to our administrative regions in the civil government, is a positive step in this direction. For it decentralizes the execution of the peace and order campaign, and allows for maximum coordination and inerfacing with the administrative regional setup.

In view of the uncertainties in the international situation there is need for our defense preparedness. Towards this end, our program for defense self-reliance is all-important. We must continue with the program of self-reliance; and for this purpose, I have already approved the acquisition of major defense items to improve our defense posture vis-a-vis external threats.

And, of course, this requires us to enhance and develop the basic and indispensable element of our Armed Forces, the Filipino soldier, to improve his fighting quality and capacity for service. He must be thoroughly trained. He must be motivated. He must be inspired. We must look to his welfare in and out of the service.

Finally our efforts in this sphere must endeavor to involve the individual citizen and civilian communities in the maintenance of order and security in their communities.

Ours is a civilian Armed Forces with a small standing, army. It can be properly said that this concept has been the concept on which even our revolutionary forbears in the last century adopted. Even under the Malolos Constitution, or the Constitution of Biak-na-Bato, the concept of the civilian army was adopted and this has continued in the Commonwealth Act No. 1 under the 1935 Constitution and in the New Society under the 1973 Constitution. It will therefore be necessary that the citizens and civilian communities assume a certain role in the maintenance of order and security in the hinterlands especially.

For only when the citizenry are fully involved in this effort will we truly succeed in quelling the internal challenges to our Republic.

There is an umbilical link between development and national security that must be continually recognized and affirmed by the action we have taken.

Today, we are at that stage in our national development efforts in which various programs demand greater allocation of resources. For this reason, it is to be expected that development requirements will compete sharply with national security in the allocation of resources.

The projected reduction of the AFP budget in 1979 is in fact a reflection of the success of our security and peace and order efforts and recognition of the growing requirements of national development.

Actually and in truth, we are spending for economic and social development three times if not four times what we are spending for security. This is a matter which I have insisted upon even at the height of the crisis. Even while we were fighting the rebellion in Luzon, as well as in Mindanao, I had insisted that always the civilian government should spend at the very least three times whatever was spent by the Armed Forces of the Philippines. And I repeat, this is a symbol of the patriotism, the self-abnegation and the self-denial on the part of the leaders of the military, that they have agreed to this concept in the allocation of resources of our Republic.

I congratulate the Armed Forces also and the defense establishment for having adopted the measures to immediately bring about cost-effectiveness consciousness at all levels of the Armed Forces. For it will be necessary to meet the challenge to perform the same task with the same degree of efficiency and performance with comparatively lesser resources. We will have to make every peso of the defense budget count more than the amount that we have spent in the past.

While we are at this stage, may I thank the Armed Forces for these unusual symbols and sign that you have at the back of the parade ground. The only comment that I can make is that every time they change those placards they sound like the anti-riot squad.

I am aware that in every unit of the Armed Forces, there is an effort to economize. This policy will now reach every soldier whether in combat or engaged in administrative and support units. So it will be necessary to refine methods and innovate techniques in doing things.

We must improve our logistics system, organization, and procedures. We will eliminate red-tape and unnecessary duplication and waste.

And I must say, I congratulate the Armed Forces for having succeeded in projecting requirements sufficiently ahead into the future not only five years but even ten years hence.

I congratulate the defense establishment, as well as the Chief of Staff, the general staff, and the major services commanders for this achievement which I know is rather difficult under the present circumstances. Perhaps very few of us will realize, including the citizenry of our country, that in this planning the Armed Forces have been compelled to adopt a more modest role in the entire scheme of things.

The changes, however, and all the challenge before us are no different from those that we have to face in the future. On the contrary they will be much less. The Armed Forces will continue to develop. Long after we are gone, the Armed Forces will maintain its quality of service because you, the soldiers of today, have maintained such a high level of proficiency and efficiency.

I have said in the past and I say again, you have become the models for the citizenry of our country. But you are not only the models for today. In the future, our children and their children will probably point to your examples of probity, of integrity, of strength of character, of daring, courage, professionalism and patriotism, examples which they will seek to approximate in the performance of their own task.

And therefore, as I stand before you today, I can only say that this again compels me to repeat, the loyalty of the soldier is loyalty not only to the Commander-in-Chief but also to the Republic and the Constitution. Your loyalty will be to maintain the law and our freedom. As I have said in the past, you have performed a monumental task. You have participated in a revolution that has brought about a change not only in the quality of life but also in the hearts and minds of our people. For this the generations today and of the future will be thankful to you.

I, as your Commander-in-Chief, therefore, come today to also pledge to you loyalty to the ideals for which we have fought in the past and will continue to fight in the future, which are embodied in the Constitution.

I salute you on this day, and say, carry on, for the Filipino soldier bids well to continue to achieve the dreams of our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].