Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the awarding of 25,000 Land Titles to NHA Beneficiaries and Inauguration of Teachers’ BLISS Condominium II

It is a great honor and pleasure for me to join you here today for this memorable occasion which marks the awarding of 25,000 land titles to citizen beneficiaries and the inauguration of this New Teachers BLISS Condominium here in Balintawak, Quezon City.

Close to these grounds we stand on today is a truly historic spot in our country, which reminds us of the dreams and aspirations that went into the making of our nation. It was here 88 years ago where our revered Andres Bonifacio, joined by the men and women of his generation, broke off all allegiance to mother Spain by tearing to pieces their cedulas, and declared for all the world to hear. “Long live the Philippines.”

We remember that proud declaration of August 23, 1896 as the Cry of Balintawak. And to this day we perpetuate the memory of that event as a signal moment in our people’s struggle for independence and nationhood.

It is fitting that we should gather here in Balintawak 88 years later, because today we come here to redeem and fulfill another cry of our people — their cry for their well-being and welfare.

You will probably remember the occasion in 1981 when we first began our Land for the Landless Program in Metro Manila—that occasion being the awarding of 10,000 titles to project beneficiaries of our Tondo Foreshore Project. I said then on that occasion, there should be no Filipino squatter in his own country. And I pledged my leadership then and the resolution of our Government towards the fulfillment of this goal.

Since that time, that basic policy statement has becoming the rallying cry of so many of our urban citizenry. Not only here in Metro Manila but in all urban centers of our country.

And since then I am truly proud to say that we in Government have not reneged on that promise and that pledge. We have continued to explore and avail of all means to turn into reality the hope of our urban poor to have their own land and their own homes.

The awarding of 25,000 titles to project beneficiaries is such a testament of this on-going commitment. It pursues on a massive scale the program we began in 1981, and it sets the way for future projects that will doubtless benefit thousands of other families in our country.

For truly this is not a one-shot program we are talking about. Since 1981, the number of titles awarded to family beneficiaries have been increasing every year. In 1981, we awarded 10,000 titles. In 1982, we awarded 20,000 titles. In 1983, we awarded 25,000 titles. And today. we added another 25,000 titles into the record.

It is true that in the past politicians and leaders have often spoken of “land for the landless”, especially during election time. And that our people had come to see it as no more than just an empty slogan.

But that is a thing of the past. For today that slogan is a living reality in our midst. It is a vital priority program of our Government today. And it will not cease until we truly redeem in full our declaration that no Filipino shall be a squatter in his own country. That every family shall have the dignity and honor due them as citizens of our beloved land.

If we examine for a moment the way we have approached this acute need of our urban poor, you will all readily see that this is not a fly-by-night affair.

In the first place, we have made Urban Land Reform a specific policy and objective of Government in the very letter and spirit of our Constitution. Thanks to the Amendment approved during the last plebiscite. And this means that urban land reform is a major responsibility and concern of Government. With this mandate, we have cleared the way for a massive and sustained program, to resolve once and for all the problems of slum and squatting in urban centers throughout the country. With this mandate, we can extend what we have magnificently began here in Metro Manila into the far flung centers of the nation.

We will note secondly that we do not have here an empty letter of law and policy. For already, even before the passage of the Urban Land Reform Amendment, we have set in place the mechanism to attend to the urgent needs of our urban poor. We have transformed our haphazard housing agencies of the past into the National Housing Authority we know today. And we can point today to so many projects initiated and completed by the NHA which are today living testimonials that slum areas and settlements can become thriving communities.

And let me say thirdly that we do not focus on housing needs alone; we match what we do in these areas with complementary programs to enable communities to thrive and grow and prosper. I refer here to the many support programs and services we make available to our citizenry — opportunities for livelihood, skills training, self-reliant projects.

What has been really happening during the past so many years is the growing convergence of government projects to attend to the urgent needs of the poor. And this attention has become even more magnified during this period when economic difficulties beset us. All our massive priority programs today respond squarely to the lot of the poor among us, and I can cite among others the following:

1. The KKK 2. The BLISS Program 3. The Sariling Sikap Program 4. The People’s Forest 5. And of course, Urban Land Reform

And we have given the well-being of the poor our preferential attention and commitment because we believe that it is here where we can truly seed the dynamic development of our nation as a whole.

Our ultimate goal, let me stress again, is to establish self-reliant communities. And we shall achieve this in the best tradition of “bayanihan” and community effort.

We would have reason to fear failure in this program if we were doing nothing more than the mere granting of land titles to beneficiaries. But in fact there is more to it than that.

The families in these communities we are building have their own obligations and responsibilities. The land and services which are being awarded to beneficiaries are not for free. Beneficiaries are expected to pay for them so that the program can go on and on to benefit more and more families. A part of the funding is of course subsidized by our Government, but there is nonetheless a vital part, within the means of all beneficiaries, that must be shouldered by them.

And the idea we really want to inculcate is the transformation of our slums into creative and responsible communities, into communities that understand that the rewards of life are won by effort and work. To do otherwise, would be to risk the making of still more decaying communities in our midst and to revive the policy of handouts that in the end never helps anyone at all.

Here then we repose our faith that the time will not be long in coming when all of our urban poor will be integrated into self-reliant and dynamic communities. When all will have their own place of dwelling in the population centers of our country.

And if anyone in the opposition will suggest that the awarding of land titles is a gimmick, let us reply not with words but with the record of success we have had with this program. Let us point them to the records which show that we have done more in this area during the last 10 years alone than the efforts of all past administrations combined. And let us bid them to visit what is taking place in these many projects, in Tondo, in Malabon, and here in Quezon City.

In stressing here the preferential attention we give to the needs of our urban poor, we do not by any means forget the equally urgent needs of other sectors of our society.

And it seems to me appropriate that side by side with this awarding of land titles, we also inaugurate this New Teachers BLISS Condominium II here in Balintawak.

In the ranks of our civil service, there is perhaps no sector so vital and important to the future of our nation than the teachers who man the ramparts of our public education system, we can hardly exaggerate the contribution they make to the vitality of our society. And I know personally of the sacrifices of every public schoolteacher, because I myself come from a family of teachers.

It is true that for a time, because they are so many, increments in pay and ameliorative benefits accorded have not always kept pace with the responsibilities they bear. And that is why we were witness for a time of the agitation for a new deal coming from the ranks of our schoolteachers.

The time of neglect, however, is now past. Today, we are doing all we can to implement a package of measures that will upgrade teacher salaries and benefits, accelerate teacher development, and enable teachers to improve their well-being and livelihood opportunities.

We see here today in this Teachers BLISS project one vivid manifestation of the priority we give to the well-being of teachers.

The Teachers’ BLISS Program has the traditional features of a BLISS project-it consists of medium rise buildings to maximize the use of a relatively expensive piece of land and it has all the amenities of a human habitat. Eventually, the beneficiaries – our public school teachers and the members of their families — shall participate in a livelihood program under the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK), as in all other KKK undertakings, the goal will be to make every family a productive unit to increase productivity and generate additional family income.

The Teachers’ BLISS addresses the shelter needs of our educators. This is just the beginning of our efforts, starting from Metro Manila, this program is envisioned to expand to a National Housing Program for Teachers.

Of all the things that we might mention here on this occasion, it must be stressed above all that we are not talking here of a program or programs to merely benefit a few, of projects focused only in Metro Manila. You in this city are indeed very fortunate, but let me say now and stress again that this is only the beginning.

Our programs for the urban poor will extend from this metropolis to the far-flung centers of the archipelago. And we will transform every slum and squatter community of our country into new habitats of life and hope.

Our BLISS Program for teachers in Metro Manila is but the precursor of a larger nationwide program. And you may be sure that our Government will not relent until the well-being of all our educators is so advanced and promoted.

In support of this scope we envision for our programs, I will sign today in your esence Presidential Decree No._____, increasing the capitalization of the National Housing Authority to P5 billion, for the purpose of leading in the implementation of an expanded and accelerated Urban Land Reform and Social Housing Program, and of a National Housing Program for Teachers.

By this means, we make known to one and all that we have here a long-term and self-sustaining program.

The NHA has for sometime now been our principal innovator and agent in such landmark projects as the Tondo foreshore and BLISS Program. Today. in keeping with the wider and greater challenges we embrace, it is meet that we should increase its resources and capabilities, so that indeed the example we inaugurate here in Balintawak will reach the entire archipelago.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.