Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Philippine Army Day

[Delivered at Fort Bonifacio, March 22, 1972]

Towards Self-Reliance

I AM HAPPY to see here the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the body that initiates the approval of the appropriation act. I presume that this demonstrates the interest and the inclination of the leadership of the House of Representatives. It is my hope that the appropriation for the Armed Forces of the Philippines will come out of Congress without any cut whatsoever.

I am indeed very proud to be able to come here this morning. I come to congratulate the officers and men, and the civilian personnel, of the Philippine Army, on this occasion.

Today, I was touched as I pinned the Gold Cross medal on Mrs. Apolinar whose husband died in one of those small and often unreported incidents that the Armed Forces of the Philippines, including the Philippine Army, participate in almost every day.

It is most appropriate that we celebrate the anniversary of this organization and we recall with pride your many achievements, most of all your unswerving loyalty to our flag and our government, which is to say, to our people.

It is my hope that through all changes and vicissitudes in the nation’s life, the Philippine Army will continue to pay allegiance to the ideals which have shaped our people and our society, the ideals embodied in our Constitution ant in our free way of life.

Soldiering is a hazardous profession in more ways than one. Literally a,soldier lays his life on the line the moment he enlists and takes his oath of duty. But the hazards that a soldier contends with extend well beyond the battlefields and well beyond those unforseen engagements that safeguard the peace and order of our beloved land; they are manifest too in tranquil times, in periods of sustained calm and peace.

One of the most wounding experiences a soldier must undergo is the lack of recognition in a time of relative peace and the thought of a people unappreciative of a soldier’s sacrifice. Paradoxically the soldier is at such times often regarded with indifference and sometimes hostility, and is looked upon as somebody to be wary of, and sometimes even to malign. I note that these inclinations are true not only in our society; it is true of other free and democratic societies of the world.

There is a tendency to treat the soldier as an alien in a free society, and in a way that is good, for our society should not be given to idolizing soldiers and soldiering. This signifies that we as a people are peaceful loving, that we shall not brook any attempt to rule society with the authoritarianism of the military.

But history also teaches us that when a people have no will and no heart to fight for their individual freedom as well as for their country’s dignity, then that society is on the wane.

The short shift given to the professional soldier is a measure of the rejection if the men and women who in times of danger to the nation are the first to offer their lives in its defense. Perhaps, in a free and peace-loving society, we have to mark out a common ground, where the civilian and soldier may meet in understanding, in mutual appreciation, and harmony.

And thus it is that I welcome the re-establishment of the concept of the citizen army, the citizen army which fought in the battles of Bataan and Corregidor, in the Visayas, in Mindanao and in the underground, the citizen army which my generation of soldiers belonged.

I understand that Speaker Villareal has been articulate in proposing the activation of army training camps all over the Philippines, and is now advocating new concept of such a citizen army. I am very happy about this.

This concept of soldiery becomes all the more significant because it is a concept arising from the imperatives of a democratic order. This concept of the citizen soldier is in direct opposition to the military tradition of earlier eras, when the soldier was trained to be an automaton, and officers were martinets one step removed from tyrants. Today’s citizen soldier is, underneath the uniform an unreconstructed civilian, a soldier only because he has been taught to use weapons well and to function smoothly as part of a team in the event of active hostilities against aggressors or against internal enemies of the state.

A citizen army will not be quite as expensive as a standing army of professional soldiers. It will be an army on call, the larger part of which will mobilize and go into action only in time of peril, when the nation faces immediate danger. That is the essential idea of the so-called citizen army, and I have supported this concept because it is to me the most economical system of defense, while also embodying the principle basic to a democratic government the principle of self-government, which may be translated in the case of the military as an army consisting of the people themselves, not an elite organization separate from and above the people.

We are now in the process of producing this new soldier, the soldier of, for and by the people, but apparently we cannot go as far as we hope to at this time because of scarce resources. In the new budget proposal, we have included thi s funds which would start this project in the right direction, and, therefore, it is our hope that such a budget will be passed.

In consonance with the concept of the citizen army, we are also intent on transforming our present military organization, which is oriented to multiple alliances with friendly nations for the defense of our land, to one capable of giving the nation a self-reliant posture. It is admittedly an ambitious project, but one which I regard as not beyond our capabilities. Furthermore, this move is dictated by international events, notably the shifts in foreign policies which have made the traditional arrangements untenable. We cannot wait for the shifting events to settle. As in war, we must initiate strategy and tactics to anticipate the critical shape of events.

Some quarters believe that before we can approach the problem of self-reliant defense, or unilateral defense, we must first look after our economic development. This has been said as though we have not in fact strived in every way to accelerate economic development. We have. The truth is, in the years past, just short of a decade, we have given utmost priority to economic development, sometimes to the prejudice of military capability, to all the component projects of such development, including production, infrastructure, and industrialization. In fact, military strategy itself must take into consideration the economic capabilities of the nation, and this too we have not overlooked. But we are compelled to now consider a self-reliant defense posture not so much as a choice or an option, but as a dire necessity.

All this is not to say that the professional soldier will have a diminished role in society. On the contrary, men like you will have an even firmer role as the core of the nation’s military defense. The citizen soldier will look to you for examples of dedication and discipline, and it is your competence in the arts of war that he will emulate in times of crisis and grave peril to the stability of the nation.

We must therefore continue to determine how our military can be strengthened, for it is the only way our country can survive in a changing world.

Whatever lies in the future, I ask the men and women of the Philippine Army to stand fast, to carry on the tradition of duty and loyalty, a tradition which has made countless heroes of the soldiers of the Philippine Army, a heroism which must again be summoned from you when and if the need arises. And for that time, we must remain alert and ready to give our best to our country.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].