Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 74th anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine independence

[Delivered at the Rizal Park, June 12, 1972]

A Constant Creed

FOR A PEOPLE, the best of times is that which recalls a shining sense of glory.

This is the one such moment, the celebration of Philippine Independence Day.

I know that not all Filipinos share this feeling. There are those who have publicly called this milestone in our history a sham.

In their dogmatic way, having embraced a dogmatic ideology, they have labelled our freedom and our nationhood a sham as well.

You and I know better. We know that the democratic impulse has always run strong in our people, that it is the force which has driven our people through history in search of freedom and dignity.

We know that 74 years ago today, that search had seemed ended. At that time, we became at last a people together, a nation born. And no one can dispute the shining sense of glory which then united and exalted our people, that other day long ago, on the 12th of June.

That day was real. And the independence we won was real, as real as the blood that Filipino soldiers shed to arrive at that instance in our history, as real as the vision of our heroes of a people coming into its own as one race and as one national community, the vision that animated Rizal and Bonifacio and Mabini, and the man who led the battles against the tyrants, the first President of the First Republic, General Emilio Aguinaldo.

But it was a fleeting moment of self-realization. Nearly half a century would pass before we could call ourselves a nation again, a nation reborn.

It is proper, however, that we should celebrate mat first birth of a nation as our true Independence Day. Culminated on that day were the centuries oflonging, subjugation, sacrifice and struggle. It was the day that ended a precipitate clash of arms, the day that proclaimed Filipino freedom and sovereignty by dint of blood and courage. Although in later years we had again to fight another war before our nation could be reborn, it was that first struggle for independence which was purest in content and substance, a struggle which embodied the passionate outcry of a people long held in bondage, a cry for selfhood and dignity as human beings.

We never again lost that sense of purpose although the intervening years were peaceful and benign. The freedom that we had for a brief, bright moment informed our passage through the burgeoning new century, and within the democratic means that we learned to use and value, we carried on the struggle for self-government. In a way they were good years. At the same time, it was a period of self-discovery, unformed, inchoate, prayerful. It was also a time of testing. A time of trial carried on from the first days of the struggle against the Spanish dispensation.

From that time on our people have undergone a constant testing. Under a new master, we were tested anew as to purpose and community of spirit, tested for maturity, tested for capacity to hold together as a people, tested for endurance, tested for consanguinity in a changing world—can we survive in it as a free people? A sovereign nation?

The ultimate test at that time was the second great war. Our country was engulfed like much of the rest of the world, our people taken prisoners by the enemy, like much of the rest of the world, but unlike many other such captive peoples we fought back, thus passing that ultimate test.

With the rebirth of the Republic, the testing of our powers, purpose and profundity as a people took a new turn, a new measure. This time we were adrift in a world changing once again. As old empires broke up and new nations emerged, a profound change began to shape up in the world. We had an inkling of it, but little understanding of its depth and scope. Not until the last decade when the great underground torrent of change burst to the surface did we know that our democracy and nationhood must again undergo a test.

We are still in the throes of this new probing of our strength and our spirit amid a radical transformation of the old safe world we knew, where relationships long held valid and secure are being transformed into new shapes andtensions.

The time has come however to be realistic and hard-headed about our independence and to see everything not in the lambent light of historical idealism but in the white glare of contemporary realism.

The most visible symbols of American presence in the country are the U.S bases. The effect of the treaty on our sovereignty was one of the main topics of the technical panel discussions between representatives of the United States andthe Philippines, the first phase of the negotiations which must now be elevated to the policy level.

Increasingly, however, it is beginning to be felt that the discussion of the bases issue has passed the point in which correcting the inequality of the bases agreement is the main issue. The issue is whether the retension of the United States bases on Philippine territory serves the purposes of alliance which gave birth to the agreement.

The original purposes for which these bases were established may not exist anymore. In the contemporary context, the questions that arise are: do these | bases exist solely for the mutual defense of our two countries or do they perpetuate American participation in Philippine affairs and support American experiments in Asia? These are the questions that me extremists as well as I communist thinkers and believers in freedom are asking.

I have therefore called for a deep and speedy review of the bases and other military agreements as well as the Laurel-Langley Agreement between the United States and the Philippines.

This is the necessary first step to give real meaning to our independence. From this will follow the other steps that will enrich our economic and cultural life.

We believe that our independence will be meaningless unless we have successfully declared ourselves fully liberated from foreign influence and control.

This has been the main thrust of my thinking and policies since the beginning of my Administration. The more impatient among us did not like the subtle shifts in thinking and policies that we have had to make over the years in order to prepare the ground for this new direction. But the caution and the care were necessary in the light of both the domestic and the international situations.

But now we can take the initiatives. The situation both here and abroad permits this bold, forward step.

I am convinced that only a positive response from all of our people can see us through this most rigid of all the tests we have had to undergo. Our time in history in this challenging era is the most crucial, for we have more at stake today than at any time in the past. We have our nationhood itself at stake. We live or die as a free people, depending on how we respond to the mandate of change and to the mortal dangers that necessarily accompany me upheaval that comes with so fundamental a transformation as the world now experiences.

And my first feeling in the face of this tumult is that in order to summon strength we must be a united nation, a people fused together as one great force.

This unity is all the more essential in the face of the gathering forces of ideological dissent, an organized dissent directed from without by experienced masters in conspiracy, a powerful wedge whose thrust was precisely toward the fragmentation not only of our government but of our people. Unity therefore is no more than an elementary response to this strategy.

But I see unity as more than just a solid front against ideological dissension. We need to marshall our forces anyhow against the problems that face us in the socio-economic field and the problems of government which have long plagued our leaders and administrators, problems arising from bureaucratic lethargy and indifference, not to mention the unwieldy organization which has become a monster.

Unity can overcome these problems to a certain important extent, and I consider this of the utmost urgency for we must put out of the way as soon as possible these comparatively easier matters before we can tackle and overcome the more sensitive problems of discontent, poverty, underdevelopment, and national security. If we can reorganize the government now to make it a more effective instrument for dealing with day to day routine as well as with high priority programs of development to make it into a sophisticated machinery which can quickly adjust to new and complex requirements, then we shall be’ better equipped for the emergencies, the crises of change and external relations for the perceivable shifts in worldwide alignments even now taking shape, even now presaging the passing of an age.

More and more, in the face of these challenges to our country, we must become one family. It is indeed toward this condition that I hope to lead our people, for more and more we are going to be a family embattled. We can no longer afford the luxury of eccentricity, however interesting it might be, for we are involved with survival. If we must prevail, we must prevail as a family for it is the only way to endure. Even more powerful nations than ours are pulling back from extended positions outward, to consolidate, to shape up for the needed transformation of their own lands and societies. We can do no less perhaps because of the very nature of our present stage of development we need to do more.

For instance, we need to stand alone now. For the time may come when we may no longer depend upon mutual or bilateral defense. In the future, when the chips are down, our country can depend on no one but itself. Thus, before it is too late we must consider a new security posture based realistically on our own resources and capabilities. Events in this century are moving swiftly, often too swiftly for proper analysis and projection, thus entailing quick reflexes.We cannot abide procrastination if we must remain prepared for any exigency. We must be self-reliant in the defense of our interests now, not in some indeterminate future. Those who scoff at our efforts to build a self-reliant citizen army who question our ability to do so, and bleed at the cost of such a program, are not conversant with present realities. It may be said that they are bent on marching forward to the past.

But if we are to attain our goals, we must march forward, not to the past but to the future. And we must do this as one family, a nation united. The gaps between our ranks are perhaps wide, but not too wide that we cannot close ranks. Even the generation gap can be closed, the gap between the old still in search of lost innocence and the young in search of a never-never land. There must be some realistic, acceptable middle ground for the two generations to meet and fuse, and then get on with the task at hand—that of preserving our freedom, of enlarging our field of progress, that of strengthening our options for a good life.

These goals are not beyond us. And that is what we celebrate today—the opportunity given to us by those who fought for our freedom to make of our land and of ourselves whatever we want them to be. To preserve that opportunity should be our constant creed.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].