Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the KBL Rally

The Leveling of Our Society

I GREET all the distinguished guests who attended this meeting, especially the leaders of the various barangays of the Manila district. I was informed that it was not only this district, formerly represented by Mayor Bagatsing when he was still a representative, that was invited but the entire district of Manila. So all the representatives of the City of Manila are here now.

You know, as I was seated earlier, I listened intently and observed the unrestrained joy and noise of the people when they heard the announcement that they would now own the land on which their houses are built.

My heart overflows with joy at the happiness I see on the faces of our citizens. I feel the hearing of God to the prayer of your humble servant during the days of hardship and days of difficulty not only during the world war but during the time of fighting the communists who wanted to seize the power of the Republic of the Philippines. Wasn't there a battle called “The Battle of Mendiola Bridge?” And how many died here? How many were killed here in Mendiola, in Bustillos during the fighting in 1972 when the NPA-organized and motivated demonstrations attempted to enter Malacañang Palace? And entering Malacañang Palace attempted to kill the President and the First Family? And at the same time attempted to burn down the city?

Do you remember that day? What was the difference then from tonight of our meeting? Peace, quiet, and joy is what you witness. Isn't this the answer of God to the offering of the lives of some people? In 1972, we had to risk our lives and any property again, especially the most important thing to a person — honor. We will once again risk honor to regain the honor of most Filipinos who lost their dignity due to the bloody revolution of our comrades.

So comrades, you were happy and applauding when I signed these two decrees granting land. The land has been returned to you. But more important is the truth that the honor of our citizens. The Filipino since the time of our ancestors was a noble warrior who fought against foreigners in our country. And after a few years they lost the right to have their own land. That is why we are risking the honor of the entire country and of our Filipino people again.

Our country today is one of the fifteen members of the Security Council in the United Nations. The Philippines can be proud of its children in the meetings of intelligent and talented representatives of one hundred and fifty countries around the world. We can face anyone and say that the Philippines is getting better. Manila can be proud. If we allow our opponents to regain power through the ballot box, which was given to the KBL in successive elections, darkness, poverty, and hardship will return.

I am here, a small citizen like you who was fortunate enough to be elected President in 1965. I was reelected President in 1969 and in the referendum 1973, 1974, 1975. Every year, there was a referendum. On December 7, 1977, after the Amendments to the Constitution were approved, the question was asked you: “Do you want President Marcos to assume the position of President and Prime Minister in the coming election?” And you answered: “Yes, all the way.” More than 90 percent of the entire voting population voted that the New Society must continue. That we must recover the dignity of the individual Filipino. That we must return the pride of the Filipino nation. And that we must aspire for greatness as a country and as a people.

And now we hear our opponents who have been given the opportunity to shout. They say that Marcos is a dictator. Is there a dictator who faces the majority of the people and explains? The dictator only hides in his palace. Is there a dictator who faces the citizens and leaves the decision to them whether his government will continue? How many referendums did we call? How many plebiscites did we call? How many times did I lift martial law in order that there may be free meetings like this? In order that there may be free debate? In order that there may be free referendum and election? This is not the mark of dictatorship. And our opponents, the leftists and the rightists who want to grab the powers of government, went to the Supreme Court several times. In all those instances, I appeared before the Supreme Court. Is that the work of a dictator? If I were a dictator, those who deceive us, those who criticize, those with evil mouths, those with evil plans would have been eliminated long ago. But we give them leeway. I can only say this because we are facing hardship again. Darkness is looming again in various parts of the world. Not here in the Philippines but in other countries. There are some hitches and some conflicts. America seems to be preparing for war. Let us pray that any hitch and conflict between Russia and America does not lead to a world war. Now we are facing a general crisis, economic crisis. The price of oil has increased. The price of everything has increased. And the language of our opponents: ‘ ‘Marcos raised all the prices.’ “This means they are ignorant and deceitful. Because the price of what we import from other countries is not within our control. Like oil which is raising prices. And what does OPEC mean? Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.

You know, comrades, they raise the price. We buy oil from them that we cannot avoid buying. We need oil for our livelihood. If we stop buying oil, no jeep will run, no truck will run, no electricity generator will run, no factory will run. And we will all lose our livelihood. So we are forced to buy oil. Whatever price OPEC asks for, we must pay. But we continue to explore for oil in our country. Have we found any? Yes, we have discovered. We have oil in Palawan. Now, we are getting forty thousand barrels a day in the Nido complex. Then, we will follow the Cadlao complex. Then, Matinloc complex. All of these have oil. Just a little patience. A little endurance. Perhaps the oil from Palawan will be enough. So when the price of oil goes up, the price of other goods goes up. But what did your government do? We raised the minimum wage. How much did the price go up? Inflation rate is anywhere from 18 to 22 percent. But we raised the salaries of officers and employees in the government and of laborers and employees in the private sector to 24 percent. We increased the income of the people more than the inflation rate. The New Society must help our poor and needy.

I forgot that this is a rally for Bagatsing and Barbers. Do we still need to campaign for them?

You know, when I signed the decree for the land, I observed General Barbers and Mayor Bagatsing. When I went up here on the stage, someone told me that we need to face the issue of land in Tambunting and Sunog-Apog. They said we should give the land to our people. But I know that Bagatsing and Barbers are for our poor and needy. Barbers is the head of the police in Manila. Four thousand policemen are under him. He is knowledgeable and skilled in administration. And his name and honor are spotless. You know, many of us do not know that Barbers is already a lawyer. This is Mon, look at the bionic mayor. You know, this man is also amazing. He really has a helper in heaven. First of all, he was spared from bombing. The Lord really saved him to continue his service to our people. Well, he was a policeman and a jeepney driver so he knows the hardship of our ordinary citizens. You know, I read the platform of the National Union for Liberation. I am used to measuring the spirit and thought of a friend or foe. The platform of the National Union for Liberation is shameful. This is a platform of communists and socialists, not Filipinos. It is a borrowed spirit from other countries. I no longer need to study it. What is written here is drawn from the propaganda of the communists we fought in 1971 and 1972. This propaganda will be the source of headaches for our citizens. These people believe in seizing the property of others. Seize the corporations and give them to the government. This means there is no private property. If the government needs the nationalization of industry, it must be paid for. These corporations must be enlarged by the government and then sold to our ordinary citizens. They will do the opposite. This is not possible. This is what will destroy our economy. This is a major issue that cannot be accepted.

Comrades, your humble servant will continue as President whatever the result of this election. Whether Bagatsing and Barbers win or lose, Marcos will still be President and Prime Minister. Your applause is for yourselves because you trusted and gave me the power. How is the power used? You saw me sign a decree like a law. If Marcos is not President and Prime Minister under the government, he has no power to issue a decree giving you land. That is the meaning of electing me. On December 7, 1977, I was directed by more than 90 percent of the entire vote of 22 million Filipinos, to assume the powers of the President and the Prime Minister and continue to pursue the goals and objectives of the New Society. Under those powers, I have the power to issue this decree. I give you the land today through the Ministry of Human Settlements, through the general Manager of the National Housing Corporation.

We still have a lot to do to cleanse our society and stabilize our government. You see me cleansing our government. I am imprisoning the swindlers and thieves on the highways. Here is the minister of Highways. Why did I transfer Minister Paterno to Highways? Because there is a lot of theft on the highways. And we need a clean, capable, and intelligent man like Minister Paterno. But if Marcos were not President and Prime Minister under martial law, he would have no power to remove those thieves. And the same goes for the Professional Regulation Commission. How many of you took the exams for nursing, engineering, deck officer? How much did you pay the examiners? You also pay sometimes. We caught them extorting money. And under my powers, I immediately ordered the arrest of all members who were caught in the act of extorting money from the examinees. If I were not President with these powers, I could not do that. I have no power. So, colleagues, we still have a lot of work to do. What we have done is not enough to cleanse our society. Let us stabilize our national and local governments to cleanse Manila. We need to vote for Bagatsing and Barbers.

This is the last rally here in Manila. The last rally that is like an advance meeting. So it is good that your representatives who you empowered in the National Assembly are here – Imelda Romualdez Marcos, Tolentino, Camara, Alinea, Soller, Espina. And here is the leader of the National Assembly, Speaker Makalintal. We all thank you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1985). Presidential speeches (Vol. 10). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].