Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the inauguration at the Central Bank Security Printing Plant

[Delivered at the Mint and Gold Refinery Complex, Quezon City, September 7, 1978]

Our Final Act of Self-Reliance

I AM INDEED very happy to be able to participate in the formal inauguration of this new edifice, housing as it does the sovereign functions of printing the nation’s notes, minting its coins, refining its good and silver and at a time and occasion when our country is moving forward towards the attainment of its goals and its dreams. This edifice, therefore, becomes a special monument to the sovereignty of the Republic of the Philippines.

I do not know whether the choice of the location of this Central Bank Security Printing Plant, Mint and Gold Refinery Complex means anything, but it is opposite the Heart Center of Asia. It has been said that perhaps it was thought that the number of patients in the Heart Center will be lessened by the number of bills printed and coins minted by the complex.

Whatever it may mean, I am confident that the exercise of the exclusive right to print or coin a currency is a primary mark of that sovereignty that we as a young nation and people are so proud about; and the coin or the note, as much as the scepter or the flag, proclaims such sovereignty.

Since our independence, we have always exercised this sovereign right. Now, with the establishment of the Central Bank Security Printing Plant, Gold Refinery and Mint Complex, we shall ourselves fashion the likeness of our sovereignty in our notes and in our coins.

Money is more than just a medium of exchange. All sovereign states issue under their own authority their own money. And the colonizers never allowed’ their subjects to coin or print own money without the colonizer’s explicit permission and supervision.

During our long colonial history, money, as much as the cedula, proclaimed our subjection to the sovereignty of other states.

Under Spain, the coins of Spain and Mexico dominated Philippine commerce. This persisted until 1861, when the first official Philippine mint was established under the reign of the Spanish Queen, Isabela II, whose likeness was carried in the first gold coins minted by the Spaniards in the Philippines. Later coins would of course bear the portraits of other Spanish sovereigns, such as King Alfonso XII and the young Alfonso XIII. As for the notes circulated in the Philippines during the Spanish times, the pesos fuertes, which were first circulated in 1851, were issued under Spanish authority by El Banco Español-Filipino, the first commercial bank established in the Spanish colonial Philippines.

It was not until 1898, after the proclamation of the first Philippine Republic, that we adopted our own coinage and our own currency under our own authority. But this first Philippine money, like the first independent Philippine government, did not survive the defeat and the surrender of General Emilio Aguinaldo and the army of the Philippine revolution.

Once more a subject people, we were required to use money issued under alien sovereignty. The American regime established the Manila Mint in 1920 and housed it in the old Intendencia Building in Intramuros where it remained until it was completely destroyed during World War II. The war imposed a new sovereignty on the Philippines. During the Japanese occupation, bills bearing the imprint of the Japanese occupation forces were circulated to replace the American-sanctioned currency.

As we achieved autonomy and approached national independence we also acquired some degree of power over our own currency. During the Commonwealth period, after the passage of the Tydings-Mcduffie law and the adoption of our own Constitution, the Philippine National Assembly could pass laws affecting currency and coinage subject to the approval of the President of the United States of America. Furthermore, as a symbol and pledge of the promised independence, the signature of our own President Manuel Luis Quezon replaced that of the American Governor General Frank Murphy on the 1936 and 1941 series of Treasury Certificates. During our underground war of resistance against the Japanese, many of our provinces and municipalities, and for that matter, the guerrilla leaders, as if to assert our non-recognition of the new alien occupation, issued their own guerrilla notes, many of which were sanctioned by the Philippine government-in-exile and partially redeemed after the war.

Ther return of the American forces in 1944, on the eve of our scheduled independence, brought in new currency in the form of the Victory Series No. 66. The unissued stocks of this series were later over-printed with the words “Central Bank of the Philippines.” These became the first currency notes issued and placed in circulation by the Central Bank under the sovereignty of the independent Republic of the Philippines.

Since then the Central Bank has issued new notes, in 1949, and new coins, in 1958, under the exclusive authority granted it to issue currency in the Philippines. This was followed by the Filipinization of the Philippine currency which was undertaken by the Central Bank starting in 1967 and completed in 1969. Finally, to mark the radical reforms introduced under the New Society, Central Bank note issues are now overprinted with the legend, “Ang Bagong Lipunan” by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 168.

All throughout, from 1946 to the present, the manufacture of our currency has been delegated to reputable but international printing plants and mints. But today, it is our great pride and joy to inaugurate our very own security printing plant and mint. Today, by this final act of self-reliance, we complete our full assertion of sovereignty over our own currency.

Let me close by enjoining those who are charged with the delicate and awesome responsibility of running these institutions to exercise every care to ensure that the functions of these institutions will be performed with exacting skill and unbending rectitude. The printing of notes, the minting of coins and the refining ‘ of gold require the highest standards of integrity and skill. Anything short of these high standards will seriously affect the stability of our national currency and indelibly blemish our national reputation and even imperil the safety and stability of our Republic. Nothing short of these standards will be exacted from these institutions.

I am confident, however, that with the past performance of the Central Bank and its officers and employes, there will be no reason to regret the establishment of this Security Printing Plant Mint and Gold Refinery Complex.

In the name of our sovereign Republic and of our people’s long and heroic struggle to establish and maintain our national sovereignty, I hereby formally declare these premises open.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].