Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Second Annual Conference of the Philippine Export Council

[Delivered on March 29, 1978]

The National Economic Situation

IT IS TIMELY and fitting that this second annual conference of the Philip pine Export Council should be convened on the eve of national elections, rather than after, for this gives us an opportunity to allow the deliberations of this assembly to shed light and understanding on various issues in our national life today.

We have here in this conference a very broad representation of the private sector in our country, whose collective efforts have been eminently successful in generating national consensus in dealing with problems affecting the national economy. Here has been exemplified the effective partnership of government and the private sector in the resolution of major national issues, along the principle of participation and cooperation in the making of policies and the implementation of programs.

In the light of this experience, I am therefore confident that the judicious and prudent assessment of the Council concerning national affairs will contribute much to the burning questions that engage the nation now in this election campaign.

With your kind permission, I would like to direct my remarks today to the national economic situation, with a view to inviting your attention anew to problems that engage us in common, and with a view to clarifying some matters that have been needlessly embroiled in political controversy in the course of the campaign.

In much that has been said during the past four weeks concerning economic issues, one cannot but regret how willfully the issues have been distorted and misrepresented by certain groups under the guise of free debate and free speech.

In this first electoral test that the nation undergoes after five years of crisis government, we have already seen many of the old practices and tactics that in the past had mocked and disgraced electoral processes in our country. We have reason to regret the use of mudslinging and character assassination in this campaign, which has apparently singled out the First Family for special attack. But even more alarming than this to my mind are the efforts being employed now by the opposition to sow confusion and misunderstanding in the public mind, and to deny the public a coherent and objective view of the economic situation in the country.

These efforts would deny us what our collective efforts during the past five years have succeeded in injecting into the national economy; they would deny us our creditable economic performance during the period of pervasive crisis and challenge in our country and in the world, by singling out isolated features of economic life for comment and attack.

In this vein, they have tried to alarm our people about the level of our external debt and the price situation in the country by falsely suggesting that we have manifestly failed to control both, and that these are features that mar the record of economic performance during the last five years.

We have repeatedly stated that the fundamental issue in these elections is performance: the performance of crisis government during the last five years in terms of managing the various sectors of national life for the paramount goal of national development.

We have invited the most searching analysis of our policies and programs, of how well they have succeeded or where they may have failed in promoting the goals of our society, for we believe it vital that the national electorate in these elections must provide a mandate concerning national directions.

In the national economy, this is most essential and urgent, for we are engaged today in major endeavors, the outcome of which can only be fructifying if new determination and resolve is given to the directions and the plans we have set.

This is a matter that resides close to the heart of this assembly, but it is perhaps important that before we delve deeply into the special concerns of this body, we put to rest what the opposition has raised as issues regarding current developments in the national economy.

As a way to meet the issue of performance, the opposition would have our people believe that the level of external debt today has placed in hock future generations among our people. They would have our people believe that the economic achievements reached during the last five years are small compensation for the loans that we have incurred in achieving a measure of national development.

It is indeed unfortunate and ironic that one of the most effective policy decisions of our government, and one in which it has shown probity and judgment, should be subject to the most myopic interpretation.

We cannot isolate the matter of foreign borrowings from what they serve to engender in our economic life. For they form part of the development strategy that we have aggressively pursued.

The national economy has stood resilient amidst the battering of international recession, inflation, rising oil prices, and growing protectionist tendencies in the industrial world. Real growth of our Gross National Product has been sustained at an average annual rate of 6.2 percent over the past five years. The planned growth rate envisioned in the Development Plan for 1978-1982 has been set at 7.7 percent— a historical high but realistic. It is the only acceptable rate that will allow our economy to absorb the annual influx of more than 600,000 into our labor force.

The key factor to the growth in national income and in employment opportunities is investment. You are very well aware that as in business, corporate growth can only be sustained if fresh investments in capital and resources are poured into the enterprise. This likewise holds for our national economy. To attain a growth level of 7.7 percent, we will need funding in the amount of $43 billion in the next five years.

For a developing nation like us, we can only tax our people so much. Available savings that can be mobilized from our millions of households can reach only a certain volume. Even our export receipts, which will have to bear the burden of foreign exchange requirements for our developmental projects, are subject to constraints. To draw the funding, we will have to turn to foreign savings, to direct foreign investments or to borrowings from foreign financial institutions. This is the rationale, the economic logic, the humanistic justification for assuming external debt. The alternative to this is contraction or retrenchment in economic activities, which means stasis and stagnation, or in our case further underdevelopment. This alternative we rejected because it does not deal effectively with needs, and because it postpones and aborts what our country so urgently needs: development.

And so external debt for developing nations, which for us now stands at $6.5 billion, is welcome as long as the most prudent of debt management measures are maintained, as long as the foreign credit obtained is used to finance productive ventures, and as long as the resulting amortization and interest payments are within the country’s capacity to service. Our increased external borrowings have been most significantly poured into productive use, creating job opportunities for 2.13 million in the five-year period from 1972 to 1977 and providing solutions to the most endemic of our problems. Of the fixed term credits going to the private sector, 87 percent has been channeled to manufacturing, public utility and mining with their respective shares averaging at 46 percent, 25 percent and 17 percent, respectively.

The further allegation that the majority of our foreign borrowings have gone only to the most elite in our business community is false and constitutes a gross oversight of the realities of international finance.

The fixed-term credits allocated to the private sector have been farmed out to 642 firms in manufacturing, public utility, mining, services, construction, agriculture, commerce and finance. And to further give a developmental bias to the allocation of foreign-sourced capital resources, 12 percent of fixed-term credits obtained by the public sector have been relent to an innumerable list of agricultural, industrial, and export-oriented industries.

Our debt servicing ability has likewise never been impaired. We have restructured our foreign loans to keep amortization and interest payments within the statutory limit of 20 percent of gross export receipts. In no period in the next five years will our debt service ratio exceed the statutory requirement. In fact it will even level to 17.7 percent at the end of the five-year plan period.

Our debt servicing position and our economic prospects have been subjected to the most rigid of analysis by multilateral financial institutions and creditor countries such as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the consultative group of creditor countries to the Philippines. As a result of trust in the credit-worthiness of our economy, the official development assistance committed by the consultation group members to the Philippines in the last five years has been substantially larger than what was extended in the preceding 20 years.

And moreover these institutions have been one in forecasting accelerated growth of our country in the next few years and beyond.

The same misrepresentation of the situation is true of what the opposition has been saying about prices. They lift the issue out of the context of international crisis during the past five years. They ignore the oil crisis and the inflationary pressures that have troubled all countries, developed and developing alike.

And they neglect to point out that we have one of the most creditable records in controlling inflation and stabilizing prices of key necessities. They neglect to note that incomes have risen much faster during this period of crisis government.

The totality of our efforts in the economic sphere does not and has never merely concerned itself with coping with crisis. For beyond surmounting them, we have set before ourselves ambitious targets, many of which we have achieved.

Given our targets for economic growth and employment you can then understand the importance of exports in financing our development projects. Medium- and long-term availments will only service seven percent of our funding requirements in the next five years. Fifty-nine percent of financing shall have to come from export receipts. I hold the greatest faith that our foreign trade sector can assume this critical role, particularly now when trade prospects are improving.

Our remarkable performance in the past is a testimony to my firm trust in our business community. Over the past five years, exports have grown tremendously at an average annual growth rate of 14 percent, from a level of $1.1 billion in 1972 to $3.2 billion in 1977. In that span, the percentage contribution of export receipts to Gross National Product has increased to 18 percent. Over the next five years, in the span of the Philippine Development Plan from 1978 to 1982, exports will increase at an average annual growth rate of 20 percent, reaching a level of $7.9 billion and contributing 19 percent to GNP.

Preliminary figures released by the National Census and Statistics place last year’s exports at $3.15 billion, a 22 percent increase over 1976 export receipts. Traditional products still accounted for the bulk of 1977 export receipts, posting a total of $2.15 billion in earnings. Centrifugal and refined sugar retained its premier position as the country’s top dollar earner at $511.7 million, followed by coconut oil with $412.1 million.

The most dramatic performance was recorded by non-traditional exports which climbed up to $966.7 million in 1977 for an increase of about 30 percent over the previous year. The annual increase in non-traditional exports has been most dramatic when one considers that in 1972 this category amounted to only $135.5 million. The upward climb was steady, registering $282.20 million in 1973, $745.2 million in 1976, and finally $966.7 million in 1977. Top earners were garments, clothing, and electrical machinery and equipment parts.

Equally remarkable is our success in rice production. Rice was in critical supply in 1972 when a large segment of our people stood in long lines before rice stores. Only recently, we have concluded export contracts involving 29,000 metric tons with Indonesia and 10,000 metric tons with Malaysia, with an aggregate value of more than $ 11 million. With an estimated production of 161 million cavans for crop year 1977-78, we stand prepared to consider additional exports particularly to our ASEAN partners.

The significance of the country’s export performance last year is to be seen not only in the value and percentage increases but also in the changes of its structural and market composititn.

From a share of 9.4 percent in 1970, non-traditional exports accounted for 22.2 percent of total country exports in 1975 and well over 30 percent in 1977. Although Japan and the United States still absorbed over half of total country trade, significant inroads on new markets have been made. The European Economic Community, the Middle East, the ASEAN and socialist countries absorb increasingly higher shares of total Philippine exports. ASEAN market share for instance, was only 2.2 percent in 1975 but in 1977 went up to about five percent. Middle East countries accounted for 11 percent of total exports while the socialist countries had over four percent.

And I regard this record of performance of the export sector as one-more testament of the vitality of the economy today and of the lightness of the directions we have taken.

If last year’s export performance was remarkably good, credit goes to one homogenous group of individuals whose privileged company I have the pleasure to be with today.

Setting up export targets may be a prerogative of government but it is this hardy stock of individuals who make export targets come true. Upon them lies the burden of wheeling and dealing in the negotiation of export contracts and in activating production lines to meet shipping schedules and delivery commitments.

I take this opportunity to lay before you, the foreign trade program of the government in the five-year period of the new development plan. We have called it the National Export Strategy for 1978 to 1982. It is a strategy that has been drawn not in the isolated rooms of policy makers but in working tables where industry associations meet with our national export bodies. And it is a strategy that has been drawn not from conjured figures but from proven records of historical export performance. But they remain as mere mathematical figures unless government and the private sector work in a concerted and coordinated effort toward their eventual attainment.

The National Export Strategy, being the first one ever to be drawn up, is an indicative plan of the general directions Philippine exports should take within the next five years. It contains annual performance targets and basic action plans needed for attaining these targets. I now promulgate this Letter of Instructions adopting the five-year Indicative National Export Strategy.

The critical area of any plan is in its implementation. Integral to the national export strategy is therefore the monitoring system that will take into account the environment in which exporters operate, the activities and programs pursued to implement plans, the logistical support required to make implementation efficient.

I am deeply and personally interested in seeing the strategy made to work. To this end, I hereby direct the PEC Governing Council to submit to me directly its reports, specifying the issues discussed at each Governing Council meeting and the final recommendations proposed.

I expect the Philippine Export Council to increasingly assume its role as the primary agency on exports. Its mandate requires it to be the focal point for all export activities and it must therefore be the central clearing and coordinative body for all export development and promotion activities.

As added earnest of government’s desire to involve the private sector in the planning and implementation process, I hereby announce the expansion of the Governing Council to include five additional members from the private sector, in addition to its Chairman-President, Mr. Domingo Lim. I hereby direct the PEC to submit the appropriate measure needed to implement this decision.

We must now be prepared to move into the international trade on a scale larger than we have always assumed. On this occasion, I sign a decree providing for the development of large-scale and integrated trading companies through a system of accreditation and provision of incentives to be administered by the Philippine Export Council.

This move to encourage bigness in international trading is borne out of the noticeable deficiencies of our trading practices. The large majority of our export industries, many of whom are now pushing our non-traditional manufactures, consist of small- and medium-scale firms which have adequate combined production capacities but lack the base to meet bulk demands and the marketing organizations to clinch large contracts.

What our external trade sector eventually needs are large trading companies or trading houses which will realize economies of scale in international trade by directing volume exports to their markets, sourcing imports at bulk, providing trade credits to small producers, maintaining extensive market research net works, and absorbing substantial capital risks. It is towards these ends that this decree is directed.

Another innovative improvement which government is now preparing to introduce to our trade system is that of export financing. Our export-oriented industries are now moving to clinch contracts of substantial amounts. As our current and potential markets consist of developing nations in the ASEAN and even in Africa, the need for financing by our buyers is becoming a necessity. Let not these opportunities pass. This is one of the reasons why we created the Philippine Export and Foreign Loan Guarantee Corporation, I therefore order the PEC, the Central Bank and the government financial institutions to submit for my consideration, a package of financial assistance designed to encourage further the export of Philippine products and services.

I also direct government financial institutions, particularly the Development Bank of the Philippines to afford high priority for export-oriented projects. In addition to some manufacturers, I understand exports of processed foods such as fruits have great potential. By all means, let us promote these ventures.

About two years ago, when the oil-rich nations of the Middle East started pouring their wealth into massive infrastructure programs, we saw.good opportunities in engineering and construction of projects. We organized the Philippine-Overseas Construction Board to lead, organize and regulate the national effort. I am now ready to permit our government technical personnel to join private Philippine companies for specific assignments as consultants in foreign projects when the needs of the service so permit.

Many developments have happened which make the economic environment more conducive to the expansion of exports. In most instances, they came about because the export community articulated its needs and sat down with the public sector to map out solutions.

We have now simplified export procedures and documentation designed to cut down the process by at least 50 percent.

The rediscount window has been eased to make it more attractive to both the exporters and the commercial banks. As I intimated earlier, there should be a constant effort to monitor the financing support to Filipino exporters so that they can compete effectively with other countries.

The operational guidelines for ASEAN preferential trading arrangements have already been threshed out. This should open the avenues for more substantial trade with our ASEAN neighbors.

Country requests for concessions on tropical product exports are constantly being negotiated. We are also pursuing the expansion of product coverages under the various Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) schemes, pushing particularly the products with comparative advantage. We actively express our trade interests in many other venues, as in bilateral negotiations with our established trade partners and with new ones. Although we are now beleaguered, by textile quotas, we are constantly negotiating to get the best terms for our exports.

Finally, we deem it more and more important to lobby in international forums for greater liberalization of global trade.

As a developing nation earnestly trying to expand its exports, we express particular concern about the increasing protectionist tendencies among so many of our developed country markets. Several of the industries on which protectionist measures now converge are important export industries of the Philip pines, and of many other developing countries who, like us, are trying to generate more export earnings.

GATT has warned that industrial nations will worsen rather than ease their present economic problems by adopting protectionist measures. Trade liberalization, and not protective trade barriers, will promote economic recovery and reduce inflation and unemployment.

We therefore ask governments to restrain protectionism and adopt instead more orderly international open market policies which will result in free trade.

We have a tax incentives system for exports which is easily negated by the countervailing duties imposed on our products by the importing countries. The net result is: we lose the taxes and a foreign government imposes the taxes.

The wise approach should be to re-think our export incentives system so that countervailing duties can be avoided. Fiscal incentives may not work but a more realistic credit system may. The idea is to think of a problem-solution mix that a protectionist importing country cannot nullify.

The resolve and the scale with which we are now prepared to move in the export sector are possible because we have laid the basis for such a strategy in our national economy, and in the effective partnership of the private sector and government.

Here I find more indelible manifestation of the growth of national capabilities that has marked the five years of crisis government.

Here we can perceive what performance means when we say that this must be the fundamental issue of the coming elections.

For performance imply not only results but also prospects. They embody what we have attained, but they also suggest the capacity for greater challenges that our changing and growing society possesses by virtue of its experiences.

A certain continuity is certainly needed, now more than ever, between what we have undertaken in the past, and what must undertake now, for the process of development to continue.

The choice is for our people to determine whether the reforms we have initiated and the programs we have launched must be sustained and nurtured, or set aside in favor of other courses of action.

But this seems only good for speculation today, because in fact, in spite of the loud alarms and charges that have been made by the opposition in this campaign, they have not offered an alternative, they have not even hinted to us that they understand what is truly needed by the national economy at this time.

To the real and substantial achievements that crisis government has produced in five years, they can only repeat the same old cry: Bring down martial law.

All this time that we have labored and struggled to bring our society closer to progress, justice and equality, they have stood by, praying for our efforts to fail.

Now they ask the supreme honor within the gift of this nation: the privilege to serve in public office.

For what deed, I ask, for what sacrifice to people and country, must we reward this men with our mandate?

I say let us reject these false prophets in our midst. I say let us remain true to our covenant and our pledge, made at the start of crisis government, and repeated year after year ever since, that we shall continue to work and to build together the structures of our New Society.

My friends and fellow citizens, the time is opportune for us to seal this bond with one another once again. Let the elections reflect our unity of purpose and ideals.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].