Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Second ASCOPE Conference and Exhibition

[Delivered on October 7, 1981]

It is a singular privilege for the Philippines to host this year the second conference and exhibition of the ASEAN Council on Petroleum, and I want to express to you all the deep appreciation of our people and Government for this honor that you have bestowed upon us.

It says something of the gravity and importance of the energy issue that this conference of ASCOPE will be closely followed by the third meeting of ASEAN Energy Ministers scheduled for tomorrow, and that the very highest leaders within our region whose work relates to the critical sector of energy have journeyed here to Manila to participate in these meetings. Given the circumstances surrounding the issues and concerns of these meetings, it might seem untoward and unseemly to worry about amenities at this time, but let me say at least that we do hope that our preparations and facilities are satisfactory for you to do your work properly.

The agenda of these meetings virtually encompasses the whole and the details of the problems and challenges we face in the energy sector. Many intricate questions are involved in these discussions, and they are the kind which will determine the directions in which we will move, the projects we must implement, and the pace at which we will advance to cope and relieve ourselves from crisis. Providing as a backdrop to these discussions are the many other meetings and discussions that have taken place and have led us here, and I am fully aware of how such preparatory talks at sub-ministerial level have laid the foundations for some of the decisions that must and will be made.

In addressing this Assembly therefore, I shall not pretend to play the sage to this council of energy experts! But I would like if I may to share with you some perspectives on your conference agenda as one leader of one member country of our ASEAN community sees the energy situation today, and the hopes that he nurses about the future.

The ASEAN Council on Petroleum was born at a time of uncertainty and anxiety about the global energy situation. It developed from the felt need for our regional community to address with one voice and one will the problem of relief from the oil crisis. Individually, our nations faced this crisis with varying energy resource endowments and capacities, some under greater stress than others. But collectively, we all recognized the need to face the ordeal together.

Since the founding of ASCOPE in 1975 and the commencement of formal consultations among our Energy Ministers in 1980, the global energy situation has not substantively changed for the better. There is perhaps a little less hysteria today about the availability and price of crude oil, but there is no question that energy remains and will continue to be a dominant and pressing concern of our countries and governments.

We know for instance that energy demand in the region will continue to move upward, at a rate of up to 14 percent annually. It is generally believed that by the year 2,000, ASEAN oil requirement will reach some 7 million barrels a day.

In the meantime, with this long-term prognosis already a cause for worry, there are the immediate problems to confront: the uncertainties of oil supply and prices, the problems of financing immediate energy requirements, and the need to invest now in programs for relief in the future.

Fortunately, while the severity of the energy challenge has not changed, something has substantially changed in our perceptions and approaches to the problem since we organized ASCOPE and begun intensive consultations and discussions.

As we have begun within ASCOPE to develop a scheme for the sharing of petroleum resources and for developing capacities for oil exploration and extraction, we have also decisively moved forward into the critical need to develop alternative sources of energy within the region.

Back in 1977, when ASCOPE was still in its infancy, I said that in the matching of these priorities lies the prospect of ASEAN self-reliance in energy. That still holds true today, but in the light of our efforts since then, that prospect of self-reliance is not so illusory any more. Individually, within our countries, the issue of energy development has moved into the forefront of our planning for the future. Collectively, within ASEAN, we have begun to develop those institutional instruments whereby we can assist one another, undertake cooperative endeavors, and together map out a long term program to tap our region’s energy resources and ensure our community’s relief from the crisis.

It takes some confidence in ourselves and in our sense of community to believe that decisions taken now, and labor ventured into now, can make a difference in our future. At another time, this would have been inconceivable. But such has been the progress we have made in association, and such the growth of ASEAN since Bali in 1976, that we can take almost a sanguine view of the energy pressures today and shape a long-term vision of what we can do to ensure the future.

ASCOPE as our forum and mechanism for regional cooperation on petroleum-related matters is a vivid demonstration of this. Under its aegis, we have begun to unify our perspectives and strategies in such areas of common interest and concern, as manpower resource development, exchange of information and expertise in petroleum exploration, development and utilization; and emergency sharing in periods of critical crude and produce shortages.

The encouraging success of ASCOPE has been in an important way the seed from which the larger regional energy cooperation program has grown. In its wake, there have followed the consultations and discussions that have brought into regional consciousness the other actions that must be taken: cooperation in the development of renewable sources of energy.

Such an idea of a collective approach to the energy problem reflects so much promise for us because the differing endowments and circumstances of our countries in the face of the problem have not served to subdivide the unity of mind of our ASEAN community. Subdivisions within communities usually contain the dangers to consensus, as some begin to develop their own internal responses to problems. We have not had any of this.

Instead, almost from the first, and even before any one country could invoke the brave principles recognized by the ASEAN Council of Petroleum, the oil-producers of our community came to the aid of the other members. Some of us have shared of their scarce resources with others. Some have gone to the extent of making representation before the OPEC for other members of the community.

And collectively, we have jealously guarded and nurtured the principle of a regional solution to the energy problem.

When I say this, I am profoundly aware that our cooperative work in the energy sector has only begun to gather shape and direction. There are innumerable problems to face and decisions to make, many of which weigh heavily upon your meeting in Manila.

But may I say that this is the beginning we need, the foundation we must have to make our brave conceptions of the future work!

The most crucial foundation of all is the regional perspective we are at last developing in the energy sector. ASCOPE and the ASEAN committees have been instrumental in enriching our national perspectives with the idea of regional strength, potentials, and capacity. We are aware that ASEAN is bountifully blessed with considerable energy resources, which if truly tapped can be adequate to meet needs.

We are conscious, too, that there are considerable advantages to be gained in adopting regional approaches to the utilization and management of the region’s resources, which would not be possible if we merely embark separately on national energy development programs. As has been already well pointed out by many within the community, these advantages include among others the achievement of economies of scale in the prosecution of projects so obviously demanding of massive investments, the pooling of efforts in the critical sector of research and development in alternative sources of energy, the sharing and pooling of technical knowhow, and the development of power projects that can transcend the boundaries of nations within the regions.

That significant work is going on in the technical side of energy cooperation is to be seen in the many activities now being undertaken by various technical groups in such areas as coal exploration, development and utilization; science and technology research; power generation and development; energy conservation; and the various ASCOPE projects.

Significant also is the gathering consensus within the community to view third country assistance and international agency help in energy from a regional perspective, which is to say that we are collectively concerned now that every kind of assistance must be meaningful to the needs of the whole and instrumental to region-wide development.

All these efforts are highly commendable and useful. And they reflect the spirit in which we are moving in the field of energy development. But it also must be said that we must ever range these efforts against the grim perspective of the global energy situation, and that everyone of these activities must be fully prosecuted if they are ever to make a difference in the energy position of our region.

In this respect, we cannot help but feel that we are really facing in the energy sector the kind of task so vividly captured in Alice in Wonderland : that even to stay where we are, we already have to run very fast; and that to make progress, we have to run twice as wearisome and taxing a race.

We face here nothing less than a marathon run. Between the level of development that we must attain for our societies simply to remain afloat, and the tremendous energy requirements that such development implies, there is a formidable problem to answer that already taxes our will, our imagination, and our endurance.

Between the finitude of oil reserves, those already developed or potentially to be developed, and the alternative renewable sources of energy that must be explored and developed, there is another formidable gap to close.

Between the continuing rise of petroleum prices on which so much of our economic life today depend, and our capacity to make more efficient use of our energy resources, there is yet another task to hurdle.

And who is not aware of the tremendous financial burden that most developing countries must face in trying to meet their energy requirements today and in developing their energy resources for tomorrow.

We are in short engaged on many fronts, and the periodical which recently described the problem as “an ordeal with end” is not exactly exaggerating. As developing countries, we in ASEAN have been hit hard by the energy crisis, because our development efforts exhibit a very fast growth in energy demand, and we are not as economically resilient as developed countries in coping with skyrocketing energy costs and accelerating at the same time their energy development.

The real difference, I perceive, between our situation today, and the situation we were in before we gathered in this way to deal with problems together, has nothing to do with any easing in the gravity of the energy situation per se. It has to do with what we have learned together, what we have developed in the interval, and what is rising now in our national and regional approaches to the energy problem.

The crucial work is at last taking place.

In the policy sphere, a lot has been achieved in developing consensus on policies and strategies. We have come to recognize the need to diversify our energy base and to develop our energy resources.

Beyond identification of the problems, we are now moving into the practical work that must be borne. The cooperative idea, so easy to embrace as an ideal and yet so hard to work out in practice, is being fleshed out patiently and with determination in the various aspects and fields of energy development.

The technical preparation that oftentimes has hindered the practical side of coping with the energy problem is finally receiving the emphasis that is needed.

Finally, as to the commitment of our Governments to this long-term and demanding program of energy self-reliance for ASEAN, and of close collaboration among ourselves, of this we can no longer be in doubt.

These various strands of our collective response to the energy problem contain many challenges that will fully test us. But in themselves they already bear the prospects of our community for coping with the energy situation in this decade and beyond.

In your deliberations and in the meeting of ASEAN Energy Ministers, various proposals relating to key steps in this endeavor are up for discussion. I shall not comment on their details, beyond singling out the proposal that ASEAN now constitute a separate committee on energy cooperation, and express my Government’s support for it. I believe with most of you that such a step will greatly aid in the accelerated development of a concerted ASEAN energy program.

There are so many aspects of the problem which we have only begun to address, and so many issues that clearly require collective response from our community. We should view our present efforts in energy cooperation as a stepping stone towards larger ventures, and also as a stage leading towards other stages in a region-wide energy program. By this I am suggesting that we should be able to move progressively from the kind of measures we are implementing today toward other kinds of cooperative arrangements.

Much that we can say today about where our attention should be focused and what actions we must take have been in a sense the recurring theme through the years since the birth of ASCOPE. Emphatically, the same message keeps coming to mind: that we must bring our sense of regional unity to bear upon our approach to the energy challenge, and that we must crystallize and expand functional cooperation among ourselves. The merit of remembering these as you embark upon your labors is that they have been proven by the progress we are making and they are the anchor for the long work before us.

We are long past dreaming that the energy crisis will ease of its own accord. Achieving for our region a measure of stability in a sphere of great uncertainty today is not an overnight venture. It is a process and a very long one. It can be hastened, it can be managed, and it can ease our respective situation along the way — if we have the will to cooperate, the insight into our problems and potentials, and the determination to sustain the long labor so clearly demanded.

Your deliberations in Manila, ladies and gentlemen, form part of this critical process, and I should like to hope in closing that you will have a most fruitful and pleasant meeting.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.