Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Fourth Seminar Workshop on Rural Electrification for Provincial Electric Cooperatives Team

[Delivered in Malacañang, May 29, 1971]

To Light Up the Rural Areas

I COME TO congratulate the graduates of which there are, I understand, 64. This is not the first time that I have spoken before a group of graduates such as you; I think this is the fourth time. However, this event, the graduation of this class, is a most important event because we are moving inexorably towards the organization of the machinery that will implement one of the most important programs of government today. There are several areas in which the government, the private sector and the citizenry are joined in common effort. One of these important areas is the cooperative effort in land reform and tenancy reform. Thus we have the Moshav type of farming in Magalang, Pampanga and in Llanera, Nueva Ecija. We are also joined in promoting community development in general, thus we have the self-help projects handled by the Presidential Arm for Community Development and its counterparts in the barrios.

The national housing effort is also a program where both the government and the private sector are teamed in partnership. We intend to spend this year P400 million for housing. From studies we have made, we found that we need to build every year 470,000 dwellings, most of which, of course, will be in the urban areas, which means about 370,000 units in the urban areas and 100,000 in the rural areas. Incidentally, this is not an overall target, it is an annual target, a yearly objective. But all of these are, in my point of view, minor compared to that of lighting up the rural areas.

Let me call to your attention some of the data on electricity. We have a total of 1,389 municipalities throughout the Philippines, but only 706 of this enjoy electrical power, which means that 683 municipalities are, from the modern and all points of view, in darkness. Out of 34 million Filipinos, and this figure is based on the survey conducted sometime ago, before we reached the total of about 37.8 million, only 7.3 million or less than 20 per cent of the population had electrical power available. This means that only 20 per cent: of our people are serviced by electricity. And yet power is a fundamental requisite in the modernizing process.

The teams that have gone into ten days of intensive teaching are composed of representatives of the PACD, the representatives of the Cooperatives Office,the representatives of local governments, the representatives of the civic groups and the representatives of the teachers. A team of five. This team is properly called the Provincial Electric Cooperative Team, the PECT. These are the teams that will go to the barrios and municipalities and provinces, to attain several objectives. One of them, as has been explained by the Chairman of the Board of the NEA, is to gather data on which feasibility studies will be based. And the next, to organize cooperatives and to set the atmosphere for the reception of this more sophisticated organizational approach towards electricity. This team, therefore, will be the modern Prometheus, who shall bring light to the dark, progress where there is stagnation, knowledge where there is ignorance, and abundance where there is scarcity, health where there is disease. You can, therefore, see the importance of these teams.

So, I congratulate those who have participated in the seminar. Those who have organized it, initiated it, those who are in the teaching staff, in the administration, and those who have participated as students, and are now graduating from this seminar. I need not go into the uses of electric power. I need not cite to you the deleterious effect of lack of power in most of the areas of the Philippines. But I merely cite to you the role of government. Government must be the initiating power, but government alone will not suffice.

Let me point out to you the percentages of ownership of privately-owned electrical corporations and those which are government-owned. As of now, the present figures show that of all power plants operating today 68 per cent are privately-owned and 32 per cent are government-owned. In most instances, electricity is considered a luxury commodity. The cost of electric power is much too high even for our middle class.

There you see the problem that we all face. The problem that government and the private sector and the entire nation face. The purpose is not only to establish electric power, the sources of electric power, but distribute it at cost well within the reach of our common people. It is necessary, therefore, for government to set the tone and provide the momentum. We must now, at this early stage, start. In fact, my feeling is that we should have initiated this a long, long time, ago, say, several decades ago, because this is a 20-year program, and this should have been initiated immediately after the war. But be that as it, may, the purpose here is to create an organization and set the atmosphere so that our people will not only welcome cooperatives for electricity, but demand it.

And I think we shall succeed.

At the same tune, the organization of this program must be moved and so oriented that it will acquire such a direction and momentum that no matter who may be President, or no matter who may be running the country, nothing short of a complete upheaval of the country and the nation would be able to block its attainment.

The program is well funded. We have envisioned an expenditure of P600 million over, a period of several years, coming from the general funds of government, the reparations, USAID, from loans abroad, and donations. This programs has been-well studied. It is one of the most thoroughly studied programs of the government. It is headed by dynamic organizers and executives, and now we have the basic structure in the provinces, the foundation as it were. The foundational structure is composed of the PECT, or the Provincial Electric Cooperatives Team.

That is why I have taken time out to come and meet with you, and to extend my congratulations to you. I know that I have congratulated you in the past for many achievements, but this is something new, this is something noble. Just as we are initiating cooperatives in farming, in tenancy, cooperatives in the consuming areas, cooperatives in the small industries area, we are now proceeding into cooperatives in electricity. This is going to be a key, opening various areas of activity. It is my feeling that if the electrification program fails, many of the programs of the government and of the private sector will fail as well. Even the small industries program, which must depend on the capability of the participants to absorb all the talents and all the money that we are now making available. All these will not be absorbed by the common people nor by the small producers unless we electrify the areas in which they live and in which they trade. I point out to you merely a few of the instances which indicate the importance this particular area of activity.

And so, may friends allow me therefore as President, along with Mrs. Marcos, to congratulate all of you. I would like to thank all those who have helped in this particular endeavor, and in this particular instance I would like to point to one special benefactor, and that is the United States government. We have included in the program the contribution of the USAID, and we have with us the local Executive Director, no other than Mr. Tom Niblock, whom I would like to thank personally.

I remember that when the First Lady went to Washington she was invited by President Nixon to visit one of their cooperatives in one of the farming areas, in Virginia. And she used the personal helicopter of the President, accompanied by no other than the First lady of the United States, to visit Virginia and to seethe cooperatives at work in that area.

I recall this incident to indicate to you the deep interest of the United States government in the success of this particular program. And I reciprocate the generosity of the US government, and I assure them that all the resources of our government and the capability, the strength of our people, shall be utilized to bring about the success of this program.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].