Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 22nd National Convention of the Philippine Jaycees

[Delivered at The Plaza, October 1, 1970]

The Philippines Beyond the Seventies

MR. YATCO, PRESIDENT Liwanag of the Philippine Jaycees, and those two energetic leaders, Tony Pangilinan and Boy Calo, I understand, are all engaged in political activity. I don’t know what the Comelec will say about them, for I haven’t heard of any of them filing their papers of candidacy.

The public enthusiasm, the cheering and the boos, the rousing political meetings and the pervasive propaganda, the urgency of a political campaign are missing in the race for delegate seats. The Comelec, of course, and the Constitutional Convention Law have prevented all this. Thus, we are experiencing an experiment in political campaigns.

The pendulum has swung from one extreme to the other. From an extreme of prolix speeches, of sound and fury in campaigns, of excessive expenditures, we have moved to a rare modulation, even to a veritable paucity in the discussion of issues and in light shed on the men running for a convention seat.

Anyway, I am indeed very happy to be here with you. Your President will bear witness to the fact that I was so eager to be here that at 9 o’clock I was all prepared to come here, only to be informed by my advance party that there was not a single Jaycee here at the Rizal theater. Worried that perhaps some mishap had befallen the entire Jaycee organization, I had my men make inquiries, and I was informed that you were engaged in a demonstration. But it was the kind of demonstration that we welcome, the kind of demonstration which we all hope everybody will engage in, which would show the enthusiasm of the young.

I greet each and every member of this convention. You represent various regions of the country. Indeed, I see here my friends from Sulu and Cotabato, and I am very glad that they were able to come, notwithstanding the reports of an impending tribal war. At least, that is what the papers say. I have just received the report on this matter of Secretary Ponce Enrile, who arrived in Manila barely 30 minutes ago. I sent him to the South to find out what the situation was. I always do. Whenever I read anything serious in the newspapers, I always send my own investigators. It is better to find out directly because sources of information are a little bit unreliable nowadays. I said just a little bit unreliable, mind you.

Well, you and I belong to the younger generation. And I hope you will pardon me if I include myself. And the younger generation, as you know, is obsessed with what is going to become of the world and of our country and of our people. Whenever there are any new plans, we speak of the present decade, the 70’s. This decade is supposed to mold the future. This is the womb of the days to come. But today let me talk to you of the future after the 70’s.

What will be the image of the Philippines and of this part of the world after the seventies?

We can almost hear our critics or detractors voicing the old saying, “Take care of today and tomorrow will take care of itself.” There was probably a time when we could survive and even flourish and indeed progress, with this old attitude. But that was sometime ago. I do not believe that is possible now, in this modern world of cataclysmic, sudden, shocking change.

There is nothing we can do about the present, so some people say except to live with it. Present problems are the result, however, of past action or inaction, which led me to say that the role of a President or a leader of the people is to correct the mistakes of past leadership and past Presidents. You therefore become so occupied with rectifying the errors of the past that you seldom have enough time to plan for the future.

Well, it’s about time we started planning for the future. And as soon as became President in 1965, you remember, I organized Presidential Commissions that have since been working quietly. Presidential study groups from all sectors were put to work to tell us, tell me, tell the decision makers tell the planning groups, what we want the Philippines to be twenty year from now, thirty years from now. I even asked the military planners, “Fifty years from now, what will the Philippines be doing in the matter of security. What will we do with the military bases, or with the SEATO, the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization? What will be our policy with respect to Red China? What do we expect Red China to become? Will time be at moderating influence or will this conflict between Russia and Red China continue? Will it explode?” These are the questions that the leader asks the experts, the men who probe into the future and therefore can give some kind of a guide to the decision maker. When we say that we are solving present problems, we are actually merely managing them, according to some observers, or controlling them by temporary “crash” measures.

But the future is yet to come. We can anticipate its main outlines and provide in the present the solutions to problems that will arise.

That is, for good or ill, the way of the modern world. There are many who say, why don’t we leave that to the younger generation? Anyway, that’s going to be their world. But the younger generation will certainly damn us if we do not now lay the basis for the decisions that they have to make, ten years, twenty years from now. And when I say “they,” I perhaps mean you. I understand there are 53 candidates from the Jaycee membership for delegates to the Constitutional Convention. Oh, that may not be enough to control the Constitutional Convention, but it certainly will exert an influence on the Constitutional Convention, if all of you get elected.

As businessmen and modern managers, you know that this is also the way of modern enterprise. You want to know what your business will be like, or how it will be operating two years, three years, five years and better yet ten to twenty years from now. This is but simple foresight for to be unconcerned about the future is to surrender to circumstance which is not the way and the character of man. The human specie is supposed to be differentiated from all other vertebrates by his capacity to change his environment, present and future. And by environment I don’t refer merely to his physical surroundings but to the ideas that create those physical surroundings.

Projections are common, common to both business and to the public sector. You also know that we live in a world of rapid change, as I have said, shocking, cataclysmic, sudden change. And what is a decade in the history or the life of a nation? It’s just a dot in the continuing history of a country. It was not so when the world was younger, I suppose, when economies were parochial, and a change in one part of the world took a pig, long time to reach the other end. But in our modern times, a decision in Moscow or in Washington or in Peking or in Cairo or Tel Aviv, will reverberate throughout the world in a matter of minutes if not seconds, and Crisis may come and go in a matter of hours or days.

As a developing country, there are tremendous demands upon us. You will know this. Even the developed countries which have all the resources and skills to meet the problems of the future have to plan ahead.

You see the big industrial countries planning now in terms not of 1975 or 1979, but in terms of the year 2,000, and the Philippines will again be left behind if we do not also do the same. And notwithstanding all this long-term planning, all these projections, sometimes things go awry. Plans fail to respond to unexpected situations, and therein we find the human factor at work. You can appreciate, therefore, the urgency with which developing countries, already limited in resources, limited in capability must prepare for the future that is even now daily gaining upon us.

I have often quoted the wise observation in reply to the question what must a man do in Asia in order to progress, and the answer was in Asia, a man merely to stand still must run. To stand still, you must run.

In a previous speech before another group of business and industrial leaders, I said that the prospects for the seventies, in so far as the economy was concerned, had become brighter because of the discipline we imposed on ourselves this year.

I note that the theme under this administration of President Liwanag is self-discipline and this is indeed something that we must all think of seriously, and practice and implement individually and as a nation. We voiced optimism about solving our balance-of-payments problems, and our optimism was well rewarded, yours and mine. In March, for instance, I think the exports amounted only to about $35 million. In May and June, they went up to $125 million. In January of this year the dollar reserves were only about $175 million. Now, they have gone up to $235 million. We have been able to restructure about $300 million worth of short-term loans. We have been able to pay standby credits. I notice the ambassador from Japan is here, Ambassador Urabe. The Japanese government has extended to us a $50 million standby loan. And today, October 1st, the consultative group of about 12 nations called or invited by the World Bank is meeting in Paris on the Philippine 4-year economic social-development program to look particularly into the opening of investment and trade credits, supplier’s credit, and other accommodations that may be extended to the Philippines after having, shall we say, passed the peak of crisis. We are now trying to consolidate our stronger position, gained from all this self-discipline, for the entire strategy of meeting the balance of payments problem rested on self-discipline. And self-discipline is not too pleasant when you come to think of it. Discipline presupposes and connotes restraints self-denial, and self-denial is never popular, whether with the younger people or with the older people, whether with males or females.

Now, notwithstanding the difficulties we encountered, we are moving forward. This does not mean that we have solved all our problems. No, not by any means. But we are over the hump and we are now moving forward to the other plans that we had prepared sometime last year.

I have often been asked: why were these decisions made in 1970, not in 1969 or 1968? The decision makers were notified of this crisis, which was approaching sometime in August, September, October, November. And here is one of the weaknesses of our democracy that must be met, and that is, the political pressures which often require the postponement of urgent decisions.

There was an election in November and, predictably, everybody kept postponing decisions that could affect the political campaign. I, for one, had insisted upon an immediate decision, strong in my confidence that irrespective of whatever decision would be arrived at the political results would not be affected. But I was overruled. I was overruled and the decision was delayed; not until 1970 was there a definite decision made.

Here you see again the workings of what I have always described as managing, merely managing the circumstances, managing and trying to survive. We must now plan ahead.

Within the period of the 4-year Development Plan, which is now being discussed in Paris, we were to have an increase of 6.5 per cent in the Gross National Product. Now, these are familiar figures which you already know but let me repeat them for the television and radio audience who, I understand, are listening all over the country this morning. Anyway, the constant increase in population is anywhere from 3.2 to 3.5, and assuming that we will not be able to control it, you would see the narrow margin between progress and retrogression. We must control our population growth now. This is one of the things that we must plan for, not only for the decade of the 70s but for the next several decades. Speaking of population control, well, I think I am a faithful practitioner of this particular science, or rather, the Presidency has imposed on me this particular discipline.

Though we need to talk of population control now, do you know that the results of the steps that we are taking toward population control will not affect this generation? It will affect the next generation or the generation after that. But we must take steps now. This is what I mean by the long projection.

Of course there are many people who say, why should we bother about these long term programs when there are many urgent things that we must attend to at this time — peace and order, roads, and others of immediate concern. Well, I don’t know about Makati, but that’s what they say in Manila. But this is merely to emphasize the fact that there is a perennial tug-of-war between the immediate, short term, urgent peremptory requirements and the long-term but lasting demands inherent in the long projection, the growth perspective, the plans for generations ahead and not only in the next 40 days. Caught in the middle of this tug-of-war is always the President. Congress for example approves all kinds of laws. They will approve P7 billion worth of appropriations when the income of government is only P3 billion. So you have a deficit of P4 billion and the President is supposed to create the P4 billion. And when he cuts down on expenses in one part of economic activity, either of the private sector or that of government, he gets blamed.

But, I guess, that is why you are President, I keep telling myself. You are President so that you can be blamed for things that nobody else can be blamed for. But that’s true. That is why if the President is capable, whenever there is hesitation, whenever the decision makers and the planners hesitate from an unwillingness to assume responsibility from an unpopular decision, it is the duty of the leader to assume responsibility immediately even if it may make him unpopular. This is the role of the leader.

And I speak of this because the Jaycees is a leadership group. This is a pool of leadership on which the country will draw in the future. Just remember what I have said today — that if a leader tends to be a weathervane, always trying to feel the pulse of the people and go with the wind, he will never be able to love the country or the nation. Not only once, but very often, he will have to stand alone and accept the worst possible accusations against him, knowing fully well that he has chosen to assume the responsibility and the blame for decisions imposed by circumstances.

As I keep repeating, and as I wrote to Bongbong the other day, loneliness is not to be feared. He is all alone there in the Worth Abbey School. He wrote me yesterday that he has learned to clean a bathroom big enough for ten boys in five minutes flat. Of course he was trained in the palace, but as I was saying, and I have been telling him always, loneliness should never be shunned by anyone who wants to be a leader because when you are a leader, loneliness is always the other side of the coin, not only of freedom but of leadership. You can never be free unless you learn to be lonely and alone. You will never be a leader unless you are capable of making decisions and assuming responsibility alone.

I am heartened by the fact that your convention theme this year is self-discipline because this is precisely the very heart of self-discipline. I do not foresee any time in the immediate future when we can safely discard self-discipline without forfeiting the future of the Philippines.

When a country is prosperous, is rich, is big, it can afford to make some mistakes or even many mistakes. But when a country is developing and is small, its resources are limited; it cannot therefore afford even a single mistake, especially in planning and implementation. A single mistake could be a reversal and a retrogression, and may mean the loss of decades of hard work by the government and the people.

And thus the importance of the competence of a leader, and this competence depends for effectiveness upon the men whom he chooses to help him acquire the facts on which he bases decisions.

We are called upon to secure our nation — economically, politically, socially — in a world that changes so rapidly.

The essential question for leadership is this: what will the world be like beyond the seventies? In our present reflections, especially where they relate to the economy, we only take account of certain fixed factors, such as the end of parity in 1974, the termination of the Laurel-Langley agreement, and fits possible replacement, eventual peace in Vietnam with the promised withdrawal of American ground forces, and I say ground forces advisedly, the continual, if gradual, growth of our neighbors in Southeast Asia and in Asia in general, and the development of certain specific relations in the regions.

Now this specific relations may pertain to cultural, industrial or economic and even political relations. It behooves the leader, and you are leaders, to look into the various facets of such relationships. What are the alternatives? What are the options that our government may have? And if you were in the place of the leader, what would you do? We want to see a peaceful cooperating Asia so that it will not be dominated or overwhelmed by what may be the natural law of the jungle, which seems to prevail even in this modern age, which in some societies dictates that the rich shall grow richer and the poor, poorer. We can manage this law only to a certain extent. Beyond this still is the law.

In the late seventies, what will happen to Japan, and the United States, Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore? Japan, which is now an industrial society, may join the United States as a super power. What will be its inclinations? How do we in the Philippines propose to live in this new context? How about Red China? As I said in the beginning, will there be a moderation among its leaders? Will they discard the old philosophy of an Asian hegemony under the domination of Red China? How about the Russian threat? The new bases being put up on the islands of the Indian Ocean? What nation in this part of the world has a maritime tradition and therefore may pose an external threat to other nations? What is the prospect of the clash of ideologies not only in our country but in other countries in Asia? What do we intend to do about this? How about diplomatic relations with Russia? With Red China? With the other socialist countries?

Will there; be diversification of our products and diversification of our markets, and if so what are we doing about it? These are the questions that arise in the mind of a leader because certainly it will be a sad, sad thing if you and the succeeding generations will say that Marcos did not even think of this problem, when it was in his power to mold the beginning of a progressive policy. Well, I must tell you that as of now the developing countries still have the three major requirements for living — food, shelter, and clothing— as their principal problems. As of now, the Philippines is not any different. We must alter and change this obsession and this concern, we; must grow beyond this problem.

We need, therefore, to make projections, as I have said, so that we can relate the demands of the future to our own goals as a nation. We need, as well, to reformulate our goals, because we cannot wed old goals to new conditions.

For this purpose, as I said, I have established presidential commissions or study groups. One group of about 300 scholars have already submitted their studies and their recommendations, and they are “eye openers.” It is my hope that we will be able to get some of you to participate in these study groups in this projection, for I shall continue to call on specialists in the public and in the private sector, to look closely into the problems beyond the seventies. This nation can no longer move in the world with its traditional blinders. Without intellectual discipline and foresight, we will not be able to survive, much less progress.

But we cannot wait until such a staff or commission shall have submitted its report. We know now the problems of our cities, some of them. The second problem, next to pollution control, is pollution. What are we doing about it? Look at the Pasig River. I remember when I was young, I used to be a member of an outboard motorboat racers group, and we used to race down the Pasig River. I turned turtle right in front of Malacañang, or rather, just behind Malacañang. But the water was so clean that it was a pleasant swim to the river bank. Well, one of my cabinet members fell into the Pasig River sometime ago and he almost died, not from the effort of swimming to the shore but from the contaminated water.

Pollution is not true only of the Philippines, it is also true of Europe, of the United States. What was it that somebody said of Lake Erie in the United States? He said that if you fall into the Lake, into lake Erie, you do not get back to shore and you do not get dirty, you disintegrate.

And when we speak of pollution, we go into the problem of conservation. Some people have made fun of my obsession with conservation and indicted me for inviting General Lindbergh here to emphasize the need for conservation. But this is one of the problems not only of this decade, not only of the seventies, but of several decades to come up to the year 2000.

I have cancelled many forest concessions. I have set aside anywhere from 1 million to 2 million hectares of land so that they may not be touched by any commercial or industrial enterprise, and I have been attacked on this by critics who say that I am blind to the requirements of the modern world.

But my feeling is that pollution and conservation are the twin problems that go hand in hand with population control. This is going to be your problem when you become the leaders of government and even now as business leaders. When you make decisions you will be confronted by all these problems. The dangers of pollution are upon us; and they will get worse, they will affect the genetic future of Filipinos.

Now, the ecological balance is in danger and we must do something about it. If we are able to attend to this problem now it should not be through the obsolete vision of past plans but in the light of what shall happen 10 years from now.

Can you imagine, therefore, the difficulty of a leader when he is asked to put more funds into the effort to maintain the ecological balance? From the viewpoint of the great majority of our people this concern is not too urgent because they feel that the available money must go first to patrol cars or telecommunications facilities of the police, or arms for local policemen, or public works because the roads were destroyed in Casiguran, and things like that. You have a difficult decision right in front of you, and while you are making the decision nobody is helping. But that is why you are a leader because you are supposed to stand straight despite harassments from all sides, and while you are trying to maintain your equanimity, you must also have the presence of mind to solve present and future dangers.

The nature of social unrest has imperceptibly changed. The old dissidents were very much concerned about land and land reform. But we have now dissenters who question even the entire system, even as this system, unbeknownst to them is changing — and will even be more drastically changed, perhaps, in the next two years.

We decided sometime ago, when I was still President of the Senate in fact, on the adoption of the land reform code, that we must split the big haciendas, encomiendas, feudal estates. Well and good. We must give five hectares to each family; this is known as the family size plot. Well and good. That is to say, the idea was good about a generation ago, — or as late as 1950, let us say. Came the 1960s, and there were an average of five children among those who acquired land under land reform. And so the five hectares have to be subdivided among the five children, and each one gets one hectare for one family.

Now comes the following generation and there will be five more children, as per average. I have only three so I am below the average, I guess. But we are going to subdivide the one hectare all over again, and every new family will have one fifth of a hectare. So the entire system of and reform is under question now. And the immediate answer, of course, is cooperatives. I have always said that if any principle of socialism or communism is applicable to our people and to our situation and problems, let us adopt it, without adopting the political ideology of dictatorship, of godlessness, and even of an elite group ruling our society without elections, and which rely on violence as the only instrument of change and reform. Let us adopt those that fit our requirements. We are now experimenting with cooperative farming, as you may have noted.

You see, therefore, the changes in almost every new decade. The educational system has changed while our backs were turned to our problems. School boys and girls are no longer naive trusters in the future, they want to make their own future and I don’t blame them. I was interviewed sometime yesterday and I was asked, how do you feel towards these demonstrators? And I said, I feel friendly towards them because not too long ago I led some demonstrators from the University of the Philippines myself. I was also a demonstrator and I know their feelings. I realize the urgency of attending to their requirements because they believe they are right. And maybe they are right. We have to listen to them no matter how radical they are. We must listen to them provided that they do not use violence. They will find in me a collaborator in the effort to make a better Philippines.

Now, what are the consequences of these changes? The consequences of these changes, of these developments, to future leadership are shattering now.

There is the rapid obsolescence of ideas — even moral sentiments. Slowly the world is turning into an open society. I will not talk of Copenhagen, Stockholm, Amsterdam or London, or pornography or the new standards in art. Although we don’t see very much art in it, it is there. And no matter how you try to stop it, it is coming. As I said, there is a rapid obsolescence of ideas — of moral sentiments, of standards. Of course, we will try to maintain our old values. And at the same time, try to sympathize and understand the new developments. How many development economics ideas have come and gone in the last 10 years? Apart from the fact that economic systems are not pure and have cultural undertones, the strategies of a decade ago are not so useful now as they were then. Old visions of national frontiers gave way to new exigencies. Who would have believed, for example, two years ago that West Germany would sign a non-aggression pact with Russia? But they did, they just did and with this single action, the very nature and complexion of European politics completely changed.

What about our own politics, domestic as well as international? It has; been said that the perceptions of many politicians are so many years behind actual realities. I am rather inclined to agree with this. Frankly, we hear the same hoary protestations against taxes, the same platitudes about government expenditures and operations and the same ancient platforms withered by time.

Only now are we witnessing the integration of polities with social policy, and this a new development. The National Social Action Council, to name but one example, is a triad of effort between the ecumenical church, the civic sector, and the government. Who would have imagined that this could be possible during our time? We have begun to realize that the survival of society, its progress, depends on collective effort, on a plurality of leadership, rather than a single center, which tells people what to do.

With the obsolescence of ideas naturally goes the traditional concepts of leadership. The criteria now surmount administrative or legal abilities but are more emphatic on vision, on energy, and the charisma to transmute ideas and programs into reality. Social status, political heritage, will not be the main issues in the late seventies and beyond — but the capacity to make people move forward and towards goals which they themselves have set.

How about the church? Well, you now have church ecumenism. We are not far from political ecumenism. Now, let this not be misconstrued again. Some people might misread this to say that Marcos has prophesied that democracy and communism will get together, and that in the Philippines there will be both communism and democracy. I did not say that. I say that in the future more and more, if man is to survive, there will be political ecumenism. And I refer to the future, the long future, the seventies and beyond.

The challenge before us, therefore, is a challenge, I would say, to intelligence and imagination. It is not our difficulties, whether in resources or anything, that will cripple us—but the way we view our difficulties. Of course, all resources are scarce; they will always be scarce in a developing society. The difference lies in the choice of priorities. And in the ingenuity of the people and leadership. But above all tins is the mental picture that we have of the society that we hope to bring about in our world, in our region, and in our country.

Our reformists do not have a clear picture of the society they want. Because that is the very nature of reform. They do not go beyond the slogans of equal opportunity, equal rights, because, as I said, we have failed in the longer projections. Let us help them, let us help the reformists. Let us help them project the future, and perhaps prepare for them a vision of what they want and what perhaps we want as well. There should be goals and there should be progress. We need to be more specific; we need to make our vision operational.

Discussion, my friends, is only useful when it leads to public education. It is, therefore, imperative that we develop the intelligence of our people, their imagination, heighten their imaginative ingenuity and their self-discipline, so that they can understand fully the implications of the challenge.

The challenge says that we must often do two or more things at the same time; never have we been challenged with this before; always in the past we have been asked to consider one thing at a time, and we found out that was the secret of achievement. But now and in the future, we shall be compelled to do three things at a time. The challenge is simultaneous. First-things-first was effective as a policy in a stable world; in a changing world, the challenge is many-headed and I repeat, simultaneous. We will be fighting on many fronts. We must learn to do so now, not tomorrow, not in the future, but now. If we cannot cope with this situation, if a leadership cannot emerge capable of making us cope with it, then I must say that we shall merely drift as a nation, no better than a man who lives a hand-to-mouth existence in a neighborhood that is affluent.

And that is the difficulty in a democracy. Because in a democracy, everyone must be heard. And while you are fighting on many fronts there will be many others who will call attention to other fronts, and while you are hard-pressed in a crisis, other crises will be created by those who do not wish you well. But this is the very meaning of democracy.

So now, we must work, we must study. We must understand our world. I ask you, the new leaders, to understand your government, your community, to understand yourselves because, my friends, this is, and I repeat, the very start of the projections for the late ’70’s and ’80’s of which I have spoken.

We must begin to understand the world in which we live, the new ideas, the new values, the new concepts, the new initiatives. To misunderstand them is to completely fail. I trust that you, the Jaycees, will lead in understanding this new world.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].