Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the UN General Assembly

[Delivered in New York, September 21, 1966]

Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, Distinguished Delegates to the General Assembly of the United Nations Organization:

Allow me, first of all, Mr. President, to extend my congratulations to the General Assembly for its wisdom in having elected you to preside over the deliberations of the 21st session of this Assembly. That a distinguished son of Asia should be chosen to preside over and assume this position of responsibility at this time seems to be in the fitness of things. For, in the past several months the grave threats to peace and challenges to the authority of the United Nations have come from Asia and Africa. It seems fitting, therefore, that the earnest search for the solutions to these grave problems that we are confronted with be undertaken under the leadership of an Afghan diplomat and leader whose native land, lying athwart the intercepting lines of power and dominion in the very heart of Asia, is specially interested in mitigating conflict and promote the healing of the wounds of Asia as well as of the world.

Distinguished delegates of this Assembly: This is not my first time to speak from this podium. This hall is not unfamiliar to me for on many an occasion I had represented my country here as a delegate. It is my privilege to speak before you now as the leader of 32 million people of the Republic of the Philippines.

I come from that Asian country whose shores have been washed over many centuries by the tidal ebb and flow of empire. Its people, those that inhabit the land, come from forebears who have been able to share with their neighbors a cultural inheritance that was enriched by the Arabic, Hindu and Chinese civilizations. On this oriental base, a nation was born that would ultimately be influenced from the West, first from Spain, and next from the United States. This was the country that in Asia and Africa was the first to mount an anti-colonial revolution in 1896 and 1898, to install and proclaim a republic.

These are the credentials of my country. But I wish also to state that in 1946, the United States of America recognized our political emancipation and since then my country and my people have sought the ancient springs of their national identity and sought to be identified with Asia, seeking to help in the molding of the destiny of Asia.

It is quite apparent that the second half of the 20th century virtually characterized itself as a new century and it was ushered in by a radical decade and properly, perhaps, it may be said that this new century that was to distinguish the climate of the post-war world was properly presided by the spirit of internationalism. And so great and large a symbolic significance was given to the organization of the United Nations in 1945. Its intentions proclaimed the controlling interests of the new politics as the rejection of war for the settlement of international disputes and the promotion of peace on a universal scale.

This Charter thus became a new decalogue of a new faith in a new century and yet, before the actual term of universal peace could even be articulated properly, there was discord among the nations, especially among the big powers, themselves who have been so instrumental in organizing the United Nations. The ideal of unity itself was seriously challenged and the disagreement within this Assembly led to the organization of blocs, and in the reality of international community, the organization of fields of influence.

And the General Assembly seemed to mirror the reality of these seemingly irreconcilable divisions. Instead of the one world which the Charter had affirmed, there was a progressive fragmentation of the nations along ideological, social and economic lines. There was a so-called Free World as there was a Communist World. There was a world of the big powers and a world of the satellites. There was a Western World and an Eastern World. And, now, there is a developed, and an underdeveloped, world.

These terms are not merely verbal for it is evident that the conceptual divisions of our universe are indicated in corresponding situations and real distinctions. And, one of the most ironic facts of our civilization is that while yearly we convene here in the General Assembly to speak of peace, we have witnessed the proliferation of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. Nations and powers seemed to be bent on increasing their capability for war rather than in utilizing their strength for the attainment of international peace.

And, I can safely say that perhaps we have gone back to the heresy of traditional politics that in order to achieve peace we must prepare for, and even wage war, Against this background, therefore, I come from Asia like many of you, and the question is posed: What then is the destiny of Asia?. The destiny of Asia is, I believe, the destiny we can share with the whole world, but more specifically with the developing nations in Africa and Latin America: to attain the goal envisaged by the Charter of the United Nations of social progress and better standards of living and wider freedom.

The last World War, while preserving the freedom of the European peoples, also led perhaps unintentionally, to the liquidation of colonialism, and one billion eight hundred million people emerged as free nations. Out of these, eighty five per cent or one billion five hundred million are in Asia, mainly on the Chinese mainland, the Indian subcontinent, the Indochinese and Malay peninsulas and the two archipelagoes of Indonesia and the Philippines, as well as the Middle East.

It was an essential condition for the survival and progress of these liberated nations that they have an opportunity to control their independence and establish a political and social institution as they may decide for themselves and of their own free choice and to cooperate with others in the maintenance of peace in this world.

And so, today, we are faced with Vietnam. The case of bringing the war in Vietnam to the conference table is beyond dispute and all of us must give loyal support to any attempt to arrest the deterioration of this conflict into a war of catastrophic proportions.

I am happy to note that the secretary general has taken steps along this direction. It is unfortunate that his efforts have not been properly supported. For several months now, since February, several Asian states, my country among them, have attempted to bring about a dialogue between North and South Vietnam. Perhaps it is now time to consider what I had suggested before and that is, the possibility of the organization of a political counterpart of the UN-controlled ECAFE within the framework of the United Nations. This would be an organization that would frankly recognize and accept the diversity of political beliefs in Asia. This would be a political forum where urgent issues like Vietnam could be referred to.

There are other forums of this nature in other areas of the world but unfortunately up to now there is no such forum in Asia. And the principle that the Asian peoples themselves have the inescapable obligation of providing Asian solutions to Asian problems is at once so just and indisputably right that no country, no nation, not even Hanoi and Peking, probably, can help but be under strong moral obligation to relax their hostile attitude. At least, this is our fervent prayer.

Not so long ago, the Soviet Union achieved an effective diplomatic maneuver by negotiating the Peace of Tashkent. The effort, while it served no special interest for the Soviet Union, contributed vitally to the peace and stability of the Indian sub-continent.

In the spirit of that achievement, may I reiterate the appeal of the nations of Asia with which we have dealt—Malaysia and Thailand among them— and the other countries, that all Asian countries, or countries of Asia for that matter, and all other countries of the world including the Soviet Union, act with equal boldness and imagination by calling a new Tashkent for Southeast Asia to end this brutal war in South Vietnam.

For we have in Vietnam today, a people who, for 25 years have gone through suffering and war, and have more than earned their right to be left alone, to be free and to live in peace with their neighbors. And yet, without their participation and through no wish of their own, they had been chosen as the testing ground for a new dogma of universal and perpetual revolution—war by proxy.

We have watched this from, a distance, knowing the meaning of subversion and intimate with the cruel connotations of guerrilla war and insurgency, and we suffered with Vietnam. The Philippines has sent a 2,000-man civic action group to South Vietnam. They are composed of engineers and a security force. The objective is not war but peace. The task of the unit is to work for reconstruction, not for destruction, and it is in accordance with the traditions of my country. For 15 years now, we have been sending to the Indochina peninsula doctors and nurses to succor the sick and help the needy people of the towns of Vietnam and Laos. We do not wish to add to the sufferings of the people of South Vietnam. On the contrary, we look forward to a negotiated settlement of this war whereby the North and the South, and their allies, would agree to a cessation of hostilities until such time as the Vietnamese people, as a whole, can freely determine their own destiny in accordance with the enshrined principle of self-determination.

To the great powers directly or indirectly involved in that conflict we appeal—to bear in mind constantly the primary responsibility for keeping the peace and to use their strength and resources not to advance their own particular political hegemonies or their special economic interests, but rather, the welfare of mankind.

For it staggers the mind to consider the cost of the Vietnam War, it terms of human, natural and financial resources. If these resources were harnessed to constructive ends they would be large enough to reverse the negative results so far of the United Nations Development Decade.

This, however, suggests the possibility that the proposed Asian peace conference will include not only the establishment of a truce but also consider the formulation of concrete proposals that would not only repair the material damage caused by the war but also organize and finance projects for the improvement of the region, like the Mekong River development project. There is a substantial reservoir of good will to sustain such a cooperative effort, as is shown in the reaction of Asians toward the Asian Development Bank with headquarters in our city of Manila, and by the ready acceptance of the Honolulu Declaration of social revolution of Vietnam, even as violence now continues in that country.

These are not the only developments that light with hope the gloomy picture of Southeast Asia. In the space of a few months, normal relations have been restored between my country and Malaysia, between the Philippines and Singapore. Through Asian diplomacy and responsibility, in which my country happily participated, the Indonesian konfrontasi with Malaysia has been dismantled and today Indonesia’s responsible leaders give assurances of their wish to return to the United Nations. As an Asian leader, and in representation of all those who have missed the wisdom of Indonesia’s counsel in international relations, I hope that Indonesia may soon return to the fold of the United Nations.

Indonesia is the largest and most important country, perhaps, in the Southeast Asia region. Its absence from the councils of the United Nations had left a void in our midst. It has much to contribute to the day-to-day activities of this organization as well as to its future development based on the lofty ideals embodied in the charter of this organization. As an ancient nation proud of its distinctive national identity and its priceless heritage of centuries-old culture, Indonesia is also devoted to the principles of self-reliance and self-help, and is determined to make its full contribution to the peace, freedom and progress not only of Asia but of the whole world.

We look forward, therefore, to the return of Indonesia to the United Nations family, as a neighbor, as a brother nation, and as an ally in the age-old, world-wide struggle in behalf of the freedom and dignity of man.

Despite the grave problems that beset our region, we feel that we must soon approach a watershed which will be when there will be moderation on the part of everyone, especially among those who seek to encourage subversion, and when everyone, especially in Asia, will be willing to live in tolerance and in peace with his neighbor.

The United Nations was conceived as a force for international peace and security. For twenty years, it has endeavored to mediate between the East and the West, between rival blocs, and in recent years, this rivalry has largely abated in Europe. But now it has exploded in Asia and Communist China is one of the protagonists. Regretably, the question is not even on the agenda of the United Nations and I feel that it has thus evaded its primordial responsibility under the Charter.

In the second instance, the United Nations is a force for greater equality in the world. It has vital responsibilities for the speedy grant of independence to colonial and dependent territories. It seeks to stop the violation of human rights wherever they may occur, including all forms of racial discriminations, especially its most virulent manifestation, apartheid, and to narrow the widening gap between the rich and poor nations of the world. For one of the most serious problems the United Nations, and for that matter, all countries, will soon face, is the long range problem of the bipolarization of the world all over again into rich and poor nations, along the lines of colonialism, for the rich nations are the old colonizers and the poor nations are the old colonies.

Whatever may be said of the achievements of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and promotion of human rights, as our distinguished Secretary General well said more than once forcefully, the Development Decade now in its sixth year is moving backward instead of forward. And the tragedy of it is that we continue to debate. Debate may help mitigate conflict thus enabling the United Nations to serve as a force for peace, but it cannot surmount the Great Divide between the rich and the poor nations. Only through effective action can the United Nations be able to become a significant force for the greater equality that we seek in this world.

The United Nations is not a world government, and the General Assembly is not a world parliament. But when we contemplate the problems of the war in Vietnam, Southern Rhodesia, Southwest Africa, the stubborn issues of disarmament, and even the continuing financial crises that beset the United Nations, all of these becloud its future. One could almost wish that the United Nations were indeed a world government and that the General Assembly were a world parliament.

But the reality is that the rules for amending the Charter insure that under present conditions, the United Nations will never be a world government. What then is the alternative?

For the present the choice seems to be to candidly accept the fact that the United Nations is a tool for diplomatic negotiation fashioned by 118 nation-states, each jealous of its national sovereignty. To promote the derogation of national sovereignty in favor of the collective authority of the United Nations, this would appear to be the limit for efforts to strengthen the United Nations at the present time. It would imply the readiness to discuss the question of Vietnam regardless of the misgivings and reservations of certain nations. It would mean the sincere support of measures to impose obedience on members of the United Nations. It would involve patient negotiations, the tedious, the tiring step by step attempt to try to achieve in one magic stroke the grand design of complete and universal disarmament not by, simple, practical plans to attain this ultimate objective. It would mean readiness to forego winning mere debating points that we try to do here, in favor of making one gesture, one heartening gesture of faith in the organization, and solidarity among ourselves by helping to bail out perhaps the United Nations from the crippling and humiliating insolvency which faces it.

And all of us have a role to play and a contribution to make in this undertaking. For the United Nations itself, may I say, there is a clear and admitted need to protect this organization, improve the techniques employed in its manifold operations, and to bring to its work, particularly in developing countries, a greater sense of mission and dedication.

And now, perhaps, it is time to speak of the review and revision of the Charter of the United Nations, already years overdue and which perhaps can no longer be deferred. A whole new world has emerged since 1945. And the Charter should faithfully reflect the realities and the vital merits of this new world. Only thus can the United Nations become an instrument fully responsive to the aims and aspirations of the member nations.

And, to the developing countries, including my own, I would, speaking from the heart, address the following-appeal: Let us redouble our efforts at self-help with the aim of reducing to the absolute minimum the burden which our need for economic aid imposes on the United Nations, and on the developed countries. Let us exercise our right to do our utmost for the well-being of our own people. But after having done that which is humanly possible for our own people, for the economic and social development of our country, if there should remain a vital margin between success and failure, between poverty and prosperity which is not within our capacity, no matter how heroic our efforts may be, then let that margin, but that margin alone, be the measure of the demand which we would then make in good conscience upon the international society.

Let us, through the practice of social justice, and deliberate fostering of civil liberties, mitigate as much as possible the social tensions among our own people and by that much reduce the sum total of the tension that beset our world.

Let us compose our own differences and resolve our own quarrels peacefully and justly, thereby eliminating the areas of conflict in our neighborhoods. Let us remove from the agenda of this General Assembly as many of the disputes as we ourselves can settle.

Let us act with sincerity and firm purpose to avoid or put an end to small wars which have a way of growing into major international crises. There is intrinsic merit in the task of putting our own house in order. It is also an act of wisdom for if we small nations cannot settle our own quarrels, the big powers will come in and settle it for us.

Let us not underestimate the inherent value of the cumulative effect of small contributions to peace, and a recent example comes to mind. I have already referred to the dismantling of the konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia. Rising above both pride and protocol, the Indonesian Government put an end to its armed konfrontasi with Malaysia, by means of a peace agreement under which there were, as the Indonesian foreign minister observed, and I quote “no winners except the Malay people,” to which both Malaysia and Indonesia belong, and, happily to which the Philippines also belongs.

As a result, the political climate in our immediate vicinity was transformed almost overnight from one of tension and conflict to one of peace and enhanced prospect for fruitful cooperation. This change for the better has not brought any headlines, nor any front page news, as has the war in Vietnam, but it has brought forth something significant—that there is a nucleus of peace and stability in a sea, an area, of crises and conflicts.

By itself, such a nucleus of reconciliation might not have much of an impact, but if it could have counterparts in other areas of the globe where local conflicts are still amenable to neighborly solution, the total effect might be of considerable contribution to the peace of the whole world.

And, finally, conscious of our righteousness, the righteousness of our cause, but cognizant also of the need for a new brotherhood of man, let us leave the past behind and meet other countries halfway whenever they should come forward in a sincere desire for joint endeavor in building a more stable, more secure and more prosperous world.

And now, in all sincerity and with due respect to the requirements of propriety, permit me to address an earnest appeal and plea to the developed nations, especially the big powers.

We ask the big powers, first of all, to make yet one final and all-out effort to break the political stalemate in order that they might be able to discharge their primary obligation under the Charter to insure world peace and establish a workable system of collective security.

Secondly, to devise an effective system of international control leading to the eventual elimination of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.

Thirdly, to complete their program of disarmament which would enable them to fulfill their promise to use part of the savings accruing from the termination of the armament race for the acceleration of economic and social progress throughout the world.

Fourthly, to use the United Nations as a major instrument in a concerted effort to arrest economic bipolarization of the world into the rich and the poor nations.

Fifthly, to complete the liquidation of colonialism and remove the last vestiges in a world that has no longer any place or justification for it, and

Finally, to remove the developing regions, once and for all, from the arena of the cold war where there is no place for small nations, and give them the time to establish stable conditions, and grant them the assistance that small nations need for peaceful growth.

All these we must do even as we endeavor to sharpen the United Nations into a tool for diplomatic negotiations for I cannot believe that we are a race of beings doomed by the death-wish and irresistibly drawn to self-destruction and to disaster. Rather, let us demonstrate that we are intelligent human beings, because I think we have skill and will enough to use the United Nations to insure not only man’s survival but also his growth and development.

And, in the earnest effort to achieve these goals, we have enjoyed in the United Nations for the past five years, the wise and dedicated guidance of Secretary General U Thant. For reasons that do him honor as a man of conscience and a man of peace, he has declined to offer himself for a second term. While respecting the reasons he has given, we would invoke those very reasons in asking him to stay. For the office of Secretary General is a unique priesthood of selfless service and sacrifice. At certain times, it may become an office of indefinite tenure. Such a time is now. Secretary General U Thant has served the cause of peace in many ways. Let us, in one voice, ask him to stay with us a while and by so doing, perhaps perform his greatest service to mankind. And, having asked this of him, let each member in turn candidly examine his conscience and let every government ask itself what it has failed to do in the past for the United Nations, and what it can do today and tomorrow, so that a man of principle like Secretary General U Thant, in conscience, may agree to continue serving our organization.

The challenge is not to any one great power alone, not to the United States only, not only to the Soviet Union. This is a challenge to the entire community of states, for the problems of world security and development transcend regional boundaries. Their effects and implications, for good or ill, are global in their dimensions and they hammer home in crisis after crisis the one central fact of our existence: that our world is one, in technology, in economics, in vulnerability to the atomic weapons of war, in long-term welfare, in the ultimate destiny of the human species.

The time lag between awareness and action on the implications of the irreversible oneness of our world cannot be extended indefinitely without mortal danger to mankind. Before it is too late, a worldwide framework of peace, orderly cooperation and co-existence must be built enabling East and West, North and South, to work together, and together enrich and prolong man’s life span on earth.

Only in the larger context can lasting solutions be found to the problems of the world.

With profound gratitude, Asia, and the whole world of course, acknowledges the great achievements recorded by the United Nations during the first 20 years of its existence. In any history of our time, pride of place must be accorded to the invaluable services of the United Nations

In an age less convulsed than our own by revolutionary changes, these far-reaching achievements might have proved sufficient unto themselves. But our times and the state of our world demand much more of the United Nations; they require nothing less than the full implementation of the Charter and the realization of the United Nation’s maximum potential for universal peace and human betterment.

And, in the accomplishment of this task, herculean by any standard, the threat of atomic annihilation by mistake or miscalculation imposes an almost impossibly short deadline.

We stand in danger of failure to meet this deadline unless we can summon the energy and the will to match the magnitude and urgency of the challenge with a response both timely and adequate. We cannot defer much longer the decision as to the kind of a world we really want but can only postpone, and only for a relatively short time, the fateful day of reckoning.

Shall we permit in defiance of the clear dictates of wisdom the permanent division of the world into rich and poor nations, with all that such a tragic cleavage portends for the future of mankind?

The crisis is Asia warns us to pause and reconsider our position while there is yet time to change course.

Do we really want a growing world secure in its peaceful pursuits, co-existing in harmony and moving confidently towards a better life for all? Do we truly want the kind of world blueprinted in the Charter not as a distant realm nor as an illusion but as an attainable destiny within the framework of the United Nations?

Let every nation examine its own conscience and answer the question.

This session may be the final one opportunity for redemption, for the time of decision is upon us. We must act in concert. We must act decisively. The imperatives of survival dictate no other course. Let us say and proclaim that man once more is the master of our race and not slave of his own heritage.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1966). Address of President Marcos before the UN General Assembly, New York, September 21, 1966. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62(46) , 8600-8609.