Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 35th annual general meeting of the International Air Transport Association (IATA)

[Delivered on November 27, 1979]

A New IATA

MINE IS A difficult task. I am from Asia, and the Orient where tradition requires that when the lady of the house has spoken, the man keeps quiet.

However, not being too notorious for timidity, I essay to violate some of the rules of peace in the home, and seek to welcome you for and on behalf of the entire Filipino people and the Republic of the Philippines.

This is the second formal meeting and gathering of this body here in our country. You have singled out our country to host your meeting, I am certain you have varied reasons for it. For all of this, however, we are grateful, for this is a distinct honor.

It is with appreciation, therefore, that I come to speak before you. I remember that I addressed a similar assembly in 1967, recalling that earlier assembly, one cannot help noting how different the world was then, and how different now the circumstances in this conference. Some of you perhaps will not fail to note how different Manila and the Philippines have become. I hope that you like the change.

The physical changes that you see now mirror an even more profound transformation, as we seek to radically restructure our society — that old society that was so subjected to anarchic events that was common to many of the small and developing countries, not only in this part of the world but for the rest of the Third World. It was in a determined move to once and for all assume for ourselves the role of deciding our destiny that we sought to restructure that society.

We have in 1972 established what we refer to as our New Society, this has been a period of building and of change in our country, in which at last we have made a determined bid to accelerate the growth and development of our whole society, and the introduction of rationality in the implementation of our plans.

Of all the international industries, perhaps the aviation industry, which bears a most eloquent witness to the changes taking place in our world, can testify to the changes in our country.

There is a parallel between the rise of the developing countries in this decade and the unprecedented changes that have occurred in world aviation during this same decade. It is for instance a marvel to note that in 1979, world air travel exceeded 800 billion revenue-passenger miles, or twice the volume of the previous decade. More impressive still is the fact that in 1959, at the outset of the jet age, the volume of air travel was barely one-tenth of the current year’s achievement. This massive movement of peoples and cargo by air throughout the world was made possible by the combined efforts of the members of your industry.

And we all know that much of this change has meant greater traffic into parts of the world that in earlier periods were virtually unknown.

In the future, it is estimated that the mass movement of people will exceed one and one-half trillion revenue-passenger miles by the end of the coming decade. We can thus appreciate what these prospects mean in terms of new aircraft requirements, estimated at a level between $100 billion and $150 billion by 1989.

All of this progress has been made possible among others, by the dramatic technological advances achieved by the aircraft – and engine-manufacturing industry. In place of the old lumbering piston-propelled machines of the past, with their limited capacities and speed, a large population of modern jet aircraft—varying in size from small jets to the huge jumbos, but all fast, sleek and highly efficient — streak across our skies every day. Where air travel used to be the prerogative of a small elite, it is now accessible to the masses. The daily routine movements of travellers, cargo, and mail made possible by modern air transport are helping to expand tourism and trade all over the world, and to promote the continuing development of countries, regions, and indeed the entire world.

IATA also has come a long way since that day in August 60 years ago when a handful of men of vision representing six European airlines met in the Hague to set up this worldwide association of air carriers, realizing even then that the key to the orderly development of the air-transport industry is mutual cooperation and concerted effort.

The changes that have taken place in the industry since then can only be described as phenomenal. Happily, the association has consistently responded to the needs of the times — accepting more members, restructuring its internal organization, broadening the scope of its activities, liberalizing its tariff-coordinating activities — so that today, at the threshold of a new decade, it fittingly speaks of a “new IATA” and of the opportunity its members have to face — the substantive issues confronting the world aviation community today and in the years ahead.

But even with all the progress that have taken place, I am aware that you are now meeting at a critical juncture in the history of world aviation. Like all other major industries, you are confronting a future clouded by prospects of recession, inflation, a continuing fuel crisis, turbulent financial markets, and political uncertainties. Moreover, your own specific industry must contend with a challenge somewhat unique to you: the fact that the regulatory environment under which you operate is now being pulled in different directions by different philosophies and national policies. In one school of thought are the advocates of de-regulation. Pulling in the opposite direction are those who advocate protectionism. In the midst of all this, I understand that the general membership of IATA stands for the continuation, although in much more liberalized form, of the framework of multilateral cooperation under which your industry has operated for many decades.

The Philippines has time and again manifested its support of multilateralism. On the one hand, it has strongly supported the efforts of its fellow members of ASEAN or the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the members of which are Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines — in seeking the liberalization of certain protectionist aviation policies that now confront our region. On the other hand, through formal manifestations issued by our Ministry of Foreign Affairs as well as by our flag carrier, we have joined more than 80 governments and airlines in urging caution and moderation in current efforts to fully de-regulate the international aviation industry and diminish the role of multilateral cooperation. The active participation of Philippine Airlines in IATA and of the Philippine government’s aeronautical authorities in the International Civil Aviation Organization, are further manifestations of where our country stands.

Multilateralism, after all, is indispensable to political, economic, and social harmony in the modern world. It is a principle enshrined in the United Nations, which we strongly support, as well as in all its subsidiary international organizations, to which we are also firmly committed.

In aviation, as in many areas of life, the most ideal arrangements are not to be found in any extreme: neither in the ruinous anarchy of unbridled competition nor in the stifling regimentation of excessive regulation. They are to be found rather in balance and in harmony. In a judicious combination of the virtues of all systems, which in turn can be arrived at only through multilateral cooperation and consensus.

The Philippines finds no inconsistency whatsoever between us commitment to multilateral cooperation and the free-enterprise system on which our society is committed. We believe in competition as a force that fosters efficiency, high product quality, low costs, and innovation. But while the marketplace is the final court in which definitive judgments are rendered on competitive success or failure, it does not provide the institutions that help improve and enhance the competitive process itself.

For example, in aviation, such basic infrastructure facilities as airports, air-traffic-control facilities, road access to airports, customs and immigration services, as well as the organization and manpower for all these are provided by governments, not by competing private enterprises.

Nor are the benefits of facilitation and interlinking a creation of competition in the marketplace. The worldwide air-transport industry is one of the most complex systems that exist today. The fact that massive volumes of passengers, cargo, and mail can move all over the world on a round-the clock basis with relative ease and convenience is due to the continuing collaborative efforts of your industry to design and improve the institutional machinery and systems involved and to make sure that they work. The fact that, say, one passenger can buy one ticket with one currency from one travel agent that will take him to multiple destinations around the world on many carriers, and still allow him to change his mind along the way, is a convenience that competition could not have provided. It is clearly the product of cooperation among competing airlines, the cooperation that takes place within the framework of the traffic conferences and the trade-association activities of your organization.

I am happy to note, however, that your association has decided to reorganize itself with the view to providing its members the opportunities of meeting the needs of the marketplace competitively without surrendering the prerogative of cooperating whenever and wherever necessary. I also understand that the philosophical and strategic inclinations of your member-airlines are hardly uniform nor homogenous — some preferring less regulation and more competition, and others preferring protection. I believe it is to the credit of your organization that it has now decided to liberalize the terms of its membership in order to accommodate such a broad range of viewpoints.

In this spirit, it becomes especially important that the worldwide aviation environment accommodate the aspirations of developing countries to start and maintain a viable national flag carrier. For these are essential instruments of economic development, tourism and trade, and national security. They are at once export-earning as well as import-substituting industries. They link our economies to our neighbors and to far-off lands; enable us to promote our country as tourist destinations; provide our peoples with the opportunities to come in contact with other countries and other cultures, assist in the development of local technology and highly skilled manpower, induce the development of related industries; and provide the stand-by capacity for internal and external mobility that the country needs for its internal and external security.

Whatever kind of market or regulatory environment that the airline industry and the different governments decide to evolve, the industry cannot in any way abdicate its prerogative to act in concert. For we are all aware that in certain vital areas of aviation, isolated efforts cannot achieve what concerted action can.

I am also convinced that it will take nothing less than the collective efforts of airlines and governments to meet what appears to be the major and most intractable problem now faced by your industry: the fuel crisis. Your industry will have to devise an equitable method of distributing access to fuel supplies. The shortage and high cost of fuel should serve as a sobering antidote to any undue intoxication with unbridled, predatory, and ruinous competition. No individual airline nor government alone, but only the combined efforts of all, can effectively produce the wide-ranging measures needed to achieve savings, economies and efficiencies in fuel consumption. It needs collective action on many fronts — from the technical to the operating to the aeropolitical — including the straightening of airlanes and the improvement of air traffic-control systems.

There are many more issues and problems that doubtless will occupy you in your present meeting and in your future activities. They include, among others, the need to reduce and control the environmental pollution by fuel exhausts of the numerous aircraft in service; the demand for the reduction of noise, especially around airports, or for what has come to be called the “right to silence;” the economical carriage of airmail; the parallel developments of the travel-agency and the cargo-agency industries; and many others.

I also understand that among the highest items in your agenda is a discussion of the future shape and directions of your tariff-coordinating machinery, which under your new structure has been liberalized, made optional rather than compulsory, allows and encourages more flexibility and innovation, and will be open to outside observers. I hope for your success in your deliberations on this important topic.

With the same high hopes for success, I single out for mention here the need for cooperation between airlines and governments in solving one of the bottlenecks that now exist in the air-transport system, and which paradoxically is a bottleneck not in the air but on the ground. I refer to the growing congestion in customs, immigration, and health procedures at all major airports. I am fully aware that the phenomenal growth of passenger and cargo traffic that I referred to earlier has not been matched by the commensurate expansion of airport facilities nor by improvements of their clearance systems and procedures.

Admittedly, the Manila International Airport is no exception. But with the completion this coming year of the new, larger and more efficient terminal building — incidentally, our original terminal was burned during those riots and disturbances that I referred to earlier in my speech — the situation will vastly improve. And even pending the completion of this building, I have issued instructions, which I hereby reiterate, to the Bureau of Air Transportation, the Airport Management, the Bureau of Customs, the Commission on Immigration, and the Ministry of Health to give top priority to speeding up and facilitating passenger- and cargo-clearance procedures at the airport in order to serve, in the best way possible, the convenience of travellers and the interests of shippers and consignees.

Finally, in line with the spirit of multilateral cooperation and the continued growth of aviation, I would like to mention here the one sinister problem that continually casts its dark shadow over your industry: this is the specter of terrorism through hijacking, sabotage, and related criminal acts against airlines and the travelling public which has grown in frequency during this decade. I am aware that security coordination is one of your quiet but more intensive programs. But clearly this is a problem that must fully engage the family of nations, not merely of the airlines acting together with resolve. On this, IATA can count on the rail cooperation of the Filipino people and the Philippine government with the airline industry in minimizing if not totally eliminating the incidence of these criminal acts, and of devising effective ways of coping with them should they occur.

But even when we take full account of the many problems confronting your industry, I do not believe there is any other way of looking at the future except with optimism and hope. You have faced other crises in the past, and you have managed not only to survive but to grow to your present unprecedented scope and size. There is no reason why the same wisdom and skills which your industry has applied to its past crises will not succeed again in overcoming your present and future problems.

It is by virtue of this optimism and hope that Philippine Airlines, our government-owned national flag carrier, is embarking on a bold and aggressive expansion plan, acquiring new aircraft and disposing of its old, fuel-inefficient first-generation jets, and expanding its maintenance facilities, its in-flight catering facilities, its worldwide computerized reservations system, and others. It has likewise been expanding and diversifying its route structure, building air links to more and more cities of the world, and enhancing the importance of Manila as a gateway city in this part of the world.

You will see in this that we have nothing but confidence in the future. We have confidence in the future of civil aviation. As we have confidence in the future of our race and of our country. And this confidence in the long-term prospects of the Philippines is made possible by the political and economic successes of the New Society that we started to establish in 1972.

We are now in the midst of remoulding and re-establishing a democratic society. I am quite happy that as you confront your own problems in your meeting in Manila, you can also observe first-hand the strengths, the confidence, the hopes, and the energies that our people apply to meeting the same crises that confront you, and to building our destiny and our future. I trust that our innate optimism will be contagious.

You have done us great honor in choosing the Philippines as the venue for your 35th Annual General Meeting. You have also done us honor by placing the presidency of IATA during the past year in the hands of a Filipino, Mr. Roman A. Cruz, Jr., the chairman and president of our own flag carrier, Philippine Airlines. As he prepares to relinquish the presidency of IATA at the end of his term this month, we would like to express the hope that he has served you and your organization well, and we would like to convey our good wishes to his successor for the continued success of your organization.

Once again, may I say that the Philippines certainly will continue to support IATA and the efforts at multilateralism of this organization.

May I, therefore, wish you a most constructive and fruitful meeting, and a most pleasant stay in our country. If there is anything that I can do in order to make your stay more pleasant and more fruitful, please let me know.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].