Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 4th International Population Conference

[Delivered at the PICC, October 24, 1978]

Community Action in Population Planning

I MUST SAY that the speeches delivered ahead of me already constitute a keynote address. AH 1 can discuss now is the government policy and its move to involve the political action groups in population or family planning. However, let me perform my task and welcome everybody for and on behalf of the Filipino people and the Republic of the Philippines. For the Philippines today stands in the very vortex of what is often described as our global population problem, and you, I am sure, can well appreciate our eagerness to host a meeting as important and as vital as the one you convene today.

We are most gratified that in addition to the impressive delegations with their outstanding credentials, this conference has received generous attention and concern; and we have the First Lady of Costa Rica in our country today attending this conference. Madame Carazo, you do us great honor in making this visit to Manila, and you exceedingly enrich the discussions of this conference with your presence.

We meet here on an issue which for the better part of this decade has exercised the energies of men and nations, if not the entire world.

The urgency of the problems, the dimensions of the challenge before mankind, and the compelling necessity for workable solutions make the population issue perhaps the most profound in our century.

Yet if gravity hover upon this conference on this issue, it is not because our global efforts to lick this problem have failed.

Yesterday, I came across a wire-service report reprinted in one of our national dailies, concerning a recent study made by two demographers at the University of Chicago. It spoke of “Declining World Fertility.”

I am sure you will agree with me, whether or not you agree with the findings of the report, that it is an unaccustomed title for a demographic report, and it is very likely to reduce the claim of demography, well-founded in our century, to being the second dismal science.

The conclusion of the report was-no less astonishingly cheering. After claiming a reduction in the rate of increase in population in some 148 countries, it concluded hopefully: “Only 10 years ago, doomsday prophesizing called for mass starvation, world chaos and possible world war by the year 2000. If recent trends continue, the world population crisis appears resolvable.”

I cite this report, although T have not read it in its entirety and do not have the expertise that you may have to make a proper valuation of it, because it seems to provide an illustration of a significant change, which has come over us in our approach to the population problem.

I must confess that in previous years, I found population conferences; whether national or international, somewhat grim affairs, where the main focus was on the problem and the main effort was devoted to sounding the alarm, by citing the dismal figures and projecting them to the inevitable doomsday which awaited us at the end of the century.

These alarums, of course, served a useful purpose: they contributed to the mobilization of national and international population policies. But I have found the more recent conferences more bracing because their main focus has been on the solution of the problem, and the main effort devoted consideration and improvement of actual programs of population control. This is a change that has come about since the adoption of national and international population policies some 10 years ago.

Over 10 years ago, when I first became the President of our Republic, I joined 29 other heads of state in endorsing a number of principles, among which were the following:

That the population problem must be recognized as a principal element in long-range national planning if governments are to achieve their economic goals and fulfill the aspirations of their people;

That the opportunity to decide the number and spacing of children is a basic human right;

That the great majority of parents desires to have some knowledge and the means to plan their families; and

That the objective of family planning is the enrichment of human life, not its restriction, by assuring greater opportunity to each person to attain his individual dignity and to reach his full potential.

These principles have come to be known as the declaration of population growth and human dignity and welfare.

In the ensuing years, the signatory heads of state agreed to put these principles into practice, grappling with the population problems and needs of their respective countries in the light of their political, social, cultural, religious and economic conditions.

Seven years afterwards, all of us who signed that declaration of population growth and human dignity and welfare were extremely heartened when representatives of 136 nations met in Bucharest and endorsed a world population plan of action that was based on the very principles we endorsed — the improvement of the quality of life, the interrelationship between population and development, the right of individuals to decide on the number and spacing of their children, and the protection of the family as the basic unit of society.

The year after Bucharest, the World Population Society took a look at the immediate past and the near future bringing together over 100 leaders of action programs to review what had been done over the past year and what had to be done in the future. There is a personal reason for my remembering this conference in which Mrs. Marcos was privileged to be among the keynote speakers.

It has not been easy to bring across to development and population planners the varying interrelationships between population and development. They years since Bucharest have seen many efforts to get the family planning people to see their work as part of national development and to get the development planners and workers to recognize, the population dimension in the development process.

Among the many organizations that have played a major role in linking development and population is the World Population Society, under whose auspices and those of the Population Center Foundation we are meeting here today.

I see the meetings over the next few days as yet another step in the continuing dialogue on how best to fulfill the world population plan of action.

Last year, the International Population Conference was on the “fulfillment of the world plan of action. “This year, we deal with a very important facet of implementation, “community action: expanding urban village and urban community participation in development and population/family planning programs.”

The theme of the present conference is especially well-chosen, because if there is any difference between population programming before Bucharest and after, that difference stems from the larger role the people themselves are expected to play in the population program.

Traditionally, family planning programs were designed from the top. Money was allocated to a population sector, generally a sub-sector of health. The program was implemented by a carefully planned, administered and financed service-delivery system — more often than not, clinic-based — which operated according to centrally established norms. The program was heavily capital-intensive and intended to view individuals as passive recipients of initiatives and services coming from the center.

The success of such a program has depended on the capacity of the government to maintain such a centrally-directed delivery system over a long period of time. Even where the government has this capacity, long periods of direction from the center and to discourage initiative and morale at lower organizational levels. Hence, it is not surprising that many such programs at best succeed only partially.

In contrast, the post-Bucharest thinking is guided by policies such as decentralization, development and use of local resources, mobilization and involvement of the community, and emphasis on the socio-economic aspects of development. Instead of investing exclusively in physicians and health centers, the post-Bucharest thinking would assign higher priority to the development of the community’s capacity to use its own resources. The program builds and develops the community infrastructure and uses it to carry out primary promotion and service delivery. Here, media services are not the structure on which the program is built; they rather function as technical back-up system.

This change in thinking is not easy to make. But the need for it cannot be doubted. Indeed, we must construe it as an essential requisite for the fulfillment of the World Population Plan of Action.

Here in the Philippines, as in so many other developing countries, we have had to face many problems in the planning and implementation of our population programs. We have had our share of debates over strategy and tactics that earlier characterized the efforts to evolve a global plan of action. But it has been our experience that working within the context of realities and conditions in our country, and tapping what we can from the enormous amount of knowledge accumulated over the years in the global study of the population problems, it is possible to change the very conditions of life at village levels in our society no matter how poor. We have found out that the problems are susceptible to sustained and planned effort. Most of all we have been able to wed our population program to engineering of development in our country.

We have implemented a number of schemes aimed at making the population program more development-oriented than contraceptive-oriented. Rather than looking at the individual the way a drug salesman looks at a prospective customer, we have tried to involve the individual in a dialogue about his own needs, problems and aspirations for a better life. We have tried to tailor our response to his needs and his priorities.

We have felt that making the Filipinos realize the need for planning their families, helping them internalize the whys, the hows, and the wherefores of limiting family size will exert a more lasting influence on their right and responsibility to make fertility-related decisions.

We have, in short, come a long way from Bucharest.

The Philippine population program is well on the way towards placing population policy in the context of national development. The co-sponsor of this conference, the Population Center Foundation, has played a major role in promoting a view of population that goes beyond family planning.

And for this, of course, we must congratulate the management of the Population Center Foundation. The First Lady has participated in this; Dr. Lorenzo; the chairman and members of the Board; as well as the Metro Manila Commission.

But the latest manifestation of the post-Bucharest spirit— and perhaps the most ambitious one — is the new program of our new Ministry of Human Settlements which seeks the total development of communities and individuals.

I point to what we in the Philippines have experienced in the effort to meet the population problem, as a way of illustrating in an intimate way the efficacy of various principles ad proposals adopted on a global scale in previous conferences. No doubt in other countries, even more impressive achievements have been recorded, and we shall learn from you and from the delegates in this conference.

It is my belief that the accumulation of experiences and knowledge in this global effort increases every day our total capacity to meet the population challenge.

The virtue of an international conference such as this is the sharing of concern, the interchange of knowledge, and the expression of solidarity that otherwise would not be there if our nations were acting alone in combating the population challenge.

Grave and urgent though the population may be, it is. not finally resistant to the resolute actions of our respective nations and of mankind. There has been creative and significant improvement the world over, and if we keep on the initiative and unflagging objectives, the time will surely come when we can ensure again for every man his dignity and his welfare.

Let me close with the prayer that your discussions will be rich in insight and vision, and that your stay in Manila will be a pleasant one.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].