Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the 10th Anniversary of the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines

[Released on February 21, 1984]

I welcome this opportunity to join you in celebrating the 11th Anniversary of the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines; and I am glad that along with the invitation to lunch has come the privilege of addressing you in assembly.

It is not, alas, the easiest task for a man of government to appear before an audience of foreign correspondents and Western journalists. Given the long and broad background of government-media relations, of criticisms given and taken, a government official always faces a dilemma as to what stance to assume before you: whether friendly or belligerent, proud or terrified, threatening or accommodating. But all of you will probably say that it really doesn’t matter very much to you what tack we take; you just want us to come and be grilled.

In a fairly long lifetime that has now been devoted for decades to politics and government, I know enough of the “adversarial” tradition in government-media relations to fill a memoir. But I must say that such a memoir if written will be crowded not only with plaints and laments about the liberties taken by the press at my expense, but also with recollections of my esteem for the profession as a whole, and for many who have served it with great distinction and pride.

Some of us politicians may rankle about that statement by a journalist that “the only way for a journalist to look at a politician is down.” But some journalists themselves have taken exception to that. As the columnist George Will has said, “that is unpleasantly self-congratulatory.” and he goes on to observe: “the idea that only an ‘adversary relationship’ with government is proper for journalists pleases some journalists because it seems hairy-chested, and because it spares them the tortures of thought.”

Whatever way journalists may describe their calling, it is not my intent here to attempt a critique of journalism. I hope rather to inquire with you into the problems of our relationship and dialogue, and to see whether it will be possible for us to understand each other better.

The Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines is ten years old today, yet the history of foreign media coverage of events and developments in our country dates back much farther, to the time even when our people’s destiny lay in the hands of others. I take the time to point this out, because it is surely not insignificant to note, especially in the light of the foreign correspondents’ experience in other developing countries, that the work of correspondents in our land has had an almost unbroken history of free traffic, free flow and non-interference. There have been a few occasions when for explicit reasons publicly explained our government had to bar a foreign correspondent from working in our country, but I believe you will say with me that we have scrupulously adhered to the principle of allowing the foreign press to operate freely within our country.

Many countries are loathe to subscribe wholly to such a principle, in the belief that such will be injurious to their national interests. In our case we have been consistent in affirming it.

We subscribe to that policy not only because this has long been accepted tradition on our part, but because we believe that the service of the international press forms an important part of our links with our world community. It is one means whereby we can hope to be understood by the rest of the world, and to understand it as well.

It does not always work according to our hopes, of course. Oftentimes it has been our experience to have foreign journalists come and look for what they want to find and not to examine the situation and see us for what we are and it is in those times when I am besieged by the prodoings of those who would prefer to insulate us from the outside world.

At the heart of this issue of government-media relations is the fact that governments and international media organizations do not entertain the same ideas of what the news flow must serve or promote. That is perhaps understandable. But we have suffered, in my view, from a rather narrow and self-righteous conception of the role of news media in our contemporary world, which has crystallized as their power and influence have grown.

The more visible aspect of this has to do with occasional errors and distortions in reportage, which can and have occurred in the course of the daily race with deadlines and other pressures. In the span alone of the last five months, there are any number of so-called “facts” reported in the media to quibble over, of government officials misquoted, of news stories that did not turn out to be true, of violent encounters that did not take place, including the heavy reportage on my health.

For a change, the old credibility charge against government has also been hurled against the media. And the celebrated journalistic frauds — in the New York Times , the Washington Post and the New York Daily News — have had the effect reinforcing the belief that journalists embroider the facts on the way to publication.

But the problem I think is much deeper and more disturbing. It has in essence to do with the “bad news” syndrome of the Western media, its obsession to catalogue catastrophe and ruin in our human world.

It is already a limitation when only “bad news” is seen or heard or read about by the international community of a given country. The picture is at least only incomplete.

But there is an even more disturbing tendency, and one that has become virtually an occupational disease of correspondent journalism. And this is the attempt to get ahead of events, to predict things before they happen. A former journalist Robert Maynard sometime ago wrote with insight about this problem, particularly as it relates to reportage on international affairs. It has been suggested that the Western media, because of the rude surprise of events in Iran and Nicaragua, have become more and more obsessed with trying to anticipate the next theater of upheaval and revolution, with predicting turmoil in the developing countries. It is suggested that media organizations  more and more these days work with set scenarios, and they try to extrapolate a few facts into a full-blown story, that may or may not after all take place.

We in the Philippines have been so long familiar with this type of analytic journalism, that if we had for one moment believed any of these reports we should have long ago gone under. How many times for instance during the last ten years has it been reported that revolution and upheaval was just around the corner in our country? Who can forget Time’s vivid portrayal of us as “The Powder Keg in the Pacific” back in 1979? How many times have the sorrows of Iran been foretold for us by foreign correspondents? And how often have recent travellers to the Philippines been astonished by actual conditions here in the light of the picture they had received of the country through the media abroad?

The trouble with journalistic fortune-telling is the same with all forms of crystal gazing. Events may belie what is predicted. The world of foreign affairs, with all its complexities and dynamics, is probably the least susceptible to easy prediction and analysis. And when taken within the context of journalism’s fervid face and hurry, foreign affairs becomes very complicated indeed.

Some diplomats have complained, and I believe with justice, that the international news media report with facility and confidence what they themselves may not see after years of posting in a foreign country or will only speculate on with the greatest caution and reservation.

“We must have some concept of change,” Henry Kissinger says, “since history is not going to stop.” But that should be the business of those who are charged to direct and influence events, not of those who are supposed to report them.

To a very definite extent these very tendencies of Western media — to report only on bad news, to embroider the facts, and to predict events before they happen — have produced an equally unhappy tendency on the part of governments that contributes nothing to keep people better informed. I mean here the practice of governments to work more and more with less attention to the media, and indeed even to withhold information from the media. The attempt to limit contact, to restrict access, appeals to many governments of the developed countries. As a result the adversary relationship really then becomes two-way. And the service of the public’s need to know deteriorates and stagnates.

One is moved to ask in this light, whether some kind of reform is reasonable and possible? Is it not possible for the Western media to report on developments in the developing countries without being caught in the tirages of partisan politics and in the morass of Western prejudices and concepts? Is it possible for the Western media to undertake an earnest effort to understand the countries they report on, their aspirations, their labors, their struggles, their lives? Is it possible for foreign correspondents and their host countries to work a little better together without surrendering their interests to each other?

These are questions for which answers must be found because increasingly each side seems to be drifting towards policies and attitudes that in the end can only restrict the flow of information.

Late last year, it came as a major shock for the American media to discover public opinion heavily critical against it, while being supportive of the American government. The confidence rating of the press fell to as low as 13.7 percent, according to an opinion survey.

While this development occasioned some soul-searching on the part of the press in America, however, it seems hardly to have touched its attitudes and treatment of foreign countries.

I put this forward as an issue for us to try and resolve together, because I believe that your association in common with us would desire to preserve and promote our working relationship. My remarks would be for naught if they are taken to mean as merely a desire on our part to make the correspondent press follow our lead and sing our tune.

I seek something more vital and important for our country than that.

We are living through a time of tremendous challenge in our country today, and it is important that our present efforts and labors be understood by neighbors and friends all over the world. We have proclaimed a policy to look to ourselves for our own deliverance, to seek once and for all national self-reliance. But we do not mean by this any hostility to anyone certainly not isolation from the world.

We entertain the hope that in the midst of this national endeavor the correspondent press will help to cast light on the real problems we face in our country, on the labors that we undertake, and that it will not fail also to see the things and the achievements of which our people may be justly proud.

The other day I made a remarkable discovery in the course of my reading. When written in Chinese, the word “crisis” is composed of two characters: one represents danger, and the other represents opportunity.

I think of this period as such a time of opportunity for the Philippines, and I hope you will be around to see and report what we will make of this in the near future.

Thank you all very much.

-oOo-

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.