Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the Bulacan Agro-Industrial Fair

[Released on April 23, 1984]

I consider it an honor and a pleasure to visit the province of Bulacan once again, and to join the people of this province for the opening of this impressive Agro-Industrial Fair.

It seems to me highly appropriate that a fair of this kind and magnitude should be organized here in this province, and that many illustrious sons and daughters of Bulacan should be present here today, for in many ways this occasion exemplifies the greatness and creativity of which all Bulakeños can be proud.

It is a truism by now that nothing that happens in this province is ever of small significance to the rest of our country. Indeed there is a feeling and belief that Bulacan, by reason of her history and her geographical position in the archipelago, serves as some sort of social, political and cultural barometer for the entire Philippines.

Historically, we remember Bulacan as one of the major seeding grounds for Philippine nationalism. Among many great Bulakenos of the 19th century, including the revered Plaridel, our hopes for nationhood first flamed and gathered momentum. And it was not surprising that Bulacan was among the first eight provinces to take up arms against Spain in the revolution of 1896.

And neither was it surprising that it was on these grounds in Malolos that the first Constitution of our First Republic was drafted and ratified in 1898, and that the founding of that Republic would also be marked here. History it would seem fated this province to assume a leading role in giving identity to the Filipino nation. But it is not for historical and political reasons alone that Bulacan can claim preeminence in our national life. Economically also, and by reason of her proximity to the national capital of Manila, this province has served as a precursor of Philippine economic development – in the development of agriculture in our country beginning in Spanish times, and in the later development of industry which came with modern times. For much of her history, Bulacan has been part of the so-called rice granary of our land. And for much of the 20th century, it has been here where we have seen the real prospects of industrialization coming to the Philippines.

Finally, it must also be said that Bulacan is a cultural barometer for the nation, because of her leadership in the evolution of what we are proud to claim as our national culture. In our arts and letters, in all that we claim as unique in our folkways and traditions, we can never fail to find the contributions of Bulakeños. And perhaps most important of all, in the propagation of our national language, we find the Bulakeño second to none in giving the national tongue richness and color.

So I say that in coming to Bulacan, I come here in part to pay tribute to the great achievements of this province and her people. And I come here also to acknowledge what you continue to contribute to the development of our country and to the enrichment of our national inheritance.

It is not of small significance to note today for instance, that a major part of my Cabinet is composed of Bulakeños, most of whom I trust are present on this occasion. There is first of all our eminent Minister of Labor Blas F. Ople, a true Bulakeño if there ever was one, who since the beginning of my Presidency has served in various capacities. There is also the Minister of Public Works and Highways, Jesus Hipolito, who has been instrumental in laying the major infrastructures not only of this province, but of our whole country. There is Minister Teodulo Natividad, who at present is Deputy Minister of National Defense, and who is well remembered for his work as a legislator and as a champion of better law enforcement and humane penal reform. And there are many others whom I cannot single our by name because we’ll probably be staying here all day.

the point at any rate is plain. What Bulacan has historically provided our nation and our people in terms of enlightened leadership and service, it continues to do so today. And it does so both in terms of the vital contribution of the province as a whole to the vigor and vitality of our national economy, our national life and our culture.

To turn to the importance of this agro-industrial fair, we can well say that we have here a virtual vindication of our polices for the development of an agro-industrial economy for our country. For Bulacan indeed is a practical demonstration of the feasbility and wisdom of integrating the development of agriculture alongside the development of industry.

On the one hand, this province has never turned its back to the land, in spite of the seeming attractions of simply becoming a satellite center of Metro Manila. To this day, the province, with its wide and flat terrain and the many rivers draining its plains, serves as a leader in the production of rice and other food crops. Neither has it been oblivious to the cultivation and extraction of the products of our water resources. Fishing is today one of the most important industries of Bulacan. And to this day it has the biggest fishpond production in our entire country.

In the field of livestock and poultry raising, Bulacan too has been a major contributor. It is not for nothing that the town of Sta. Maria has been described as “the egg nest of our country”, because of its network of big poultry farm.

But in a decisive way also, Bulacan’s economic development has not stopped at the margins of agriculture. It has moved into the vital sector of integrating agricultural activities with manufacturing and industrial enterprise. In the most basic step of manufacturing – which is the processing of agricultural products into manufactured goods – this province has demonstrated her prowess in small and medium scale industries, in cottage manufacturing, in hundreds of enterprises that have become virtual models for an industrializing society.

And finally let us take note that Bulacan has fully taken advantage of her proximity to Metro Manila in encouraging the establishment with in her borders diverse manufacturing activities of size and complexity. Among the various industries we can find here for instance textile mills, cement plants, steel mills, feed mills, chemical plants, garment factories, tanneries and breweries.

What is truly significant and instructive to my mind of the economic development of Bulacan is the forward integration being made between agriculture and industry – the way in which the products of one sector become the raw materials for the other resulting in greater value added to economic effort. One impressive instance of this is the setting up of the plant producing industrial grade paper from bagasse, a sugarcane by-product. Others are the various food manufacturing enterprises which are wholly based on products produced by our farms and seas.

I think that in a broader way, what we are really exhibiting in this agro-industrial fair is not so much the products being produced by the province of Bulacan, but the fertility and feasibility of an idea – the idea that with enterprise and effort, success will not be denied the Filipino. It shows us what can be done and achieved where government and people cooperate and labor together. It shows us what energetic and earnest programs can develop in the way of strengthening our economic life.

We have spoken so many times in the past that economic development cannot take place without the necessary combination of various elements in the economic process – of economic infrastructure such as roads, power and communications; of agriculture research and technology transfer; of attractive financing packages to reach economic activities at all levels; and of support policies by the government.

It is easy to talk about these things, but it always takes political will to marshall and muster them together, to put in the necessary investments and to mobilize the people for productive effort.

Statistically, our investments in infrastructure in Bulacan alone are heavy indeed, amounting to many billions of pesos at last count and covering many types of public works. But the irrigation facilities we have put up, the roads and bridges we have built, the reforms we have instituted – all have paid us back in products and enterprises that will likely outlast our lifetime.

When therefore we hear the critics among us who criticize the emphasis we place on a balanced growth of an agro-industrial economy, we can well point to Bulacan as evidence of the success of that policy.

When we are asked what our heavy public investments mean in terms of economic development in our land, we can point for one to the record of growth of the Bulacan economy, which during the last ten years alone has grown at impressive levels.

Today we are in the midst of another election season, and we should never forget that there are deeper issues in this election campaign than just the election of men and women to the Batas Pambansa. We are in the last analysis passing upon the merits of opposing programs and policies of government, or more accurately between one party that has an entire program of government and others that can only express opposition to that program without alternatives.

When we ask of the people of Bulacan for their support of the KBL candidates in this election, we do so on behalf of their proven record of service in government, and we do so also on behalf of the larger program for national life which we all support and live for.

And when we promise that their leadership will mean something to Bulacan and all Bulakeños, it is because their leadership is umbilically linked to the very leadership of this nation and the entire country.

I have every confidence and faith that the achievements of Bulacan and her people, outstanding as they are already, are only a beginning. The future is full of the bright promise of this province and her constituents.

This province will remain a leader in our land, because it continues to hold before it the rewards of enterprise and exploration. This is what this fair is all about. And this is what economic development is all about.

Thank you and god bless you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.