Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines To the Rotary Club of Manila

[Released on September 20, 1984]

In my years in public life, I have been the guest so many times of the Rotary Club of Manila that I am now quite familiar with the rewards as well as the pains of being the object of your hospitality.

Of the rewards, I can confidently attest to the fact that you never fail to provide your luncheon speaker a good lunch, that you give him ample time and room to be heard, and that all in all you hand him here one of the most lively forums that he can hope for in this country.

But just as so many things in life do not come for free, so these rewards descend upon your guest at a certain price. And the price is that of your merciless scrutiny and questioning, and heaven help those of us who have neither the wit nor good humor to take it all in stride:

All this is part of a tradition that has been faithfully kept for 65 years now since the founding of the Rotary Club of Manila and it is entirely to be expected of a community of opinion leaders in our country for whom national affairs is of more than passing importance.

There is a story told about Daniel Webster, the famed American orator and statesman, that after one of his speeches, he was approached by one member of the audience who apparently was not at all impressed. The latter said to him: “I had heard that you were a very great man, but I don’t think so. I heard your speech and understood every word you said!”

You may well say that the guy was not a Rotarian.

For myself, I will simply say that today I would be thankful if by the time I am finished, you will have understood all I have to say about the policies of our government today and about some key issues of national life, rather than remember me for being great and inscrutable.

For truly this is a time when we cannot have too much of clarity and understanding in our public affairs.

In recent months, I have come to fear that the national dialogue — between the political parties, between business and government, and between the various sectors of society — is clogged by misimpressions and misunderstandings, by humbug and platitudes, by anxieties and rumors, that cloud our perceptions of national life, and of the real problems that we must face. Almost every question of public policy, every issue of public concern, is swiftly attenuated by all sorts of rumors and speculations.

I should like to address myself here today to a few areas of national affairs in which understanding is especially needed to ensure effective and responsible action. They are first, the matter of our negotiations with the International Monetary Fund and international banks, and the implications that an agreement will have for the economy and the nation; secondly, the matter of confidence — business and public alike — in the very stability and future of the country; and thirdly, the matter of roles of the parties in our system of government and how this relates to the vital process of national recovery and stabilization.

The IMF and Loan Restructuring Negotiations

To take, first, the question of our negotiations with the IMF and international creditors, it is amazing how much is being said or anticipated on the basis of so few facts that are known or understood.

To begin with, there seems to be much confusion in the public mind about what exactly is the program we are negotiating, and whether this involves two separate agreements, one with the International Monetary Fund and another with the international banks.

In fact, we are speaking here of only one program for the country. But this involves two essential elements: an agreement with the IMF for a $630 million standby credit facility; and an agreement with the banks for the rescheduling of a portion of our country’s external debt. These two are interlinked, and one cannot be approved without the other. Moreover, the negotiations with the banks is supposed to take place only after the conclusion of the talks with the IMF.

What has happened so far is that the first stage of the negotiations — that with the IMF — has been concluded successfully. This has had the effect of providing a “good housekeeping seal” for the country, and this in turn has provided the “go signal” for the banks to now negotiate its own agreements with our government. It is for this reason that Central Bank Governor Fernandez and Prime Minister Virata are both now in the United States.

It is when this latter negotiation is concluded successfully that the IMF board will act upon our government’s letter of intent, and hopefully approve our program. Although the talks with the IMF have been concluded, therefore, approval of the program has not yet been given. And we must point out the fact that unless an agreement is reached with the banks, there will be no program, and negotiations will have to be undertaken anew.

However, the brighter side of the picture is that the conclusion of the talks with the IMF teams and the verdict of “good housekeeping” it rendered constitute already a significant augury for approval of the entire program. The news reports are therefore not exactly in error. All the key components of our recovery program are in place the same have been favorably received by the IMF. And these we are confident will in turn enjoy the support of the banks.

In sum, we believe that approval of the program is only a matter of time. And we envision that we may secure this by the latter part of October.

As to the elements of the program for restoring balance in our external economic relations and payments position, the steps we are taking are mainly the following:

1. The reduction of the budget deficit to about 1 to 1.2 per cent of GNP by 1985.

2. The reduction of the financial requirements of government corporations from P18 billion last year to about P12 billion in 1984.

3. The control and reduction of liquidity; and

4. The containment of inflation beginning this year and beyond.

Bringing down inflation is perhaps the most critical of these objectives, for the problem is ruinous to all. Inflation saps incomes and upsets the flow of commerce and economic activity. It is in this light that we have utilized interest rates policy and open market operations of the central bank. We now project a downtrend in inflation during the latter part of the year. And we believe that stabilization measures will allow us to lower interest rates in 1985.

Developments in recent months already show part of the impact of this program. And there is confidence that we will meet the targets we have set for ourselves.

At this point of the year, the hoped-for downtrend of inflation is beginning to take shape.

In our balance of payments position, an actual surplus of $239 million was posted as early as the first quarter of 1984. When adjusted for arrearages in interest and other payments, however, we still would have a deficit of $155 million.

For the first five months of 1984, the value posted a growth of 7.6 per cent, from $1,944 million to $2,144 million. Significantly, nontraditional manufactured exports posted a 20. 5 per cent increase in value.

In contrast, imports declined over the same period by as much as 21 per cent, from $3,036 million to $2,399 million.

Our oil import bill was limited to $703 million, due to a reduction on imports to 25.1 million barrels of oil.

As to the broad implications that approval of our loan restructuring and financial program will have when it does come we can say that this is a crucial step for the country toward recovery.

It will mean firstly the normalization of our dealings with the International Financial Community.

With loan restructuring approved, availment of credit lines will now enable our industries to resume normal operations through the importation of their critical raw material requirements.

There are those who have said that the $630 million IMF credit facility will be merely utilized to pay the interests and arrearages of our loans. This is not the case the amount is designed to build up our reserves to a substantial level by the end of the year and by 1985.

Overall, with the approval of the program. We envision the resumption of a great deal of normal business activity by 1985.

What lends, I think, some real confidence about our ability to implement the economic recovery program is the fact that during the past 11 months. When we were negotiating with the IMF, the national economy proved itself quite resilient and strong, without new money during this period, except for some bilateral aid. We have managed fairly well. Delay in the IMF approval did not cripple us or worsen the crisis we were facing. In fact, there was perceptible improvement from the difficulties we were facing during the last quarter of 1983.

From October 1983 to the present, we have received about $1.5 billion in bilateral assistance from the following sources:

These amounts have been primarily directed towards providing for an adequate supply of fertilizers, pesticides, supply feeds and veterinary pharmaceuticals, which are critical for our food production program.

Where Did Our Foreign Loans Go?

While we are on the subject of rescheduling our external debt, it may be appropriate to also focus briefly on where this money went. Because this seems to underpin many of the misimpressions and confusion about our economy today.

As of March 31 of this year, our external debt amounted to $25,152 billion. Of this total, $16,592 billion is accounted for by the non-monetary sector. That includes all debts incurred by the national government and local governments, and government and private corporations. The remainder of $8.56 billion went to the monetary sector, and this includes funds relent to the private sector.

The amount that went to the non-monetary sector is further broken down to $11,372 billion which went to the public sector. And $5.22 billion to the private sector.

Most of the public sector loans were granted in the form of official development assistance and were used to finance infrastructure projects, irrigation, energy and social development projects.

About $2.8 billion went into power and electrification projects, including the nuclear power plant ($1 billion), geothermal plant ($.5 billion), hydroelectric and rural electrification projects ($.9 billion), as well as their transmission and distribution facilities.

$1.1 billion was allocated for the improvement of the country’s transportation network. This covered roads and highways construction and improvement ($.4 billion); purchase of aircrafts and improvement of airports ($.4 billion); improvement of railways system including the purchase of locomotive and light rail system ($.2 billion). In addition, loans for general infrastructure and other development projects amounted to $1 billion.

Direct private sector borrowings on the other hand were mainly used to finance business activities in manufacturing $1.37 billion; mining, $.76 billion, public utilities, $.75 billion; among others.

Loans for relending to export-oriented projects and small-medium scale industries amounted to $1 billion. For major industrial projects, $1 billion. And finally for the agriculture sector in terms of irrigation facilities, $6 billion.

The evidences of our Public Investments Program are there to see for anyone who wants to examine the matter dispassionately. They are to be seen for one in the modernization and upgrading program we have undertaken for our infrastructure. And facilities which were in the early seventies so inadequate and dilapidated.

They are to be seen in our massive energy development program that has at this point already reduced our dependence on imported oil from 94 per cent in 1971 to only 60 per cent today.

And they are to be seen in our new irrigation systems that have considerably helped to improve our food production effort.

And when we project our visions to the near and longer-term prospects of the economy, our investments in these areas will spell even greater dividends for the future

Economic Directions and Priorities.

In the National Recovery Program we are at present undertaking it bears stressing that these earlier and long-term investments provide a base on which to refocus economic priorities, spur productivity, And achieve greater balance in the economy.

As stabilization measures predictably affect our import-dependent industrial sector. We can spur greater effort in farming, forest development, aquatic resource development, and mineral-based production at one end, and in complementary activities in the cottage, small-scale and labor-intensive industries on the other. These agro-based activities will assume a very vital role in our recovery effort.

All in all, what we expect to produce in our recovery program over the new plan period extending up to 1987 are:

1. An improved balance of payments position

2. A stronger and more efficient financial system

3. More viable government corporations

4. A more efficient, less import-dependent and more competitive industrial structure;

5. A more developed and productive agricultural sector.

These are the overall directions for the national economy that in essence will receive the support of the International Monetary Fund and the International Financial Community when the rescheduling program is approved. And these are the basis of their faith and ours that our economy is viable and capable of growth. And that our external debt can be fully serviced by the country.

The Problem of Confidence

There has been much talk of late about the problem of confidence in our country’s future. And it is appropriate that we face this issue squarely.

John F. Kennedy once said that “confidence is a matter of myth and also a matter of truth.” confidence can arise or depart as much from false illusions and belies. As they can arise or depart from real facts and circumstances.

If we reflect soberly on the crisis we have lived through during the last 11 months. One cannot fail to see how much of this problem of confidence has arisen mainly from panic and speculation, from misapprehensions and fears.

To review the catalogue of media reports of last year and early this year, one can hardly quarrel with the observation that the prevailing prognosis then was that our country was headed for economic collapse and ruin. And that prognosis in turn could have been self-fulfilling but for the real strengths and resiliency of the economy and the nation.

Many believed that without prompt IMF assistance, we were a goner. But here we are 11 months after. With the negotiations still continuing, considerably better off than we were a year ago.

Many freely speculated that the foreign exchange rate will deteriorate to Latin American proportions. To something as high as P50 to the dollar. Yet in fact we have witnessed a perceptible stabilization of the exchange rate in recent months.

Many believed in the continued flight of capital. Which was so high in the early months of the crisis. Yet today we are beginning to witness the gradual return of the money that went abroad.

What I am suggesting is that the grounds for confidence in our economy are there for us to tap and support. The real issue of confidence is actually a question of whether the many sectors and elements of the economy and the nation will live up to their responsibilities. And not desert them. We can well imagine what can possibly happen if business for instance were to neglect its obligations; if labor were blind to all public responsibility; and if government were to abandon its duty to safeguard our economic health. But the converse is also true: that recognizing our respective obligations and roles. And pulling together for the common task. Recovery is within reach and renewed growth is possible.

International financial institutions are saying as much about our country today. So I don’t see why the perspective of some of us should be any less sanguine than theirs.

The Roles of the Opposition and the Majority Party

Behind this issue of confidence, of course, we can see the disturbing intrusion of partisanship into a matter in which we must be united not divided.

The prognosis of economic ruin for the country has become a convenient issue for the opposition to parrot. Because some imagine that that is the road to power. One can see well enough how this thesis might sit well with those who desire the overthrow of the republic; but it is difficult to understand this in the thinking of the political opposition. Whose stake in the survival of the nation cannot possibly be less than that of the party in power.

What this amounts to in my view is a serious misconception of roles and purposes in our political life today, and a failure to appreciate the overriding national purpose that ought to bind us together.

We are facing today the harsh realities of natural calamities and disasters on top of an economic crisis. Instead of procrastinating about helping the country, it is necessary for everybody now to contribute no matter how much, their time, their wealth, and their energies to the national recovery effort.

All this talk about reconciliation today is to my mind moot and academic, because the crucial step toward such has already been taken when we held successful parliamentary elections in the country. When we hold elections, especially for parliament, there is an open presentation of all the principles, ideals, beliefs and policies on which every party and every candidate stands. And the people are supposed to undertake a study of all these platforms presented to them and resolve the questions and issues posed to them at the polls.

The first question that is resolved is which party shall assume the administration of the government. Now there are some people who still insist that we should talk about some form of joint responsibility or coalition in government of the KBL the Unido and other opposition parties. Yet the people have spoken. They have resolved the basic question in a democratic election, and that is that the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan should run the government.

When the victorious party does not obtain a clear majority of the seats in parliament, then that is the time to talk of a coalition and of changing the course the nation is pursuing. But the moment the mandate is clear — to the effect that the party in power is returned and secures a majority — then the policies that were the basis of its administration of government are supposed to be continued and maintained, subject of course to restudy, refinement and redirection according to circumstances and needs.

Within the framework of the parliamentary way, to paraphrase the biblical saying, the opposition can of course propose, but the majority party must dispose. For responsibility must ever remain with the party that has been mandated to lead. And it cannot abdicate that responsibility without violating that mandate.

Now what does that responsibility consist of?

It places first of all within the charge of the majority party the heavy task of maintaining the stability of political institutions and the internal peace and order of the nation.

It reposes on it the task of leading the nation in the achievement of economic and social progress and in the promotion of the well-being and welfare of every member of society.

It places in its hands the task of promoting the relations of the nation with the family of nations, and of ensuring that these relations will be favorable for the nation’s goal of peace and progress.

This charge, I submit, is being filled by our majority party today. It has formed a government to lead us through this present time of challenge in our economic, social and political life. It has mustered the capabilities and resources of our armed forces and civilian government to meet the tide of terrorism and insurgency in the land. It has defended the nation against the ambitions of those who would supplant our democratic way of life with a foreign ideology.

Just as our political system reposes this charge of leadership upon the party in power, so does it place upon the parliamentary. Opposition the task of likewise defending the nation against those who would destroy it.

What is disturbing at present is the fact that up to now we have been left to wonder where precisely the opposition stands in this national struggle against insurgency and terrorism. Or what it is prepared to do in the way of counsel and support in our present efforts of recovery and national stabilization. Many of us continue to wonder. Will they join us in maintaining the political stability of our country during this period of crisis and challenge?

Our political differences notwithstanding, we are first and last servants to the nation’s supreme and abiding interest. We are, if we are truly firm adherents of the democratic way, bound by the same overriding cause. Though indeed we may differ about specific policies and directions in the administration of government.

The danger today of a distorted political dialogue is greater than ever, because today we are virtually in a struggle for the survival and stability of our nation. We cannot afford to be partisans in this fateful struggle we cannot resolve our problems. Divided in our purposes and consumed by our selfish ambitions for power.

For if our republic falls, as I have said and will say again to the ranks of the opposition. It will not fall into your hands. But into the rule of an alien faith, in which neither you nor I will have a place.

In this time of trial for national life, there is much for each and all of us to do. And we must do all we can, in our respective ways. To ensure the survival and stability of our country.

And if we succeed at this, the time will come soon enough, when again we can contend at the hustings, indulge if we must all our political quarrels and differences. For in two years time we shall have the local elections, and in 1987, the Presidential Elections.

But the time for that is not now. Now is the time for positive and substantial planning, for making policies that will avail, for designing and implementing programs, and for addressing all our energies to one overriding goal: national survival and stability.

For it is hardly possible that with the kind of problems we confront today. We can turn the situation around. Distracted by these partisan tendencies and mistakenly believing that the failure of one will be the victory of the other. We do our nation a great disservice in dissipating in this way our national capacity and vigor, and in denying the national purpose our best and most earnest efforts.

So I will close by making this appeal to all — to all the political parties, to all sectors of our society, to every citizen: let us close ranks in the face of these challenges confronting our country today. And together let us strive to turn this time of crisis and travail around and together let us save ourselves.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.