Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Independence Day

Year after year, for many years past, on this day and in this very place, we gather to commemorate the proclamation of our country's independence which was achieved on June 12, 1898.

Eighty-four years have passed since that historic moment in the town of Kawit in the province of Cavite. Here, our people and the leaders of that time courageously declared our complete independence and liberation from the shackles of a foreign country.

Through this singular declaration on the 12th of June 1898in Kawit, Cavite, we reckon the culmination of the struggles of our people for their birthright and the very beginning of what we call our nation.

But hardly had the ink dried on that historic document when again the nation was called to arms—this time to face another foreign power. And history would record that not until 18 years later would national independence be recovered, and the Filipino people reign sovereign and supreme in their own country and land.

Not for us, as for some other nations, was nationhood forged simply and indelibly through a single act either of violence or of writing a single document, or of fighting one war or revolution. No single date confidently marks out for us that singular moment, when, as in the case of others, we ceased to be merely a collection of tribes and islands and of communities, ceased to be a possession of a colonial power, and became a truly sovereign and a free nation.

As in the preceding three centuries of Spanish rule, so in the succeeding 84 years, we have had to carve the edifice of our nation from the rubble of innumerable crises and struggles.

And it has always been the destiny of every generation of Filipinos never to presume that their independence has been won once and for always, but rather to struggle always to secure the fact and the fruit of nationhood.

But there is nothing in this for which we as a people must feel shame. For this is simply the truth and the meaning our history, and we who have inherited the burden of carrying our nation into the future may even justly feel fortunate for this priceless counsel—of vigilance that history has imposed upon us.

So a day like this fittingly a day of reflection and renewal of the bonds that unite our nation. The commemorations ofdates and events would surely be empty of meaning, if they do not refresh and reawaken the exertion of will and effort that time and again has been summoned to meet the perils and challenges of the nation.

Herodotus, the great historian, relates how the Athenians, returning to their city-state after it had been devastated by the Persian armies, were astonished to find, alive and thriving in the midst of their city ruins, the sacred olive tree which was the symbol of their country. And in that moment of recognition, they knew that Athens would never die, but live on, greater than it had ever been.

So we in our times, amidst the challenges and laborers before us, midst the uncertainties and tensions in our contemporary world, so we today look to the spirit that defines and sustains our sense of national community.

As we survey the world around us, and the nation we are today, we see unmistakably how uncertainty and anxiety relentlessly sap the fabric of community among and within nations throughout the world.

Conflicts have again arisen in so many points in our troubled globe, and at home we have reason to be concerned about the increasingly loud cry of groups for their respective selfish interests, and the apparent obliviousness of some to that supreme interest—the national purpose and the welfare of the nation.

We need to remind ourselves, now more than ever, of those things that bind us together, those that through the centuries have threaded together our story as a people and have made us this sovereign and free nation, and not another.

If we reflect on this hard enough, we would surely discover that our nation, like all nations worthy of the name, is no mere accident of history, no superficial unity imposed upon a myriad of islands and tribes, but a national community born of certain bonds that are not only indissoluble if we but take care to guard them, but incalculable sources of strength, if we but take care to nurture and develop them.

The first of these bonds that make us a nation is the sense of belonging we all feel to this particular community and state, and not to any other it has been well described as a kinship of race, for we are in many ways a homogeneous people; a kinship in space, for these islands that are home to us have been from the beginning our patrimony and birthright; and a kinship through time, because our peoples have a common history dating back to the very emergence of man in the archipelago and, for that matter, in this region.

This elemental kinship is further broadened by yet another kind of link: The link of culture in framing their answer to the riddle of life and the purpose of society, our people developed their customs and ways, their arts and their ownsciences, their philosophy and their sense of regard for the past. What we know of this cultural dimension to our national community is of a heritage varied and rich, and in the diversity of eastern and western influences, we have molded a self-image in which we unmistakably recognize only ourselves.

The third fabric of community has to do with the way we as a people organize the work and economic resources on which we develop for survival. Whether we accept or not the viewpoint of Marxist ideology which sees the economic bond as the whole basis of human community, there is no question that the economic factor plays a crucial part in cementing the bonds that form a people and a nation.

In our case this runs very deep indeed, for our progression from village community to nations tells of a fundamental belief in the efficacy and necessity of cooperative endeavor in the making of welfare and of progress. Today we are indeed a national economy in which the resources of the parts make up the resources of the whole, and the production of separate groups and regions of the country gather together to feed and support the whole, and the national economy in turn sustains and supports the various sectors and regions. If it were otherwise, the fabric of national community would be impaired.

There is finally a fourth and final bond, which gathers all the others together, and this has to do with the vision we entertain of ourselves as a political community, our ideas of how to govern ourselves, our approaches to the task of modernization and social of nations. Here we are truly talking of what constitutes a nation’s ideology, a nation’s faith in itself and in the future.

For us, it seems to me, there can be no doubt now that as a people we do share a very deep and lasting faith in the efficacy of free enterprise and democratic politics as the key to our future as a nation. We have grafted what we have learned from other peoples—of the engineering of progress and the establishment of political freedom and order—into our own soil and circumstances, and in the process shaped our course as a nation.

The bonds of which I speak take their meaning not simply from what history may tell us, but from the active sense of belonging and sharing that every day must take place within the spectrum of our national life. For the bonds that unite a people, regardless of historical events, documents and the like, will always be endangered of being severed whenever they are weakly supported, and whenever injustices divide the whole community.

The test of national community is therefore constant: there is a test from without, as here is a test from within. And only truly dynamic, stable, and just societies survive and prosper.

What I see as I look at our nation today is a strong spirit of community, that conserve the continuity of our history and heritage, and by dint of strengthened effort, by imagination had succeeded in molding for us a strong Republic and a respected place in the family of nations.

From this fountainhead of national identity and pride spring all that is unique in the gifts and achievements of the Filipino nations; our traditions and our ways, our literature and arts and music, our laws and institutions, our devotion to law and freedom, our fierce sense of independence, and our pride in being Filipino.

It is no mean indication of the fervor of Filipino patriotism, that even when chance may take the Filipino to foreign lands to seek his fortune, he continues to retain his attachment to the homeland and to regard this country as his own.

Strange as it may seem, one of the studies in the United States of America is that, the Filipino is the only ethnic group where most of its members return to their homeland to be buried. ( Applause)

Other nations have less than these to work within the realization of their destiny. So we in our own country and in our time would do well to guard these riches that we posses, and to take care of the many more fruits that national identity may yet confer on us.

The danger to a nation, we are well reminded, is not only violence and force. It can also be—and this is more dangerous—indifference and apathy, which can just as easily squander what has been accumulated over the years and disfigure a nation’s destiny.

The work of national independence irrevocably goes, on every day. And it summons us all today, as it summons us day after day, as it did those of our ancestors and those who dreamt and fought to raise the Filipino flag whether it was in Kawit, Cavite or in Bataan or in the underground or in any of the battles that were fought for independence, or in the quiet ways of office and enterprise.

Let us therefore carry this burden. It is a burden that each and every one of us can identify.

Let us take it, bear it on our shoulders and carry it forward.

This is the meaning of independence.

Thank you.

Source : Supreme Court Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). (Address of the President on Independence Day 12 June 1982). Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 78(33) , 4221-4224.