Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On observance of the World Food Day at the International Rice Research Institute

[Delivered on October 16, 1982]

It is fitting that we should commemorate World Food Day here on the grounds of the International Rice Research Institute, and in this town of Los Baños, Laguna, where our country’s agricultural research complex and other international research institutions have risen. Through the years the IRRI has come to represent one of the greatest triumphs of science in perhaps the most urgent of human causes: the world struggle for food sufficiency. Its revolutionary discoveries of higher-yielding rice strains and advanced production technology have stood at the vanguard of the green revolution in fully half of the world where the cereal is a staple.

In addition, it exemplifies the collaborative efforts of many nations and scientists in the fulfillment of this mission. To this place have come men of science from many nations to dedicate their talents to IRRI’s noble program. And from this place have flowed landmark discoveries and achievements towards farming communities in many parts of the world where they have made, and will make, the difference between hunger and survival, between stagnation and growth.

Surely there are few finer examples of the heights that can be reached and the good that can be produced when science and technology are harnessed for the welfare of man.

This is a success story that is all the more significant in the light of the global economic crisis which the world is living through today, and the disturbing crisis in world food supplies which constitutes a part of the global crisis.

In the midst of the present period of uncertainty, all nations, developing and developed, are more than ever conscious of the external factors that impinge upon their efforts to make development and progress. They see their efforts as inescapably bound to larger global trends over which, more often than not, they have no control.

Yet, however disturbing the trends, we also know that there are factors over which we have control. And one of these surely is the decisive influence that agricultural scientific research can play in the race between catastrophe and survival. IRRI for the world, and the Los Baños complex for the Philippines, demonstrate for us beyond words that the race in food production can be won, where will and resolution animate our labors.

We have here in Los Baños today a dynamic scientific community and a complex of institutions that are the unique outgrowth of the endeavor we began two decades ago. And it says something of the results that today the Philippines is one of the few countries that exceeded the annual growth rate of 4 percent in agricultural production targeted under the United Nations second decade of development and has been cited for agricultural growth by the World Bank in its world development report. We are a beneficiary and a contributor to the success of the IRRI as an institution for international cooperation, and we are both proud and thankful for these.

I want to take the opportunity therefore to congratulate all the scientists, scholars and staff of IRRI on their success in helping to improve rice production in nearly all countries where rice is the staple. This would not have been possible but for the missionary zeal and total dedication to the service of the small farmers which Dr. Robert Chandler, Jr. and his successors have imparted to the work of IRRI.

And we are very glad that on this commemorative occasion, the institute is releasing a book on its history written by no other than its founder director, Dr. Chandler.

The lesson that we have learned during these years of investing time, effort and resources in scientific research is specially instructive. Science can only show the way for the achievement of food sufficiency. Only a political will, professional skill and people’s action can truly convert scientific know-how into wealth meaningful to the people. For this reason, the hunger challenge cannot be viewed in isolation of many other factors of which the following are especially important. First, the natural weather conditions in most countries in the southern hemisphere are highly variable and floods, typhoons and drought are rather frequent. As a result, agriculture becomes a very risky profession. Secondly, demographic pressures force poor countries into a never-ending race between production and population. Thirdly, colonial rule led to a situation where the agricultural economy remained barely above subsistence level and was centered mainly on cash crops. Fourthly, the fall in the real prices of the cash crops which developing countries are in a position to export has aggravated balance of payment problems. Finally, the problem of unemployment and underemployment arising from inadequate attention to rural development leads to the unplanned migration of landless poor to cities.

This is where Science and Technology will have to play an increasingly important role. From all agricultural raw material, value-added products should be prepared. We are now taking steps to prepare a series of valuable chemical products from the coconut.

Similarly I welcome IRRI’s initiative in organizing jointly with UPLB a demonstration program on the theme “prosperity through rice farming.” such a demonstration will help to show how the rice straw can be fortified and used as an excellent animal feed. Rice bran is a source of good quality oil both for edible and non-edible purposes. The de-oiled bran could be made into valuable poultry feed. The rice hull could be converted into bricks and cement as our scientists at F-O-R-I have shown. The rice straw which is now often burned can be used for paper manufacture. Preferably it should be incorporated into the soil so as to provide additional nitrogen and carbon and improve soil structure as recommended by IRRI. We thus see a vast panorama of opportunities for generating wealth from waste.

Likewise, we need to step up research on maximizing the return from the investment the farmer makes on inputs like seed, fertilizer, water and pesticides. We must help small farmers to improve the efficiency of the management of their farms through a proper integration of cash inputs with non-monetary inputs. We must teach them how to grow their own nitrogen through azolla, blue green algae and other forms of bio-fertilizers.

Finally, there is need for a cheap source of plant protein in the tropics, for greater emphasis on aqua-culture research and on marine fisheries, and for developing more effective ways to control the weather. The directions for research in this decade embrace many areas of urgent concern. For they reflect the revolutionary impact that science can have on food supplies.

It is a reflection of this new awareness that in December this year we shall be convening here in Manila the International Conference on Chemistry and World Food Supplies. Modern chemical research has opened our eyes to the uses of Chemistry in food production, particularly in terms of genetic engineering, nitrogen fixation, and plant resistance to diseases.

To speak of science in agriculture is finally to renew faith in ourselves and in our future. Science overwhelmingly reminds us today that where there is a will, there is always a way.

We can now take heart, I think, in the knowledge that unlike in previous years, there now is unanimous awareness of the critical dimensions of the food crisis among leaders and nations of the third world, as well as those of the developed countries. There is a heightened realization of the imperative for greater concert and cooperation which has resulted in more willing support of the initiatives being undertaken by the United Nations and its agencies particularly the food and agriculture organization.

And perhaps most important of all, we know that scientific research has produced an unprecedented abundance of new agricultural technology which are region-specific and directly applicable to food production problems in third world countries. We know that the breakthroughs achieved in such countries as India, Indonesia, Mexico, Pakistan, and the Philippines are replicable in most other similarly situated countries. under the U.N.’s Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), hundreds of scientists are hard at work in at least 13 international research institutes (including the IRRI) all over the world discovering newer technology with which to solve specific regional production deficiencies in various cereal grains, root crops, livestock and poultry. Some two years ago, we became the second developing nation to support the C-G-I-A-R in its signal contribution to scientific research directed towards this vital concern.

While we should certainly look at problems in a global context, it is my belief that an enduring food security system will emerge only when every country builds a strong national food security system. It is towards this end that we have accorded the highest priority to agriculture and rural development. With the ongoing regionalization of our development programs, of which the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran is the umbrella strategy, it should be possible for all parts of the country to grow speedily and harmoniously. I am happy to learn that you had a very fruitful technology transfer workshop at IRRI early this month where you developed an integrated strategy for improving rice production as well as for reducing the cost of production. Such a “lab to land” movement should be replicated in all crop and farming systems. We must also consider better means to protect the health of the soil while promoting intensive cropping. In this the F-A-O’s world soil charter should be an invaluable guide.

I am confident that we will achieve our goal of eradicating hunger and malnutrition in the Philippines sooner than many experts believe possible. My confidence arises from what I have seen of the dedication of our scientists and extension workers and the enthusiasm and receptivity of our farmers. We have only to look at the progress achieved in the farm sector over less than a decade. If we help farmers to help the nation, they will ensure that no one need go to bed hungry. Just as mineral fertilizer stimulates the growth of a plant, assured and remunerative marketing stimulates the interest and initiative of the farmer. We must therefore pay equal attention to production and post-harvest technology, as well as foster producer-oriented marketing.

These and many other tasks await our attention. And it is especially appropriate that we rededicate ourselves to these tasks, on this day of worldwide observance of world food day and on this occasion of renewal of the mission of the International Rice Research Institute.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.