Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Bataan Day Celebration

From Bataan: The Lesson of Survival

THE MEMORY OF an epic struggle in the life of the Filipino people has drawn us, once again, to these hallowed grounds. Many of you who are here remember the terror and the agony of Bataan thirty years ago: Doubtless you hear once more the thunder of war across these mountains and hills, and feel, as though they were real again, the ache and weariness of many battles. But sharper than all these recollections of foreboding and pain is the sense of triumph: from a desolate night threatened by doom Bataan moved into daylight, found its pulsebeat and rose to the rhythms of life again.

In this beleaguered peninsula, 3,973 Filipino officers, 67,934 Filipino enlisted men, 8,270 Philippine Scouts’ officers and men and 11,790 American officers and men fought from January to April 1942.

Out of this total of about 91,000, 24,000 were actually counted in the hospitals immobilized because of disease and injuries. Of the remaining 67,000 one-half were in the rear and one-half were along the Pilar-Bagac line which ran north of Mount Samat.

Against what Gen. MacArthur estimated to be 100,000 of the Army, about 30,000 were deployed along this 25-kilometer Pilar-Bagac line. Almost all of them were starving and sick. About 10,000 effectives were actually capable of firing a gun. In the last battle I counted only about 200 men in the line defending the top of Mount Samat.

Because of wounds and disease, many units no longer maintained reserves. On my last patrol at the start of the shelling on April 2nd, the men at the outpost line of resistance of the 21st Division could hardly move out of their foxholes, due to starvation and injuries.

The enemy was in complete control of the air. Our artillery had been silenced. Ammunition was limited to sixty (60) rounds per man.

Armor-piercing ammunition and anti-tank guns were non-existent. My patrol counted about 150 high-powered artillery pieces of the enemy which started to blast every inch of Mount Samat, turning it into an area of fire and explosions.

This prevented further resupply of food and ammunition to the men at the OPLR and main line of resistance. On the second day of bombardment, almost all communication lines were cut, thus further disorganizing the defenders on Mount Samat. When the bombardment continued and reports arrived of the two strong enemy columns spearheaded by armor moving towards the junction of the 21st Division and the 41st Division at the western slope of Mt. Samat and towards the main trail moving south at the eastern slope of Mount Samat, the younger officers and men of the 21st Division swore to die rather than surrender, on the top of this mountain. Thus it is that Mount Samat has been honored as the site of the Dambana ng Kagitingan.

But now, 30 years later, with the advantage of hindsight and the experience of our own struggle to establish our young Republic on the world scene, let us ask ourselves the question, “Why Bataan?”

Indeed, “why Bataan at all?” Did it have to happen? Have we, the present generations of Filipinos, kept faith with those who sacrificed life and blood in Bataan and Corregidor?

My friends, these are questions to which we must now seek pertinent answers.

The Philippines today is faced with problems of varying complexities. With communist-inspired insurgency in the cities and countryside, the onset of urban guerilla warfare in many centers of population, and recurrent social, economic and political problems crying out for solution, the nation’s resources and the temper of our people have been strained to the limit. Considered jointly with other factors, both internal and external, these conditions and problems constitute serious threats to national stability and security.

Now in 1972, we find ourselves again at the crossroads of decision. The situation differs noticeably from that in 1941 and 1942. Now, we no longer find ourselves under the exclusive, all-powerful protective umbrella of the Unite States. As a sovereign nation, the defense of the Philippines has become our sole responsibility, and ours alone. True, we have a mutual defense treaty with the United States and have entered into regional defense agreement with seven other member-nations of the SEATO, but we must not depend entirely on our allies for our own security. Bataan is our object lesson on this.

The internal situation today leaves much to be desired. In spite of the massive efforts of the present administration, there still exists an active insurgency in our midst, fomented by misguided elements of our population that are only waiting for the right moment to again attempt the seizure of power.

The national morale and economic potential are being sapped by subversion, organized anarchy, smuggling, by lawlessness and outlawry, by criminal syndicates that are eating up vast quantities of our time, effort and resources which could otherwise be directed towards constructive purposes. Too many of our officials are more concerned with their personal comfort, self-glorification and selfish ambition than the welfare of the people they have pledged to serve.

As we look at our world today, we come to some fundamental thoughts that are as old as history itself. While the age of confrontation is phasing out into an age of flexibility, we see the Middle East in turmoil as the conflict between Israel and the Arab nations remains unresolved; the Vietnam conflict has escalated into a mass invasion by the North of the South; the violent rivalry between Pakistan and India has resulted in a bloody confrontation and the division of Pakistan, and reordered the old alignments of power; Cambodia and Laos are still convulsed by fratricidal war within their borders; Burma is threatened with danger from inside and outside; Malaysia, in an effort to neutralize the threats to its security, has turned into a neutral state and proposes the neutralization of all of Southeast Asia; Thailand and South Korea, under the pressure of incipient rebellions within their borders, have established totalitarian regimes; Singapore, while actively engaged in its development as an entrepot, is preoccupied with its security; Indonesia, the biggest nation and country in Southeast Asia, has just received a donation of Sabre jet fighters from Australia, and in our joint communique during the state visit of its chief of state, it has allowed the announcement of certain joint military training and operations that can only mean an open avowal of the strengthening of its defenses against its prospective enemies from outside and inside its territory. And Japan, the most industrialized state of Asia, will probably be compelled to re-arm within the next five years.

Thus, experience and prudence dictate the validity of the conclusion that war and hostility is the normal state between nations and that in this day and age it is illusory to expect man to eradicate war within our lifetime.

Within this context, I am certain the dead of Bataan cannot understand why some loud voices are being raised against the Administration’s objective of attaining a self-reliant defense posture within the next five years. The consensus of our people to achieve a broader base for our international relations and widen our economic opportunities abroad must be accompanied by the unilateral development of our national defense system, based on the concept of citizen armed forces. To seek and attract new contacts outside of our traditional economic, cultural and diplomatic contacts without preparing ourselves to cope with concomitant security problems could be dangerous and would lead to national disaster.

Every nation in our region of Southeast Asia — and other developing nations elsewhere in the world for that matter — is investing extra time, effort and resources in the development of such a self-reliant posture. While the Philippines spends approximately $3.40 in terms of defense for each Filipino, the comparable defense expenditure per capita for Thailand is $7.44; South Korea, $12.57; Japan, $17.86, to cite a few examples. The proposed 5-year defense development plan to make our country more self-reliant would entail an added per capita expenditure of about $1.16 (or a total of $4.56) per Filipino — an expense that would still be well below that of some of our neighbors. This proposed formula does not, by any means, commit us to an arms race with the other countries of Southeast Asia; rather, it provides the starting position from which we can interact more freely as a sovereign nation with other sovereign nations, while at the same time maintaining a stronger capability to insure the proper domestic climate for our socio-economic programs to prosper.

As we come to report to our dead, on this altar and at this cross, we hear the lesson that is learned from Bataan, which is, never again should our country depend on others for its security. We have faith and trust in our allies and friends. We can depend on them. But we can best trust ourselves and depend on our own capabilities.

Bataan also cries out one hard lesson, and that is, that the time for preparation against danger is not when danger is perceived and threatens us but when danger is still a long, long way from our shores and from our time.

It is an unwise and imprudent leader who expects that time will eliminate the threats that he sees may be a building within or outside our boundaries. Whatever be the form of our government, the ultimate idealism is freedom, and its objective remains unchanged — the dignity of the human individual although the means to attain this noble objective may differ and change.

And thus it is that from the unyielding lines and specific fronts of Bataan, the Filipino people remember how their soldiers turned to the unconventional war of the underground which knew no static lines and no organized fronts.

In fighting a rebellion, we should never allow any foreign troops to fight on our soil. The complications arising out of their participation are more grave than the rebellion we may seek to overcome.

For some time to come the common problem of all developing nations will be exported war in the form of a communist rebellion.

In meeting any external threats, it is my decision that while there is still time we must prepare to meet it with our own strength; alone, if necessary.

There is no reason to fear any immediate threat of external aggression. We as a nation have renounced war as an instrument of national policy. We will join in the universal effort to eradicate war from our planet. But tins may not soon be attained. Considering that war and hostility seems to be the normal state between nations of our time and age, it is logical to conclude that when the nations around us acquire the capability for such aggression, our people will be called upon to meet such aggression. Now is the time to prepare for it. Slowly, if necessary. But prepare for it we must. This is the greatest deterrent to the recurrence of another Bataan.

The national interests of our allies, no matter how close and friendly they may be, may not always coincide with our own national interest.

So Bataan teaches us never again to depend completely on others for the security of our people.

It teaches us that we as a nation must depend on ourselves to fight internal subversion and external aggression no matter how small we are and how limited our resources.

Bataan is not a tale of death but an affirmation of life — not an end but a beginning. Here today, among the ghosts of the fallen, we sense not death but heroism; the image of renewal fills our minds. The sense of doom is long gone. Today we celebrate a truth that Bataan revealed to us, that we can summon vast powers in us if we wish and use them wisely, with courage and resolution, to convert defeat to victory and win the big battles of life.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].