Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the induction of officers of the Manila Motion Pictures Producers Association

[Delivered at The Plaza, September 26, 1970]

New Goals for the Movie Industry

WHEN I SPEAK to this gathering of film producers, artist and technicians. I am aware that I am speaking to a group whose work is vital and whose influence is enormous in our society. Those of us whose work is to lead and govern; look to this community to provide our people a vital and purposive entertainment industry and to harness that industry for the task of building progressives and healthy nation.

I would be dishonest not to admit that the mere experience of meeting and associating with the beauteous stars of our film industry is for me already a very real pleasure, but tonight I am even more pleased that aside from this signal-pleasure, I am accorded the honor of addressing our film producers, those men, who more than any other group govern and direct the course of our film industry.

For a long time now I have wanted to meet with you to discuss the problems that obtain in your work and the way by which all of us, you in the industry and I in the government, can use our resources to solve these problems and to really develop our motion picture industry. The present state of the industry, where it is indeed and how it is making use of its opportunities, suggest to my mind that there is a great deal that we can do to upgrade the quality of our films and to make them  truly relevant to our  lives and to our history as a nation.

Philippine cinema has simply reached the point where it must either advance or regress, either live or die. This is not to say that the opportunities for a good and prosperous life as an industry are not there; they are there, have always been, and today the opportunities have never been more inviting. We need only to consider the state of the cinema in America, Europe and Asia to see how vital this medium can be in our lives and how self-sustaining it can be as an industry.

It is for us now to seize these opportunities and make our film industry a truly vital force in the lives of our people and in the economy of our country. And I would like to tell you tonight that you are not alone in dreaming of this advancement; this concern, this hope, we share in common.

But saying that we are one in this hope is surely not the same thing as saying that it shall be realized. We shall have to inquire again into the basic goals of our movie industry and nourish it with those goals that are enduring rather than ephemeral, if we are to realize this hope. Above all, we must see the problems not merely in the light of each producer’s special concerns, but in the light of common goals and larger concerns.

This I submit, requires long and thorough study.

To begin with, there is the problem of technical facilities presently available to the industry.

In a world literally exploding with the wonders of new discoveries in the art of film-making, the Filipino film continues to use sub-standard equipment and technical know how. We continue to make do with what we had two decades ago, and it is not surprising that our product has remained the same — a pale comparison to the work of other filmmakers in the world today.

Yet the problem of equality is not to be explained merely by the absence of technical equipment. Complementary to this lack of technical facilities is an even graver lack of talent and know how to inform the local cinema. By this, I do not mean any lack whatsoever of good actors and actresses. This we have in abundance; what we do not have are the directors, writers, film editors and cinematographers who more than anyone in the industry are responsible for the quality of the film product. Our film industry has simply failed to attract such talent into the business; the few talented film-makers whom we had some years ago have since left the industry for greener fields.

In saying this, I do not mean to belittle the obstacles that confront every filmmaker and producer whenever the cinema is bound by the canons of popular tastes and mass consumption. The making of one single film requires such a huge investment, that to recover it, the film must be seen by a good portion of our film-going public. And it is surely no new discovery of ours that what is considered artistic or excellent is more often than not the dish not of the mass but of the elite.

Yet, granting that our local films must seek its audience among the masses in order to survive, it is my belief that even in the task of providing good entertainment the local film industry leaves much to be desired. Today, we seem to mistake the popular for the vulgar, and even for the patently obscene.

Even if we confine our goals only to good entertainment, I submit that such entertainment can be made relevant to our lives, can be reflective of what is uniquely Filipino, without ceasing to be popular. The fact is many of us have a tendency to underestimate the capacity of the masses to appreciate what is good, and because of this underestimation, most of our films retain this obsessive tendency to be unintelligent and silly.

It seems to me that more than the lack of capital obtaining within the industry, the reason for its failure to be self-generating and self-sustaining is to J be found in a confusion of goals and a fear of treading what is not safe and has not been tried before.

This fear and this confusion has constricted the imagination of the local film industry. And like any other enterprise, the absence of imagination results in stagnation and decay.

To infuse new life into the industry, we must re-examine therefore the goals of our movie industry, and having done this we must map out a new course for development. Then and only then can it begin to attract new capital and new talent, which alone can be the basis for its advance.

The presence of an association such as this is a good beginning for such a re-examination. Because you are the guardians and the lifeblood of the industry, a consensus of opinion among you can have sweeping effects on the industry.

It is my belief that the solution of the problem facing the industry cannot lie simply in the institution of a government subsidy for the industry or in the reduction of taxes on local films.

My administration is prepared to extend to you every assistance in your plan to develop the industry, but the price of development demands on your part the will to lift it from the morass in which we find it.

I am hopeful that this group and the other film organizations will pool their resources and conduct a thorough study of our motion picture industry. In such an undertaking, my administration is prepared to assist you at once.

On the basis of such a study, we can then make plans together for al concerted and joint development program.

I must now summarize and conclude.

I have tried to delineate to you what I take to be the problems of our film industry. I have charted the opportunities open to you as film-producers and financiers. I now leave it to you to explore them further.

It is my hope that having seen one another again, neither you nor I shall be overwhelmed by the problems before us; and knowing that we share the same hopes, we shall not flinch.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].