Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the special session of the Batasang Pambansa

[Delivered on October 18, 1983]

Mr. Speaker, distinguished members of the Batasang Pambansa:

I address you today at a moment of grave anxiety in our country, on a matter of great urgency and concern to all.

Yesterday, I issued Proclamation No. 2318 calling this assembly to this special session, for the specific purpose of considering various electoral reforms that are of urgent import to the 1984 election of a new parliament, and to the orderly course of democratic government in our country.

When I last addressed this assembly, at the beginning of its fifth regular session last July, I said then that its foremost task must be to provide for the efficacious constitution of a new parliament through peaceful and orderly elections. Since then that task has been overtaken by events; the Batasan has adjourned without passing upon the necessary amendments to the election code; and today we must frankly say that there is much anxiety and .uncertainty in the country today.

It does not require of me an extensive review of the present state of national life for it to become aware of the problems and questions that confront the nation today. In the-short span of less than three months, the nation has sharply moved into the throes of crisis, tested on the one hand by the tragic assassination of one of our countrymen, and beleaguered on the other by the impact of deepening difficulties in international economic life.

We in this Assembly are all aware of the turmoil that these events have sown in our national life and we recognize only too well the predictable actions of those who seek to profit by these events by sowing discord among us and by undermining Constitutional Government itself.

But if we recognize this moment of anguish and anxiety in the nation today for what it is, we also know that the answers to this time of trial are perfectly within the capability of the nation to master. And we will not allow the clamor of voices in our midst today to deter us from the course that the nation must follow to heal and strengthen itself.

As ever there is the course of Constitutional Government that we must follow in response to the challenge before us. And it is entirely within the capability of statesmanship to mold and balance the many forces churning in our national life today within the principles of our democratic system, and to direct them towards a course of peaceful and orderly change.

This is the task we face today.

High on the agenda of this special session is the consideration of urgent and important electoral reforms, which to the entire nation today are vital to the healing of divisions in our midst and to the redirection of national life. We see in these reforms not only the means to elect and convene the new Parliament but the means also to ensure peaceful change through future elections in our country.

We see in these reforms a means not only to bind and heal many of the wounds and anxieties of the nation today, but a framework to guide us in building for the nation’s future.

There are some who would reject this course of peaceful change, because they blindly and foolishly envision that they will better profit from chaos and violence. But we should never doubt where the true voice and conscience of the people directs us now.

That voice tells us that Government can only govern by consent of the governed. That they who would presume to lead this nation must lead by the expressed wishes of the people. And let them who aspire to lead seek and win that mandate through free elections.

This has ever been and will ever be the course set by our people for the nation to follow. And any other road to the reins of power — by recourse to violence or whatever – is contrary to the deep and abiding faith of our people.

In laying before this Assembly these reform measures for deliberation, we place in its charge the means to strengthen that faith and to ensure that peaceful change will prevail during this time of travail in our land.

And we must not falter now either in our representation of our people or in our leadership of the ship of state. For to falter now may be to endanger the very peace and civility of our land in the coming years. And it will surely endanger the welfare of our people for generations.

Ladies and gentlemen of the Batasan: great responsibilities have been laid upon us by the swift movement of events. But I am confident that the Batasan will face these responsibilities with decision and dispatch. And so will the nation follow its lead.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1983). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.