Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Baguio City Convention Center, and opening ceremonies of the Karpov-Korchnoi World Chess Championship

[Delivered in Baguio City, July 17, 1978]

The Stuff of Greatness

EVERYTHING THAT HAS to be said has been said by the speakers before me especially by the distinguished mayor of the city. Perhaps if I were a wiser man, I would follow the dictum of all those masters of eloquence and say that we welcome you and hope that this tournament will be successful as I see it will be successful, and then sit down. However, being head of state and head of government there are many responsibilities that one cannot dispense with.

For and on behalf, therefore, of the Filipino people, on behalf of the government of the Republic of the Philippines, I welcome you to our country and to this city, the summer capital of the Philippines. Let me express to you our pride and appreciation for the privilege that has been bestowed upon our country in being chosen as the site for the World Chess Championship match for 1978. As has already been explained by Dr. Max Euwe, it has been six years since the world last witnessed the holding of a match for the world chess crown, and three years since a new world champion was proclaimed. All this time we have waited for this event to take place. And now at last, we gather here along with many millions more around the world to witness the opening of this great sports competition between two great luminaries of chess.

It lends some significance to this event that it is being staged here in Asia. And as Dr. Max Euwe has commented, chess started in Asia.

Chess saw its origins in this part of the world. This is not often remembered any more mainly because, in the course of centuries, chess became the cherished possession of many peoples and countries across the seas. In the course of countless transformations the game found even stronger roots in other lands. But Asian this game was at the start, long before it became the global preoccupation that it is today.

It is, I think, a reflection of the growth of interest in chess all over the world in our time, that here in Asia the game is in the midst of a fitting revival and renaissance, of which, perhaps, our country may justly be considered a modest and a humble exponent.

At various times in the past, we have had the great privilege of hosting major international chess tournaments. I understand since 1970 about twelve of them, at which the great luminaries of chess including incidentally the world champion himself, Mr. Karpov, had been participants. More than this it has been a special effort of our government to encourage and promote the game in our country as we encourage and promote all sports and athletics.

To see those efforts today crowned by the privilege of staging the World Chess Championship is therefore a very great honor which we cherish. And we are greatly indebted to Mr. Karpov and Mr. Korchnoi for granting this rare opportunity to the Philippines and to Asia.

To you gentlemen, we express our most profound thanks, our very deep wishes for your respective success in the present competition. Your achievements in the game are justly celebrated all over the world. There is not a chess aficionado who does not know Mr. Karpov and Mr. Korchnoi. Fittingly those achievements have thrust you yet again into the trials of this prestigious contest for the greatest prize in the world of chess.

We are certain that long after your match is over it will become part of the annals of chess and it will continue to give pleasure and enjoyment to chess lovers as much as it will please, enchant and engross those who will witness your games while they take place in this city.

For there is something imperishable in the achievements of great chess masters such as you exemplify and symbolize. They are of the stuff of art, of genius and of greatness. They are what make chess so well-beloved and celebrated as a sport.

This was true of the games of the great masters who preceded you in the competition for the world chess championship. So will it be true of this world chess championship match in 1978.

And now, ladies and gentlemen, it is my very great pleasure and privilege to now declare open the World Chess Championship Match of 1978.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].