Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Launching of the Sariling Sikap Movement

[Released on February 14, 1984]

We mark here today not so much the beginning of a movement, as the renewal of a covenant we made with each other 18 years ago.

There is much in the Kilusang Sariling Sikap that is perhaps novel and unique to our time — in its response to the difficulties our nation faces today, in its call to our people to turn once more to the land for national salvation, and in its imaginative application of new technologies and approaches to the perennial task of making the land yield its bounty and riches.

Yet the antecedents and the building blocks of this program are many. And it takes its place in a long line of many labors and undertakings we have engaged in through the years, and under the aegis of the national vision we raised before our people upon our assumption of office 18 years ago.

In words that many of you may still remember, I said then: “this is a vision of the jungles opening up to the farmer’s tractor and plow, of the wilderness claimed for agriculture and the support of human life, of the mountains yielding their boundless treasure, and of the rows of factories turning the harvests of our fields into a thousand products…

“It is our people bravely determining their own future for to make the future is the supreme act of freedom.”

Again and again, in all the years of my Presidency, in many programs and undertakings, in projects current as well as past, we find the shaping hand of this vision of national life.

This, too, governs this movement which we today commend to the support and participation of our countrymen, of communities and individuals alike, of citizens and public servants, and of the many sectors of our society.

What is new about Kilusang Sariling Sikap is the added and vital dimension it gives to the national quest for self-reliance. And this is the singleminded focus and sweep it invests in its program for national productivity and economic liberation.

In an important sense, we reach through this program and this movement the logical culmination of our efforts for national development through the years.

On the one hand, it is the final thrust forward that follows the landmark programs of the recent past: the epic effort to build the basic infrastructures of the national economy, the priority programs for food production, the heavy emphasis on agricultural research and the development of new technologies, the efforts to reduce national dependence on imported fuel, and the accelerated productivity and diversification campaign in the export sector — all of which have been primarily geared towards national productivity.

In another respect, Sariling Sikap is a major effort to correct certain imbalances in our development thrusts and to meet specific problems of the day.

Our national experience during the past 18 years in sum have brought us to this final struggle which we must wage — the full economic liberation of our people, and the achievement of national self-reliance.

We have seen during these years levels of productivity and evidences of success in many of our endeavors. But self-reliance we have not yet achieved.

We have seen the national product and income attain heights impossible to imagine at the time when we began. But the economic liberation of all our people we have not reached.

We have seen our commerce with the world and our place in the family of nations grow in volume and stature. But dependence on others and vulnerability to global crisis have not ended.

This unrequited goal — this dream of a national life fully sustained by our own strivings and achievements — underlines the national situation today, our captivity to the vagaries of international life, our anxieties in the face of doubting friends and allies.

This movement is a major step toward the fulfillment of the dream.

No single program, of course, can by itself erase the state of national dependence on others for various needs. Neither can we transform overnight the blight of poverty and underdevelopment in various parts of the country.

But Kilusang Sariling Sikap goes further than any program in the past to invest the national quest for self-reliance with practicable projects and attainable goals.

And it is the first of several programs for self-reliance we propose for the various sectors of the national economy, which can turn this time of uncertainty and crisis into one of opportunity and achievement.

The essential features of Sariling Sikap are easy enough to understand. Implementing it is the challenge.

In what the First Lady has called its “macro component”, Sariling Sikap seeks to develop and transform denuded, idle and under-utilized lands into F orest Farms or People’s Forests that are productive, income-generating, and a source of food, energy and livelihood. We have identified some 10 million hectares of idle lands that over the long-term can be harnessed and developed.

The basic concept of the forest farm is to plant initially these idle lands to ipil-ipil and to intercrop it with more permanent central and orchard trees. And the objective is to create first a large source of pelletized animal feeds and veneer from ipil-ipil and other fast growing sources; and in the longer term to create an abudant supply of coffee and fruits which can be processed into drinks and canned food.

The overall implementation envisions the development of forest farms at three levels: at the provincial level with a target area of 1,000 hectares per province during the first year; at the municipal level with a target area of a maximum of 100 hectares; and at barangay level with a maximum of ten hectares.

The really important aspect of this program is that it has the potential to harness the efforts of the low-salaried and the least advantaged in our society. Teachers and men in uniforms as much as individual families can take part in the tree-planting effort at any level of the program and realize substantial incomes or additional sources of incomes.

And let us not forget that this is a program rooted in actual case studies with demonstrated profitability and success. There are three of these today: 1) the Bolinao Dendro-thermal Plantation which is a 1,000-hectare government-owned plantation planted to ipil-ipil, and is the fuel source of the dendro thermal plant in that town. The plant now provides electricity to 47 municipalities in Pangasinan. And it is envisioned that in 8 years, the total project cost of P3.5 million will be fully recovered.

2) The Ilocos Norte Agro Forestry Estate Project which is a 500-hectare plantation planted to ipil-ipil trees intercropped with fruit trees and agricultural crops. A beneficiary is expected to earn an average net income of P5,235 per year after six years.

3) The Bayambang Ipil-ipil Three Plantation and Kiln Drying, which consists of 87 hectares planted to ipil-ipil and for the purpose of charcoal production.

The other component of the program, its “micro aspect’, is the self-reliant home movement or Kasipagan homes, which is basically an educational and technology dissemination campaign designed to transform Filipino homes into self-reliant and productive units. Seven technology packages are extended to participating families with homelots, and these involved projects as varied as home gardening, vermi compost, tilapia production and household improvement.

The objective of this project component is to involve 2 million families to participate in the initial year.

I shall not go into the details of these projects under Sariling Sikap, but shall merely underline the difference it can make in the national productivity effort and the challenge involved in implementing it.

We have right now the technological knowhow to undertake Sariling Sikap on a nationwide scale. We have 200 agricultural schools to serve as raw materials production input centers for the technological packages. We have entire ministries and agencies to assist in the forest farm effort. And we can set up the plants for the processing of farm products to secure maximum advantage from them.

To fund Sariling Sikap, it is not necessary to provide an additional outlay in the national budget. It will be provided by the mandatory savings from the expenses of maintenance and operations of the government, of which in 1984 some P2 to 3 million is possible.

In the last analysis, Sariling Sikap is really a question of people: hands to take up the work that must be done, men and women and families to take up the critical burden of this national productive effort.

The ethic of work and achievement, embraced on a national scale, is what really will make the difference success and failure in this program, between poverty and liberation, between dependence and self-reliance.

This ethic alone can transform Sariling Sikap into the program for national liberation that we envision it to be

Nothing less will do the job.

Eric Hoffer once observed that the essential problem of developing nations is how to transfer the mystique of political independence into the everyday world of economic toil and effort.

Liberation cannot come for us in lamenting the years we lost through colonial subjugation, in pinning over the riches of the land taken the foreigner for centuries, or in regretting the problems that have washed upon our shores. It comes from planting the land we have and from producing for our needs. It cannot come from angry invectives, or from vain hopes, or from breastbeating. I have said before: let the dreams and the words be dramatic, if they must be; but let us never forget that the real drama, the real fulfillment lies in the common place act of sowing in order to reap, of working in order to lift up ourselves.

This then is the challenge that we urge upon our people as we launch today the Kilusang Sariling Sikap.

Let us take up this burden and apply ourselves to the work at hand, for only thus can we meet the needs to the present time and become truly the nation we aspire to be.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.