Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Chamber of Maritime Industries

[Delivered on October 12, 1978]

The Maritime Industry

I SHARE WITH all of you the joy of this moment of the unification of all your business organizations under this Chamber. I Understand that there are six associations that have been gathered under the umbrella of this Chamber, namely, the Filipino Association for Mariners Employment, the Filipino Shipowners Association, the National Federation of Fishing Associations, the Philippine Interisland Shipping Association, the Philippine Ship Agents Association, and the Philippine Shipbuilders and Repairers Association.

Those who have worked to bring about the organization of this Chamber, of course, deserve the congratulations not only of the President and the government of our Republic but of the entire nation. I have come today to demonstrate by my presence the deep concern of the government in the maritime industry and to extend on behalf of our people and of the government, in particular, the congratulations and the best wishes of all those who are aware of both the development as well as the problems of the industry. Perhaps, I should single out for special mention the administrator of the Maritime Industry Authority, Col. Generoso Tanseco, who spearheaded the unification of the various sectors of the industry.

You know when I came in, I immediately realized that I was coming into a new organization. You can always notice the almost, should we say, respectful distance that each of the member groups kept from the other, watching carefully. And there is none of the casual camaraderie that you see in old organizations. I did not expect, of course, the rambunctious enthusiasm of, say, the Jaycees, the Lions or the Rotarians, who clap on any pretext. Or for that matter, shout and cause all kinds of confusion. But you know, I did immediately notice the feeling of starting-to-get-acquainted, which I saw as soon as I entered the Fiesta Pavillion. I believe that after a few meetings, you will get to know each other, and better still, you will get to trust each other.

I need not go into all these amenities nor into the well-known facts about the maritime industry, about which you are perhaps better informed than the ordinary layman.

I need not talk about the Philippines being archipelagic, about its 7,107 islands. I need not speak of the fact that in 1975, our share of overseas shipping was only about 7.8 percent, and as of the end of 1977, it was about 14percent.I need not tell you that we are now spending $1 billion every year for the carriage of our overseas trade. And out of this, our maritime industry, you, shipowners and everybody else, have brought into the country about $140million. And I do not need to tell you that the well-being of our country — its security, its development, modernization, its movement towards our objectives — depends to a great extent on the maritime industry of the Philippines.

The maritime industry will always be the most critical and important in the entire spectrum of participants in the national economy. It is not for nothing that much of our vision of the future is predicated upon our ability to undertake a major revolution in the farming of our seas and in the utilization of our water arteries.

No sound development strategy can ignore the industry’s role as the key link among our fragmented regions and as our link to the rest of the world. Of all our industries, the maritime industry enables us to harness our land and marine resources, and facilitates domestic and international trade and commerce.

You therefore represent an industry which is vitally connected with the national interest. And this finds expression in the very soul of our Constitution and in the policies and programs of our government today, among which are the national position in international forums concerning a new law of the sea— you are well aware that we have been very active in the convention for a law of the sea — the zealous pursuit of the development of our fishery and marine resources; the accelerated development of our water transport and shipbuilding industry; and the establishment of a single agency in government to govern the development of our maritime industry.

To be sure, the maritime industry has not always enjoyed the kind of attention and support that it enjoys today. This may be due to the lack of attention to our economy in general and the inefficiency of the government offices in the past. The seas, while always critical to our national survival since pre-Spanish times, I am afraid in the past were given some kind of a second priority. Government recognition of the maritime industry was slow and haphazard in the old political system, or for that matter, many of the critical factors to survival. Deeply entrenched vested interests hampered the implementation of a maritime development program that was truly responsive to the country’s economic needs. You who were already with the industry at that time will readily remember this. Public policy governing the industry had no vision and lacked the will, and so, not surprisingly, the industry floundered for the most part in chaos and rivalries.

I recognized early the poverty of our maritime policies and programs, but in the absence of a capable government agency, or for that matter in the absence of legislative support for this particular policy, we could not pass the needed legislation before 1972. Not until September 1972 did this opportunity come, and it was one of my earliest acts towards streamlining the government administrative machinery to promulgate the Maritime Industry Development Decree of 1974 which established the Maritime Industry Authority, or as you in the industry call it, MARINA. MARINA is the industry’s central policy-making and planning agency and all other maritime-related agencies must adhere to the programs and policy guidelines formulated by MARINA.

In this, MARINA is not unlike the NEDA in relation to the economy as a whole. We wanted one single authority to give vision and direction to the parts as well as the whole of the industry. We wanted unity and action in a way that would spur the development of the industry.

Subsequent to this landmark decree, we promulgated follow-up measures to sustain the momentum achieved under the Maritime Industry Development Decree of 1974.

The Philippine Ports Authority was created to separate port administration from the revenue collection functions of the Department of Finance, thus giving special attention to ports development, which must conform with the country’s overseas and interisland trade patterns. I gather that there is now some kind of a misunderstanding between the shipowners and the ports authority. Well, since I am reviewing many of the policies of government right now, I think that you should put down in writing in the form of a memorandum and probably submit to MARINA, your position on this question of the integration or the choice of a single stevedoring and arrastre system in every port. This will bring the matter to full public scrutiny. And I welcome the opinions that may be submitted by the Chamber. This is one reason why I have always sought a single chamber— so that you may have an effective channel by which you can voice your sentiments even against public policy or government policy. Let us see what your position is. Bring it to me through the MARINA and we will work on it.

The National Seamen Board was also established to specialize in the placement and basic training of Filipino seamen. It was also necessary to establish the Philippine Shippers Council headed by the Minister of Trade to ensure that shippers are adequately protected from the control of foreign-based ship operators, as well as to provide a mechanism for giving the Philippine fleet necessary flag preference.

The government is also now in the process of upgrading the Philippine Merchant Marine Academy, the country’s premier merchant marine school The objective is to align the academy., in terms of curriculum and facilities, with the changing manpower requirements of the Philippine Fleet. The upgrading program shall be under the direct supervision of the MARINA administrator, who shall remain the chairman of the PMMA Board of Trustees.

In 1976, the Philippine National Lines, a state-owned shipping corporation was created. Now let me say that this new organization was created not to compete with the private sector but to augment the shipping requirements of the country. It is also envisioned to provide assistance to Philippine shipowners in their ship acquisition requirements.

The Philippine Coast Guard’s capability to protect life and property was strengthened with its assumption of the responsibility over ship registration and licensing which is vital in monitoring the movement of Philippine vessels.

To complement the aforementioned organizational changes, the government also instituted several investment incentives programs to effect a more attractive investment climate within the maritime industry.

The effectivity of Republic Act 1407, or the Overseas Shipping Act, was extended so that overseas shipping companies shall remain exempt from income taxes until 1985, thus enabling them to develop more quickly and be more competitive with foreign operators. Oceangoing vessels are also exempt from custom duty and import tax.

For shipbuilding and ship repair, a comprehensive system of tax incentives was instituted and this was done upon the recommendation of MARINA and the private shipbuilding sector. This is in recognition of the shipyards’ high potentials for labor absorption, industry dispersal, technology transfer and industry linkages.

The investment priorities plan of the Board of Investments was also expanded under the public utilities priorities plan which covers interisland shipping and related facilities. This is, of course, jointly implemented by MARINA and BOI.

All the above tax incentives remain in effect up to now and are basically unchanged in spite of the recent amendment of several tax incentives laws. You will remember that under 1459 and other amendments ot the internal revenue code as well as the tariff and customs code, we have re-imposed some of the taxes on tax-exempt industries. But in shipbuilding and ship repair, as well as in the entire shipping industry, the maritime industry, we have maintained the tax incentives in order to help the industry.

I would like to call the attention to this because this caused a big debate in the decision-making bodies of government including the NEDA and the Cabinet. But this is one manifestation of the administration’s and the political leadership’s full and continuing support for the maritime industry.

Recently, upon the recommendation of MARINA and the Filipino Shipowners’ Association, we promulgate the Philippine ship mortgage decree which adopted features applied in the mortgage laws of the United States as well as Liberia. This makes Philippine ship mortgage equally acceptable to foreign financiers, thus expanding the financing sources of Philippine shipowners engaged in domestic or international shipping.

These organizational changes and promotional measures are indeed substantial especially considering the short span of time during which they were promulgated. The government views all these not as concessions but as vital inputs into the industry’s development requirements, indeed as an investment in the national future.

And we have no reason to regret this expression of our commitment to the industry. For during the brief span of six years, the industry has established itself as one of our country’s major dollar earners. May I say that from a 1975 level of about US$ 121 million, the industry’s foreign exchange receipts rose to about US$232 million at the end of 1977. This excludes the dollar earnings of Philippine vessels in the cross-trade. In 1975, the Philippine Fleet’s share in the carriage of the country’s international trade was only US$46.2 million or about 7.8 percent of the total. At the end of 1977, this rose to US$140 million representing a share of about 14 percent. The annual growth rate has been most dramatic at 44.73 percent.

The merchant fleet, domestic and overseas, showed sharp increase in tonnage from an aggregate of 971, 696 in 1976 to about 1,308,895 in 1977, showing an assets build-up rate that surpasses most of the major industrial sectors in the country. In spite of the worldwide shipping slump, the Philippine market was able to absorb the fleet’s substantial growth as shown by the growth in earnings and the continued financial strength of the shipping industry. I note with great interest that the on-going fleet build-up involves the acquisition of various ship types, thus diversifying our shipping capability. We now witness the arrival of modern vessels like container and roll-on/roll-off ships in the interisland service, including the secondary and tertiary routes, thus extending more efficient and reliable shipping services to the public. In the overseas trade, in addition to the general improvement in the fleet’s share in cargo carriage, we note the entry of specialized vessels designed for the country’s major export and import commodities, as well as the increase in the tonnage of vessels designed for regional employment in consonance with our commitment in the intra-ASEAN trade. This therefore leads toward balanced fleet development which used to concentrate on our traditional trade partners, so that the fleet shall indeed become an active agent in supporting the country’s international trade strategy.

In the same manner, our fishing fleet has expanded substantially with the acquisition of deep sea fishing vessels incorporating sophisticated fishing methods. This is very significant and encouraging, in view of the increasing acceptance of the 200-mile economic zone and our adoption of the archipelagic doctrine. An adequate and strong fishing fleet is of course vital in protecting marine resources within our economic zone.

Developments in the shipbuilding and repair sector have been equally gratifying. Following the promulgation of the shipbuilding development decree of 1975, the number of shipbuilding/repair enterprises increased from 35, with an aggregate capacity of 70,120 GRT, to 106 as of today, with an aggregate capacity of 220,920 GRT. In 1977, these shipyards constructed 97 vessels with a tonnage of 27,049 GRT compared to 74 vessels, with a tonnage of 11,628 GRT in 1976. Significantly, we exported during this period 12 tugboats, confirming the large export potential of our shipbuilding sector. With MARINA’S 10-year shipbuilding program in the pipeline, we expect to see more concrete achievements in the years to come.

Finally, the presence of our seamen in overseas shipping is now being felt abroad as a result of the joint efforts of the National Seamen Board, the Coast Guard, the Ministry of Education and Culture, and MARINA. All these agencies, with the full support of private manning agencies, have cooperated in improving the Filipino seamen’s competitiveness, enabling the seaman group to regularly register annually dollar receipts exceeding US$75 million and becoming the country’s number seven dollar earner.

These achievements and positive development within the Maritime Industry were the result of policy changes and aggressive implementation. But even more, they are the product of the close cooperation between the government and the private sector.

I have come today to commend such a cooperation and to give my congratulations to the private sector as well as the agencies in the government.

At this point it bears noting that the Tightness of our policies governing the industry is in part the result of the counsel and participation of the private sector in policy-making and program implementation. And it is certain, in the hope of greater and more productive private sector effort in line with industry development, that government will seek the unification of the industry sectors under this single chamber that we inaugurate today.

There is no question that our government will sustain its efforts for the development of the maritime industry. We are committed to a dynamic development strategy that must be in constant consonance with short-term and long-term requirements. I wish to give the firm assurance that so long as I am President, this administration will continue its promotional and developmental program for the industry. But more than this, I also wish to reiterate that it is the intention of the political leadership, as well as those who participate in the implementation of policies, that the government will always be ready to sit down and review, and whenever necessary, amend or rescind its policies in the interest of the balanced development of the industry and the welfare of our nation in general. So we now ask the Chamber to adopt an aggressive attitude and initiate such proposals as it may seem wise for the industry and for the country at large.

In this spirit let us now attend to the more current problems of the industry today.

I have been informed that the maritime industry is experiencing some difficulties in implementing the integration of port arrastre services. This is a matter which requires, as I said, participation and cooperation between this Chamber and MARINA; I will await your recommendations in this matter.

In recognition of the importance of government financial assistance in the acquisition of adequate tonnage for the country’s domestic and overseas trade, as well as to further stimulate the local shipbuilding industry, I wish to announce today that I have ordered the following to be implemented:

1. To develop the overseas liner fleet, the Philippine National Lines shall acquire about 10 brand new multipurpose.or liner vessels to be used in Europe, Middle East and U.S. trade routes. An amount of about US$160 million shall be allocated from available soft loans over a two-year period. The vessels so acquired shall be transferred to already established and qualified Philipine overseas shipping companies on a lease-purchase basis.

I understand that there are some shipowners who have shown or manifested reservations about the acquisition of new ships. And that they would prefer the second-hand ones.

I believe that MARINA should now look into the alternative on this option and submit recommendations accordingly.

2. To augment the country’s ocean-going fleet, the PNL shall acquire semi-brand-new or second-hand vessels. This is the first time I see the word brand-new.

But again, the intention is not to acquire these vessels for the government. The intention is to acquire these vessels for the private sector. And therefore the private sector will acquire these vessels on a lease-purchase basis. It is best that we now obtain the opinion and the suggestions from the private sector. This is the reason for the urgency of a chamber of this nature that integrates all the various aspects of the industry. The acquisition of these vessels is a five-year program involving about US$30 million for the first year, and about US$50 million annually for the subsequent four years.

3. For the interisland shipping, the PNL shall acquire newly-built inter-island ships from local shipyards, in accordance with the shipbuilding program of MARINA, to be transferred again on a lease-purchase basis to already established and qualified Philippine interisland shipping companies. PNL, in coordination with MARINA and other relevant government agencies, shall tap World Bank and other soft loan sources and shall immediately commence the groundwork for negotiating a second World Bank shipping loan to be implemented, subject to the full disbursement of the current World Bank shipping loan administered by the Development Bank of the Philippines.

The existing investment incentive programs, financial assistance schemes, and restructured administrative systems are designed to make the maritime industry fully supportive to the development program. It is therefore the joint responsibility of both the government and the private sector to ensure that the maritime industry continue to be an effective and viable agent of national development. These programs are necessarily subject to periodic review, and their continuance shall depend substantially on the degree of cooperation and positive response that the government shall receive from the private sector.

On this day of the inauguration of the Chamber of Maritime Industries, allow me the opportunity to invite, nay, tourge, the members of this Chamber to make this association a fitting instrument for development. Let your Chamber become an effective voice and channel for you to collectively help the government balance the needs of the sectors involved, without neglecting the requirements of those sectors outside the maritime industry, keeping in mind always that all of us are dedicated to one, single objective, that is, the national welfare. Do not doubt that the effectiveness of the Chamber will entirely depend on your capability to adopt a broadminded view, which is not distorted by parochial, special, limited or vested interests, but which is guided by the appreciation of the entire country’s total development program and priorities.

For the Chamber of Maritime Industries to succeed, the leaders of the Chamber must consistently work towards achieving the total perspective of the national interest. Looking at you and watching the developments and listening to the presentations that have been made to me so far by the various groups that are within your industry, I am confident that this Chamber will succeed.

Let me extend to you therefore my congratulations, my best wishes, and the hope for a very successful Maritime Industry and its Chamber.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].