Speech of Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, on Farmers' Day

I am very happy to be with the true heroes of our country, the farmers, once again on this occasion. Farmers are more deserving of praise than some of the brave men we recognize in our country. Although they did not participate in the field of war or politics, every day, farmers pour out their sweat and blood… Every day, they struggle against the trials of nature… Every day, they risk their entire being so that our country does not suffer from hunger.

Agriculture is the cornerstone of Filipino livelihood. The life and destiny of our nation depend on the millions of farmers whose sweat sustains us. Some so-called experts say that our country is lagging behind in development because our livelihood depends on agriculture. This argument of these so-called experts is based on the mistaken belief that the measure of progress is large factories, steel plants and other signs of industrialization. I say this is a mistaken belief because events in the present time have proven that it is not enough for a country to have tons of steel to ensure the progress and prosperity of the people of a nation. In the present time when almost every country is experiencing an economic crisis, it is clear that countries with sufficient food for their people are surviving. The serious problem facing every country in the world today only proves that first of all, sufficient food and the needs of the people are necessary. We Filipinos are fortunate because the Creator has given us a land rich in natural resources. Our fields, our seas, our forests possess resources that are hard to match throughout the world. Although we have a problem due to the energy crisis, this crisis has revealed that many of the developed countries, the countries that rely on industry, like the ancient civilizations buried in the forgotten pages of history, also have feet of clay. It is easy to prove the instability of some of the so-called developed or industrialized countries: we just need to ask them if that oil can quench thirst? Can that steel or iron be served as food? Can those chemicals or plastics be used as a substitute for food if not exchanged for food? And a time will come, which seems to be gradually approaching, when the true value of agriculture in the livelihood of the world will be recognized again.

This is why the policy of our government is focused on high food production… Agrarian reform… Development of our villages. Indeed, we see a future that states that the life and survival of our country depend entirely on the ability of our villages to provide food for our entire country, and on the harvesting of the ingredients needed to make the basic needs of our people. The history of the development of our country for many centuries has been focused on the villages. The first cry of our desire for independence was felt more strongly by millions of Filipino farmers who united to break the chains of our slavery. Many of our soldiers and defenders of independence who remained with the spirit of freedom during the dark days of the past war were young farmers with innate courage and love of freedom and democracy. Our own movement for National Transformation, our New Society, was born from our sincere pledge to eliminate and correct the injustice that has prevailed in our villages for many years. We, as a race, are proud of the monuments of service and change that have taken place in our fields. After many years as a country that still buys rice, the Philippines is now selling rice to other countries, we have increased the income of farmers. With the help of various programs we have launched in the fields, we can overcome even the most severe problems in this time of crisis. We just need to look at the latest events in the villages to discover the resilience and self-confidence we need to face the challenges and problems of the coming years.

Our land reform has redeemed millions of farmers from being chained to the land. As of March 1981, 495,904 certificates of land transfer covering 589,649 hectares of farmland have been distributed to 378,789 farmers. We know that the lack of adequate facilities is what leaves the villages behind in development. That is why we launched a program to lend money to farmers, including Masagana 99, Masaganang Maisan, Biyaya ng Dagat, Bakahan sa Baranggay and Gulayang Bayan. In Masagana 99 alone, we were able to lend P4.5 billion as of 1980. Despite what our opponents say, 80 percent of the farmers who borrowed money paid off their loans. The usurers who charge exorbitant interest rates in the fields have decreased from 90 percent in 1961 to 35 percent in 1976. Due to the success of Masagana 99, lending money was also granted to corn, vegetable gardens, cattle raising, fishermen, and even forest products.

To ensure our Bountiful Harvest at all times, the government subsidizes the cost of fertilizer. As of December 1930, the government has already helped with two billion pesos worth of fertilizer used in the fields of rice and corn farmers. In order to ensure a good price for the harvest of farmers, in 1972 the government created the National Grains Authority, which was tasked with buying and selling grains, especially rice. In 1975, we only had 52 rice mills for 3.2 million cavans of rice. Currently, we have 792 rice mills in various parts of the country and can accommodate 36.2 million cavans. As part of this program, we have set the price of rice to ensure that farmers benefit from their hard work when the price of rice falls during harvest time.

The government is relentlessly installing irrigation in various parts of the country. In 1972, throughout the Philippines, only 730,158 hectares were irrigated. As of 1980, 1,322,390 hectares were irrigated, or a total of 70 percent of the hectares that are now irrigated. In the next ten years, the government will install irrigation for 2.47 million hectares of land, which is 73 percent of the land that can be irrigated in our country.

Our government has allocated P500 million for electricity in the villages, in addition to P282,352,000 from USAID, World Bank, OECF and the Republic of Germany to bring the true signal of progress to our villages. To date, 1,441,000 homes in the villages now have electricity.

Just recently, I signed PD 1467 which launched the National Crop Insurance Program and created the Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation which will insure the crops of 1.6 million farmers in case of any misfortune caused by nature, or if the crops become ill due to plant pests. This crop insurance is the first insurance of its kind and covers all types of crops in the field, including the expenses incurred in planting, fertilizer, medicine, the farmer's share of the insurance premium and other needs with the help of the supervised loan program.

Our efforts to improve yields are not only focused on what I have mentioned. Along with all of this are our projects on research, exchange of experience and knowledge, establishment of cooperatives, and promotion of product exports to other countries. We are doing all of this because more than anyone else, we are truly aware of the shortcomings of our livelihood that depends on agriculture. In order to meet the food needs of our growing population, to increase the income of those in the villages so that our progress will be faster, to completely eliminate the long-standing gap between villages and cities, we must continue our efforts to develop the villages and develop agriculture.

In light of these events, I have decided to announce today some policies and steps of the government to ensure the progress of the livelihood of our farmers.

For rice and corn farmers experiencing problems with rising prices of goods, I authorize the setting of P1.55 per kilo of rice and P1.30 per kilo of corn. I hope that this will make farmers more diligent in harvesting abundantly. To further help our farmers, starting today, the government will launch a rice drying program with an initial fund of P106 million.

One of the main objectives of our food program is to have enough food available to our people at all times. However, there is one area of food production that we are overlooking, and that is milk and dairy products. To correct this, and to save dollars that we spend on buying these products from other countries, today we will launch the dairy development program by appointing three representatives from the private sector who will form the board of directors of the Dairy Development Corporation.

In the past few years, we have successfully turned our village organizations into cooperatives. Currently, we have 21,000 village organizations throughout the country consisting of millions of farmers. To further strengthen these cooperatives of farmers, I order the release of the reserved funds of the barangay, in accordance with the rules of the Central Bank. I also authorize the Land Bank to place the corresponding money in the Cooperative Rural Banks. At least one million pesos each bank cooperative will be deposited. And I also order, starting today, that the Cooperative Development Loan Fund be made a revolving fund so that farmers can benefit from and borrow from it.

To further help our cooperatives, I authorize the Ministry of Agriculture to use the two million pesos it saved on training field personnel who will establish cooperatives. In addition, I empower the National Economic Development Authority to allocate an additional six million pesos for the Philippine Cooperative Foundation, as seed capital. And so that our fellow countrymen who were led astray also enjoy the benefits of the cooperative in the village and who are now returning to peace and surrendering their weapons after pledging allegiance to our flag, I also ordered the reopening of the Amanah Bank to finance the funds needed by our countrymen who fought against the government but are now returning to our ranks and uniting with our principles.

And to ensure the protection of their welfare and rights, starting today, I hereby direct that our farmers have representation in offices related to agriculture, such as the Livestock Development Council, Dairy Development Corporation, and National Wages Council.

I hope you are not too surprised or overwhelmed by the successive policies and measures that I have announced for the sake of our farmers. The farmer is closest to the heart of your government. Your servant is striving to give you all the blessings, help, and support needed to advance agriculture in our country. You can rely on your servant not to stop until we have fully achieved the dreamed progress for the farmer. Your servant will not relent until the condition of the farmer is placed at its peak because in your hands and shoulders, in your strength, truly lies the life, destiny, and future of our country.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.