Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 29th Annual Pacific Travel Association Conference and Workshop

[Delivered on February 1, 1980]

A Dialogue of Cultures

IT SHOULD BE no surprise to you that I have come to deliver my first public address after winning an election here during this annual conference of the Pacific Area Travel Association; for after all, the Philippines expects much from PATA and tourism.

Nothing can be more fulfilling than being able to address oneself immediately to some of the concrete problems we are confronted with. It is for this reason that I have come all the way back from the hustings to be able to speak to you.

But I gathered that this is the fifth day of your conference, and so you must be completely inebriated with speeches. So am I.

Let me, however, meet the demands and imperatives of protocol and welcome you. We welcome you and thank you for choosing for the third time this humble country and city of ours as venue for your annual conference and workshop. You have accorded us a privilege for which I would like to add my words of thanks and appreciation to that of the First Lady who, I understand, addressed you last Monday. Were I a wiser man, I should have kept my silence, since the Lady of the house has spoken. But never having been known for timidity, let me perform the role assigned to me by this new dictator of tourism, Minister Jose Aspiras. Did you know that he came all the way to the North, the northern part of the Philippines from where I come, to drag me back to Manila in order to attend this particular meeting?

I am certain that the impressive array of speakers led by Prime Minister Muldoon indicates the importance of this conference.

That I have arrived only at this late stage of the conference must be indication of the temper of the times. Needless to say, this has been a hectic period for all of us in the Philippines. We not only had a nationwide election of local executives, we also had two state visits—one by the Federal Chancellor of Austria, Bruno Kreisky, and the other by Prime Minister Robert Muldoon of New Zealand. In addition to this are the usual meetings of the National Security Council, our Foreign Policy Council and the National Economic and Development Authority, necessitated by the current and contemporary changes in the international environment.

So I am happy to be able to come and meet with you or at least to say goodbye. The international travel and tourist industry, I am sure, has not failed to feel the same temper of the times. For, if this is a hectic period in our nation’s life, it merely reflects the change and ferment in the times we live in. All over the world today we note bewildering turns in the affairs and relations of nations. We feel the impact of changes taking place; and we sense the tremors that such changes bring about.

This is true not only in the world in general but also throughout the Philippines. For you come at a period when we are in the process of building a New Society and the radical restructuring of our economic, social and political institutions.

As we begin a new decade for our industry, we note many of the factors that will make for growth or difficulty within the industry. We see many problems rising to the fore. We find some of our earlier initiatives requiring reexamination. As this is true of your industry, so is it with small developing nations like the Philippines.

In all this, we have only the certitude that in bidding for growth, we have to make way for change in aspiring to build afresh. We have to make adjustments in the planning and promotion of this industry, particularly in the Pacific which is the compass of our concerns in this conference.

It is of vital importance that, at this critical turning point for travel and tourism in the Pacific, we have a dynamic international organization to temper and soften the asperities of change. The PAT A family of several hundred tourist organizations in the countries of the Pacific Basin constitutes a vital force for the maintenance of stability and dynamism in international travel and tourism. This has been the organization which has spurred over the decades the growth of international travel and the opening of new countries to tourism.

We in the Philippines, for one, are glad to acknowledge that it was PATA which in the early days opened our country to global tourism. And it was its expertise which guided our fledgling tourism industry to its new place among tourist distinctions. What we say of our experience is no doubt true of many other countries in the Pacific.

The success of PATA in the pursuit of its objectives has always flowered from the strength of its unflagging principles: friendship and goodwill, solidarity and unity among all the nation and peoples of the world, irrespective of race, color or creed. What really makes this organization unique among many other international associations is that it has always been strictly based on voluntary membership. Therein lies its fundamental strength: that its members recognize their mutual inter-independence on each other, and pool their expertise and resources together to achieve common goals and objectives. For growth and genuine progress cannot be imposed. Nor can they be legislated.

This is particularly true of such a complex industry as tourism, which reaches out and affects just about every aspect of the socio-economic life of all nations throughout the world. And yet precisely because of this effective potential of the industry, it is one which must be nurtured and guided at all times, and it is an undertaking that requires the cooperation of every sector concerned.

It is timely, indeed, for all of us, especially in the government, to begin to unfold. You have chosen as the theme of your conference “Preparing for Growth,” and grow, certainly, the tourism and travel industry will.

The Seventies have been for everyone of us a sobering experience, and none of its lessons have been as sobering as the new knowledge that growth and progress, too, have their parameters, and that we may no longer forge ahead without at the same time looking back.

In looking back, I don’t propose to just look back at the past decade. As a student of history, may I say that the antecedents of tourism in our part of the world is no less than the fateful encounter of East and West, which began almost at the beginning of known history and continue to our own time. This encounter, which throughout history has been marked by the tumult of war and conquest, was never quite simply a case of the West penetrating the East, or as Hegel conceived it, “a matter of human civilization rising like the sun in the East and setting in the West.” It was rather more of a dialectical interaction continuing indefinitely—with both worlds carrying on their ancient dialogue, meeting their mutual challenges and responses, with the slow but perhaps inevitable movement towards the unification of the world. Whatever it is, this ancient dialogue of the cultures of the East and of the West and among the various races, promoted and maintained by the agencies of war or exploration or trade or hegemonic ambition, is only a reflection of the character of previous eras of human history. And what we see developing now in the conduct of this fundamental encounter between the East and West is in its way the reflection of the progress we have made in our own time towards unification and, hopefully, peace.

The significance that we must attach to international tourism is this: more than just being an effect of modernity, tourism is a fundamental part of the maintenance and promotion of this dialogue, a replacement, if you like, of the old encounters carried on through war, exploration, blood and thunder, religion, and other expediencies. It is, I dare say, one of those indispensable agents for peace and fruitful exchange between East and West in contemporary times, and there is, therefore, all the more reason to nurture it in the face of current threats to global order.

Odd as it may seem, many of the great feats in ancient history were inspired at root by the same impulse of modern-day travel and tourism: the curiosity of peoples about one another. Alexander’s grand dream of winning Asia grew from a fascination with the East. And who can ever doubt that Marco Polo was a tourist of great imagination and daring? What Genghis Khan and the Mongolian Empire brought to the East-West encounter, what the travels of Marco Polo opened to the West of the mystique and the riches of the East, what animated Alexander the Great to seek union with Asia, and reach the Hindus, what brought Europe to Asia in the 16th century—the rounding of the Cape of Good Hope, the takeover of Malacca, Albuquerque, in both Goa and Malacca, Serana and Tarnate in the Moluccas, Magellan in the Philippines—all these were in their own way precursors of the encounters of people, which, broadly speaking, lies at the heart of tourism.

In recalling before this forum the deeper historical dimension of tourism, I am suggesting that perhaps the way through the contemporary uncertainties of the industry may well lie in a firmer vision of our values and our goals in the industry, a vision that covers not merely economic ends but the larger considerations of culture and history. This is also to suggest that you will find answers if you look and try to understand the words of our time and the meaning of events, and not simply be enclosed within the concerns of purely tourist economics.

In the past, the basic assumption on which the future development of tourism was predicated was that, given the natural course of events, the industry would continue to grow and expand steadily and indefinitely in proportion to population growth, the rise in disposal income, and the development of the necessary technology to accommodate the evergrowing number of tourists and travelers in search of new destinations. This, in turn, was premised on a number of more fundamental assumptions: that there would be a constant and virtually inexhaustible supply of energy and natural resources; that the international economy would grow according to an orderly pattern and gradually result in a more equitable distribution of wealth among the nations of the world, and that this growth in turn would, in the end, lead to harmony, peace and political stability.

Then came 1974 as well as 1979, and nothing has ever been quite the same again.

In attempting to map out industry strategies and programs for growth in the Eighties, one fundamental reality seems to stand out clearly: the tourism and travel industry can no longer view its prospects for the future as separate from the main stream of human socio-economic development. For tourism and travel are no longer the special prerogatives of the wealthy, the powerful and the few. They have, in our time, become the patrimony of all, regardless of class, color or creed, and must, therefore, reflect as accurately as possible the broad spectrum of society’s concerns.

And what, in essence, are these concerns?

The optimal utilization of resources, first of all. Perhaps, the bigger, richer and more powerful nations of the world do not yet regard the problems of the tourism and travel industry from this perspective. But we who belong to the developing nations of the world realize only too well how precious little of our resources we can really afford to squander. Every investment in a new hotel or resort, each new aircraft and money spent on promoting our respective destinations around the world is a resource that would otherwise go to even more pressing requirements like food and shelter, health, education and social welfare.

It is of course well and good for our experts to delve into the mathematical intricacies of the benefits to be derived from tourism income, or how many times that income multiplies itself before it spreads out to the broad base of our population. The question, however, is: Does that income feed mouths that are hungry, or provide other basic necessities, or provide employment opportunities?

Every developing country in this decade must ask itself these questions, not only of tourism, but of every industry it lends priority to. One thing is certain. Glamour alone, or prestige, no longer justifies this industry or any industry for that matter. If tourism is to remain relevant to our times, it must broaden the base of its social concerns

Secondly, the industry must reflect the powerful concern today of many nations for the protection of the environment and the preservation of culture. Environment and culture once lost or destroyed, are absolutely irreplaceable Thus, they may neither be ignored or prostituted for material or selfish ends, as they often have been in the past. In the Eighties we may no longer allow tourists to indiscriminately spear fish in our waters or hunt our wildlife. We would like to see less high-rise hotels on our beaches. On tours, we would rather that our visitors and guests see more of our historical monuments and ethnic dances than our shopping centers and our night life. Or better yet, that they see both of them, one at night and the other in the daytime.

Third, there has to be some new regard for the honesty of travel experience. The traveler of today demands quality of service and genuine value for his expenditure. We, as destinations, must show him not merely the cosmetics or the glamour of it all, but also as many facets of ourselves and what we really are. For if tourism is to be an effective vehicle of understanding and communication among us, it must at least be an honest experience before it can become an enriching one.

Enrichment and education, these, today, over and above mere recreation, are the values the traveler seeks. They are therefore the values we must seek to project to him. Friendliness as shown through the warmth of a smile cannot be promulgated. To touch someone and affect his life is an effort of the heart.

On the whole what we would like to see, both as laymen and as policy planners of the tourism industry and of government, is a simpler, yet at the same time more honest, travel experience that emphasizes not merely numbers or profit margins, but also the human factor and a quality of service consonant with it.

In the years to come, we will see travel becoming more and more accessible to as wide a segment of the human population as possible. And in this accessibility, we cannot but perceive tourism’s potential not only for its own growth, but also for a truly positive contribution to the development of human brotherhood. For tourism has left virtually no part of the world untouched. More than any attempt at propaganda, or mere public relations by the government of the world and their peoples or even diplomacy as art, it is travel that perhaps in the end will actually supply the link to mutual understanding among all the peoples of the world. Where all the statesmen and the diplomats and the political leaders now seem to fail, it would seem, travel and tourism will succeed.

All this is to suggest that we ought to redirect our aspirations and our goals in this industry to its truly vital mainspring which is the desire of people to know one another, the pristine pleasures of travel and that historic dialogue between the East and the West. This is to say that we must think once more of tourism as a bridge—a bridge to understanding and knowledge among the nations and peoples of the world.

Even with the formidable problems that must surely be confronted in the present decade, growth, I agree with you, is possible and can be planned. And I venture further to believe that international tourism will continue to contribute much to global understanding and knowledge, even when other agents of international goodwill may despair and abandon the quest.

In this we share your hope, then, that the 1980s will be truly years of growth, not only for your industry but also for the world we live in as a whole. May your industry be a genuine and enriching factor in this growth for as long man’s curiosity over what lies across the mountains lives within him; tourism and travel will continue to grow.

I therefore wish you the best of luck and congratulate you on your successful conference.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1985). Presidential speeches (Vol. 10). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].