Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Assembly of Lawyers’ Association of the Philippines

The declaration which this assembly has written and proclaimed is a testament of faith of men of the law in the law of the land, and it is one which I wholly share as a member of the legal profession and as the privileged servant of the highest office in our country.

Nothing that is said in this declaration sanctifies or endorses the position of any party or candidate in the current political campaign or the election. It rather seeks to clarify and give voice to a fundamental provision in our constitution that relates to the right and the duty of suffrage. It speaks to the fundamental exercise of choice in our democratic society as the solitary principle for the determination of authority and power in our country. For without this, as the declaration makes very clear, the active consent of the governed so essential in democratic politics and government would not be possible.

You have been concerned to develop a position arising from what is specifically enshrined in law and in the constitution. And there can be no doubt that in the context of our constitution: it is, indeed, “The obligation of every citizen qualified to vote to register and cast his vote.” Suffrage is not a mere privilege, it is an obligation. So it is written in the law of the land. So it will remain as long as the provision stays in the constitution. And so the point, as you well say, is “unarguable.”

As lawyers we are not disposed to discuss at length what is not written in the law, for this is not as we say “relevant” to the adjudication of disputes; we pay our greatest attention to the construction and interpretation of the meaning of statutes. But as citizens, it is obviously important that we ever inquire and understand not only the meaning of the law, but its reason, its justice, its necessity.

And this is what I would like to do in the brief time allotted to me here this morning.

Suffrage is so much a part of our lives today that we tend sometimes to forget the price that people in many ages have had to pay in the winning of this right. We assume it as a necessary adjunct to citizenship, and yet if we but pause briefly to reflect, it is a cherished possession that had to be fought for, often under pain of oppression, sometimes at the sacrifice of life.

It is surely revealing to note for instance, that as late as a few decades ago, men were still fighting for suffrage not only in the less developed parts of the world, but even in societies as advanced as those in Europe and America. The principle of one man, one vote for instance did not fully come to life in Great Britain — that land so often regarded as the mother of democracy — until 1948, when a law granting favored sectors of society the privilege to vote twice in an election was struck down. And we all know, of course, what the blacks in America have had to struggle with in order to effect passage as late as the sixties of their rights as voters in American political life.

But then it is fair to ask why has suffrage been so important an issue in political life?

The answer is to be found in the very postulates of democratic theory and government; in the basic perception that democracy is not possible, democracy is an illusion, where there is no mechanism for the expression of consent by the governed.

Other systems may devise different ways to organize political power and authority, but in any society that aspires to be democratic, it is principally the vote which is the instrument of political power.

In various forms, suffrage existed in earlier human societies — in the Greek City-States, in the pre-democratic societies of the middle ages, in semi-autocratic communities — but it was principally during the accelerated development of democratic theory in the age of enlightenment that it began to emerge as a principle flowing from both political and moral considerations.

As men and governors began to crystallize the democratic idea, so did they also come to recognize that suffrage is the principal instrument of governance in democratic society, and that as such it must be seen as both “a private right” and “a public duty.”

Just as men have claimed the right of vote as a right flowing not only from political considerations, but from moral ideas of the basic equality and dignity of men; so also did it become a duty deriving not only from legal considerations but from the moral view of human society.

The source of this moral dimension to suffrage may be briefly traced to the decisive change in human perspectives that occurred in the great transition from the middle ages to the modern age. As many of us will remember in the middle ages, there was what is called a “holistic” conception of representation in human society. The human individual was not the unit of society, but groups, classes and interests. On this basis the initial development of suffrage resulted in the representation of a few privileged classes, and the exclusion of others deemed undeserving of the right.

With the enlightenment, and the light it cast on the human affairs, we begin to see the enthronement of the individual as the basic unit to be counted in human society. We begin to perceive the individualistic conception of representation.

For all the advances achieved, however, in political theory, practice would take time to give everyone access to this fundamental right of suffrage. Legally imposed exclusions prevented many from voting, mainly the underprivileged in society, largely through the ruse of invoking all kinds of qualifications for suffrage, and principally for the purpose of maintaining the position of the ruling classes.

Only by an appeal on moral grounds — on the principle of the basic equality of men in regard to their rights and their right to dignity and self-respect — and only by active and militant struggle, did universal adult suffrage finally become the right that we know today in almost every society that claims or aspires to be democratic.

We often fought the concept of law, law as being the collective will of a community, independent of the individual will of its members and enforced by acknowledged authority. More simply stated, it is the body of rules governing the conduct of persons living in association with others, under the guaranty of social compulsion. In the examination of what is the meaning of a right, as we lawyers know, we found that it is the power to exact from other individuals the observance of a certain act or behaviour, which power is recognized and enforced by state authority. On the other hand, a duty is the juridical necessity to observe a certain demeanor or conduct sanctioned by law. Right and duty are therefore reciprocal, correlative and inseparable, being the opposite aspects of the same relation.

There is also one fundamental rule on jurisprudence: when the law is clear, there is no room for any further interpretation. As the Latins put it, from the law there is no departure. A verbis legis non est recedendumy.

The test of any principle is its application to its extreme, if we were to push the extreme principle of refusal to vote to a complete boycott to its ultimate conclusion so that no one would vote than we would have no public officials. We would have no government; there would be no society. It is as simple as illogical and as ridiculous as that.

However, when I look at the exponents of the boycott, I see that it is not just boycott that they are working for; what they want is to bring down the republic by whatever means, including violence and bloodshed.

We lawyers have saying that external actions show internal secrets. “Acta exteriora indicant interiora secreta”. If we were truly convinced that those who advocate boycott are prompted by conscientious reasoning and a sincere belief in its validity as a political theory, I would treat the matter with more extreme thought, but I happen to be personally informed as to why some of these proponents of boycott have invoked this mode of. These proponents who were formerly members of the KBL demanded of me and the party certain political and even commercial concessions which we could not grant. Sullen and sulking from the rejection of their demands, their financial and political aspirations thus shattered. They have assumed the posture not only of civil disobedience but criminal disobedience.

Citizenship is not a compartmentalized concept –it is an indivisible reality. One cannot be half-Filipino and half-alien at one’s choice. One cannot invoke Filipino citizenship to enjoy advantages and act as an alien to escape inconveniences.

The obligation to vote is not only a legal obligation. It is also a moral obligation. Allow me to read to you a book used by many public schools, “Government and Politics of the Republic of the Philippines” written by Gregorio F. Zaide and Sonia M. Zaide. On page 146, item No. 4 of the topic “Responsibilities of Citizens” states the following:

To vote honestly and with full intelligence. Filipino citizens must participate in elections. They must go to the precincts on election day to vote because “Voting is a weapon of the citizen to safeguard his freedom.” Any citizen who voluntarily and deliberately refuses to vote is committing a sin not only against democracy but a mortal sin. As Pope Pius XII said: “It is an obligation of anyone with the right to vote, male or female, to participate in elections. Anyone who does not vote, especially if it is due to laziness or cowardice, is committing a serious sin — a mortal sin.”

The obligation to vote is not merely a legal obligation, it is also a moral obligation. Let me go direct to the point and read you a textbook which is used in most of the catholic schools, Government and Politics of the Republic of the Philippines Authored by Gregorio F. Zaide and Sonia M. Zaide. Page 146, item No. 4 of the topic “Duties of the Citizens”:

The same book refers to the joint pastoral letter of the catholic hierarchy of the Philippines on elections, dated September 12, 1953. Again I read that part to you:

The Duty to Vote

The vote, however, is not merely a right to be protected — it is a duty to be fulfilled. Every qualified citizen of a democratic republic has a duty to vote, and to vote for those candidates who would in his honest opinion best discharge of the duties of the office to which he is elected. This duty can be a grave duty, that is, one which must be performed under pain of mortal sin, when there is danger of evil men obtaining control of the government unless they are decisively voted down .”

Under the heading statement of principles , the pastoral letter of the catholic hierarchy states:

“Experience has shown, however, that when the republic is a nation consisting of millions of people inhabiting an extensive territory, the citizens cannot effectively and efficiently exercise their authority themselves, but must communicate it to certain representatives of their own choosing who will administer that authority in their behalf.

These representatives of the people and executives of their authority are not chosen permanently but for a term of years defined in the fundamental law or constitution of the republic; at the end of which the citizens are given a fresh opportunity, through the holding of elections, to decide whether they wish to retain their former representatives in office, or to replace them with new ones.

It is clear therefore from all these statements that it is both a legal and moral duty for the Filipino citizen to register and to vote.

I THANK and commend the lawyers of our country for staging this rally for the rule of law. You deserve the accolade of our people for according them intractable, ineluctable, and inexorable guides, norms, and attitudes towards the correct and reasonable application of the law, for you do so with patriotism, prudence and wisdom — true to the traditions bequesthed to us by solon, the stateman and lawgiver, who lived long before the dawn of Christianity, and who during his lifetime (638 to 559 B.C.) framed the democratic laws of Athens. These democratic traditions he founded have survived to this day. Solon-like in your espousal of the rule of law, you vindicate the stability of law. Law ever seeks stability. And it is stable because it is the law. Exceptions can neither be justified nor countenanced by imagined wrongs, by selfish motives, by personal ambitions. While there are men like you the future of the Philippines is safe.

CONCLUSION

You deserve the accolade of our people for according them intractable, ineluctable, and inexorable buides, norms, and attitudes towards the correct and reasonable application of the law. For you do so with patriotism, prudence and wisdom — true to the traditions bequeathed to us by Solon, the states.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.