Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Commencement Rites of the Philippine Military Academy

[Delivered on March 18, 1984]

Address of President Marcos at the Commencement Rites of the Philippine Military Academy

Address of the President Commencement Rites – Philippine Military Academy 18 March 1984

I have come today from the warmth of our nation’s capital to the cool and tranquility of this city and this campus to mark once more with you these immemorial rites of graduation at the Philippine Military Academy.

In the long line of graduating classes that have passed through the gates of this institution into the service of our people and our country, you are the 18th batch in the line. And significantly too, the largest corps of graduates ever.

This rite of graduation is of a piece with a whole series of commencements being held throughout the country at this time of year. Nothing to my mind speaks so eloquently of what we are and what we value as a people than this high significance which we all attach to the years of training and learning in school.

Other societies may perhaps prize for themselves other things as their richest possession or as their most enduring qualities of character. In our case, I think, there can be no doubt, that we value above all, individually and together, the acquisition of learning and training. Individually, we attach with an education the promised fulfillment of individual hopes and dreams. As a nation, this is the chief means to fulfill the national purpose to conquer the barriers to national dignity and progress, to enable us to grow in national excellence as we increase in numbers, and to build towards the kind of society we all zealously covet and aspire.

Nowhere perhaps is this enduring link between schooling and the national future so well underlined than here at the Philippines Military Academy, which exists to serve no other purpose than the advancement of our national life. In a record of service that now spans 79 years, this institution has served as the cradle of leadership for our country’s peace and defence forces. It is a key fount from which we draw to ensure continuity of leadership in our defense forces. It is a key to the maintenance of the undiminished sovereignty and security of our republic.

This is a specially appropriate time to reflect deeply upon these concerns of national life for we live today amidst stress and challenge to national life. This is a time when more than ever our country needs to renew herself in terms of vision, of purpose, of resolve, and of capacity.

In the life of a nation; we sometimes mistakenly think that all that is needed for it to survive and prosper is resolution and will. Yet as the historian Barbara Tuchman has so instructively observed, “not all the will in the world can suffice without capacity.” and capacity is nothing less than the ability to accomplish the mightiest conceptions we may aspire to create, to attain the heights which we may dare to scale.

We talk all the time, particularly now when the election fever is upon us, about the things that we do not have and would wish to have, about the possessions which we implore our people to covet, about goals for national life that must be the main business at hand, about progress, wealth and security for the nation. But it seems to me that all this talk is but a case of substituting illusions for real solutions to complex problems, until we truly apply ourselves to the mechanics of development in our society: to the tasks of meeting problems, of ordering priorities, of planning programs, and of achieving goals that are within our means and capacities.

For it is never enough merely to aspire and dream. We must achieve, or we are simply back where we started.

There is, it seems to me a vivid illustration of this in the challenge that we face in the realm of ensuring the defence and security of our country.

For a long time now, we have lived under the illusion that our national security can only be conceived in reliance on others, that our nation can only survive and endure in terms of submission to the wishes of external powers. But the lessons of experience have begun to teach us otherwise, and with disillusionment has come at last the profound and painful knowledge that, in spite of all that we have done to honor the letter and meaning of covenants and agreements, we are only as secure as the preparations and sacrifices we have made for our defense and security. We are only as sovereign and safe as the capacity we have installed in our defense and security system.

Everything else — the seeming illusion of another country’s readiness to fight with us in the fortuitous event of armed event of armed aggression against us, the desperate belief that alliances will serve the ambitious purposes for which they were made — are really no more than hopes and illusions.

And so it is under this light that we must conceive, design and implement the Filipino answer to the dangers to national sovereignty and security.

The components of this response are many, but they all come down to one main theme: self-reliance. From the conscious acceptance of the fact that we can only rely on ourselves, follow the various factors of strategy, tactics, weaponry and training that make up the capacity of our armed forces.

Obviously, we are a nation that must live with various limitations that bar us from ever achieving total security and prepareness against the aggressive intentions of others. But given those limitations, the answer is neither dependence on others nor submission to the hazards of fortune. It lies rather in doing the things that are within our capabilities and resources to build and maintain.

One component lies in strategic planning against the principal scourge to the security of countries like ourselves insurgency and rebellion from within the society itself. If we have learned anything at all about the EBB and collapse of nations in the recent past, it is above all the’ fact that their collapse have been seeded from within and not from armed invasion. Insurgency has been the soul of this phenomenon of ferment and revolution. And indifference and helplessness against it have been the key to national decay and disintegration.

To this challenge therefore, we address the greater part of the attention, planning and preparedness of our National Defense Forces today. We align much of our work on tactics, weaponry and training to meeting this danger.

This is not to suggest that we are oblivious to the other danger of direct armed aggression against us by a hostile power. With the prudent and cautionary knowledge that we have gleaned from the complexities of international life today, we recognize that such dangers can come in many forms. There are some that we can realistically meet and therefore prepare for, and there are others that we can only parry and meet through the efficacy of good diplomacy and amicable relations. It is not necessarily the fate of small nations without the modern-day arsenals of destruction to be the object and victim of these weapons.

With this knowledge that there are conflicts which we can realistically meet and contain must follow the work of ensuring the absolute fulfillment of the missions and asks which our Armed Forces embrace. We must strive for the fullest exploitation of every resource within our means. Just as in the case of the Israeli Armed Forces, where a tank or a plane or a gun in their hands is expected to outperform its equal in other hands, so must we nurture this conception of our arms.

Thirdly, there is the training of our officers and men in the Armed Forces, which must strive for the highest possible training and preparation that is within our capability to nurture and sustain.

Here at the Philippine Military Academy, we have I think today a truly vital institution for the preparation of young men for the tasks of command in our security forces. What you have undergone during your years of study in the academy is both a model for the training in the profession of arms and for responsible citizenship in society. Of you, it may appropriately be said that you emerge from here truly prepared to become an officer and a gentleman.

But this is not all. Learning and training must not stop as you leave these portals. Service in our armed forces must in itself become a time of learning and growing too. And the same must also apply to the entire rank file when we must endeavor to continue to train, retrain, equip, and polish for the tasks that must be met.

We must expect the highest kind of training and preparedness from our standing Armed Forces, because our resources can only maintain a limited Armed Force. The professional career force must constitute a standing nucleus to meet national emergencies. And only in the event of grave danger to the nation should we then summon our reserve forces for the tasks of security and defense.

This is not to say that our reserves should not receive full focus and attention. Indeed, we must continue to build them up and to keep them in readiness and fitness. And as we have seen in our anti-insurgency effort, we must see even our local communities as indispensable supporters in the struggle for order and security.

It is not in pride and arrogance that we say now that we must base national security on an active sense of self-reliance. This is merely the lesson of the times, and we must learn it or else become servants to chance.

In a world full of many anxieties and uncertainties, in which the EBB and flow of events constantly place nations in the grip of various perils and difficulties, the goal of self-reliance has ceased to be merely a hope, but an imperative. And I mean by this, self-reliance in the totality of national existence itself, not just its security posture, but the whole of it, its economic, its political, its cultural dimensions.

What we have seen during the past months is an indelible lesson for national life which we must never forget. What we have learned in the course of coping is something that should not desert us when at last we hurdle our present difficulties.

The good news that I can tell you today, as you enter formal service to our Republic, is that in the midst of so many difficulties and adversities, our country today is fully showing its reserves of strength and character. Even with the protracted talks with world financial institutions, the national economy has begun to revive in vigor and activity. The stability of the nation, which for a time was the subject of grim predictions, has never been more assured and certain, to the despair of international media which continue to find their forecasts defied. And with elections of the new parliament at hand, the cause of national strengthening will further move forward.

Back during the time of the war, when the future seemed so uncertain and dark, the writer George Orwell picked 1984 as a touchstone for reading the shape of things to come. And he foresaw this year as a time of irretrievable retrogression for the human race.

The world may not look too good these days in some parts and in patches. Yet considering the human condition, and looking squarely at ourselves and at our prospects today, George Orwell, great writer that he was, did not divine the future. I profoundly believe that 1984 will be a good year for us, and hopefully for the rest of the world.

And this is perhaps a very good time indeed for young men like you to enter into the noble and demanding vocation of service to our people and our country.

Congratulations to you all and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.