Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 77th anniversary of the Philippine Constabulary

Civility and Public Order

On the anniversary of the Philippine Constabulary and the Integrated National Police, which coincide as today marks the seventy-seventh year of the Philippine Constabulary and also the third year of the Integrated National Police — I greet all the brave soldiers and auxiliaries, especially those who have been awarded symbols of valor and service to the Motherland.

The salute you have just given your Commander-in-Chief expresses beyond words the loyalty and support that this service has unfailingly shown through all these many years, to the Presidency and, more than this, to the Republic and to the Constitution. It is with profound appreciation and admiration that I return the salute of the corps.

Today’s celebration fittingly brings together the Philippine Constabulary and the Integrated National Police under the auspices of a single celebration, with the Constabulary marking its 77th year, and the Integrated National Police its third year of existence. That the two should observe their anniversaries together is only a reflection of the unprecedented links that they have developed during the years of crisis government in the service of our people and our nation.

There is a special significance to this celebration that we should hold it for the first time in this new home of the Philippine Constabulary Brigade, Camp Bagong Diwa. This camp marks the farthest southern and eastern boundaries of the old Fort William Mckinley now known as Camp Bonifacio. This camp was the farthest from the central headquarters of the Philippine Army when the Philippine government received this military reservation from the United States of America.

To call this new camp by the terms in which we now express our national purpose and aspiration is to underline the strong bonds of this corps to the Republic, and to underscore the distinguished contribution of the service toward the attainment of “Isang Bansa, Isang Diwa.”

The record of the Constabulary and the Integrated National Police is well known to all; the awarding of the medals, certificates, the commendations indicates the share and contributions of the Constabulary and Integrated National Police to the tasks of nation building. We do not have to relieve the early years of crisis government to appreciate the distinguished record of the service in the maintenance of internal security and public order at a time when our nation faced disorder, rebellion, anarchy; and when in such desperate straits we needed the strength of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Constabulary was called upon to be the first striking force to enforce the law. History fully records the magnitude of the challenge we faced in the troubled days of 1971-72 and the response of our Armed Forces, particularly the Philippine Constabulary, to the grave dangers to national security. The first group authorized men to enforce the edict of martial law belong to the Constabulary, the planning groups that wanted the proclamation of martial law with the civil government leader included the leader’s of the Philippine Constabulary.

We do not need to review the sustained efforts of the Constabulary and the Integrated National Police to improve the climate for peace and order in our country, and how progressively our institutions for law enforcement and crime prevention have established new civility and order in our national life. These, too, are well known to all, because they are palpably felt by everyone.

In each and every area of internal security and public order — be it in the continuing fight against subversives, in the remaining conflicts in Mindanao, or in the day-to-day tasks of maintaining order in our cities and countryside— we are aware of the courage, dedication and the patriotism of the men of this service, and we all feel this courage and dedication in the substance of our national life for they have become the models for the citizenry.

Less evident, but no less real, is the contribution that your achievements in law enforcement have made to the larger effort of national strengthening and development. And it is this which I wish to underscore in paying tribute to the Constabulary and the INP today.

We may indeed regard this 77th year of the Constabulary and this third year of the INP, as a milestone in their respective histories, because they coincide with a year of major change and transition in our political life.

The holding of free elections in our country, and the convening of the Batasang Pambansa, are no less the achievement of our government decision makers and our people, than they are the achievement of our police and constabulary forces.

We cannot stress enough the umbilical link between the degree of order and civility we maintain in our national life, and the democratic processes of government that they make possible. Political processes and institutions are mere illusions without lawful authority to sustain them in the life of society.

Of this incontrovertible dictum we know so much from experience, that only the most anarchic and selfish interests today would dream of political change under a climate less civil and secure than what we have in our country.

To my mind, civility and public order are the first prerequisites of political development. Our failures in the past did not arise so much from the poverty of political ideas, as from the neglect and erosion of order in our society.

Within a developing society like ours, the importance of this is all the greater, because as in any developing society, there are many forces at work tending toward division, conflict, and tension. There has been no time for the orderly growth of laws alongside the advancement of the human state. Institutions, far from being the outgrowth of the way people live, are in fact grafted to highly stratified social orders, whose inequities soon enough rise to challenge and even destroy those institutions. The level of human poverty and misery is so severe that in the event, even the most rosy of democratic prescriptions die on the lips of the citizen who is deprived and hungry.

And it has always been at best dubious, if not wicked, to think of establishing a democratic political order according to principles and experiences derived from alien settings.

It is only when we understand how important is the achievement of public order to political change and modernization that we can see and finally appreciate the current efforts we are making towards the full normalization of our political life.

Many of course have contended that once the threats to national security were met, we should have immediately proceeded to dismantle martial law and call for national elections. Many have believed that because we sought to give reforms time in which to grow on our soil, the directions of national politics were towards the tightening rather than the relaxation of crisis government.

The currents of political life today give the lie to all these idle prognostications, for we have now in fact a confident program for political development that is stable and secure, and will, as I fully believe, lead to the full establishment of democracy in our country.

For if there is now some confidence and optimism that our present steps towards political modernization will succeed, it is because we have taken the time to slowly sow reforms in our society, not the least of which is the establishment of the habit of public order and civility in our society.

And if there is promise in the work of the Batasang Pambansa today, it is not so much because it is grounded on what we call democratic principles, as it is because the idea of popular government is grafted to a national polity and a national life that will be able to sustain and strengthen it as an institution, a natural institution of our society.

We can well imagine what might have been the result had our decision to normalize been premature. Introduced for instance before we could give roots and life to our peace and order efforts, it could well have resurrected the greatest evils of the old political system, not the least of which was the intimidation of the national electorate with which the Constabulary and the Integrated National Police are too well acquainted. It could well have brought back the bloodbaths of past elections, which were the outgrowth of a politics based on influence and privilege.

The Constabulary is well aware of these aspects of our political history, because invariably it had to play the very difficult role of policeman to our anarchic elections of the past.

Now, with the program for political normalization finally in process, we can see what has been our signal gains.

Today, we know that we can build a stable and democratic political order without having to suffer the fratricidal conflicts of the past.

We can create political change without sacrificing what we have won through crisis government, and without losing direction in the national development effort. The loss of lives from the ranks of the Constabulary and the Integrated National Police shall not be in vain.

The sense of an orderly evolution in our political affairs is to be seen in the actions of our Batasang Pambansa today, as well as in the fruitful workings of the barangays and the Sanggunians, the local governments, and the regional councils.

And it should come, I believe, as good news to the officers and men in the Constabulary and the INP that we have succeeded so far in the program of political normalization, without reawakening the conflicts of our political life that were the nightmare of the men in uniform in the past.

That there is dissent, tolerated and listened to, is a fact. But it seems to me now possible that a constructive opposition can rise and serve our society, and that we need not fear that it will be another anarchic force that will seek to dismantle all that we have taken pains to build by utilizing violence to obtain political power.

We shall be detained, of course, from time to time by various obstacles to our programs of political normalization. We shall have to face up to many residual problems that require utmost care and effort. We shall have to attend to the problems and anxieties that will arise as soon as we are able to hold elections at local government level.

But to my mind, if we keep steadily on course, neither timorous about political change nor harried by the carping of those who profess to know better, than the present political leadership, we shall irreversibly move towards the full establishment of our own form of government, call it semi-parliamentary or modified parliamentary government, whatever it is that we consider apt and necessary for our democracy.

Our crisis government will be the first to promote the full realization of a democratic political order, but it will also be the first to abort any untoward development that will unmoor us from the reforms of the last five and a half years.

The fruitful realization of our goal of political normalization rests on a progressive heavy buildup of national capabilities, not on an apocalyptic or radical change from the current state of national affairs. This should be apparent to all the citizenry now.

It will require a steady and vigilant eye on the climate of internal security and order.

It will require purposive work at barangay and local government level, so that steadily power at the base will become a force not to be ignored at the top of the political ladder.

It will require the same aggressive push in the economic sector, with emphasis on the advancement of backward communities and the grassroots.

It will require continuous and steady gains in the social sector, so that men, women and children will come to know what it means to have rights and initiatives in a democratic society. And the counterpart of such rights, the duties of the citizenry to the nation and to the country.

Most of all it will require a sense of oneness among our people — oneness in identity and in purpose — so that thereby we will have one direction as a nation.

The semi-parliamentary system we are building provides for a transition from crisis government that will not sacrifice the gains of the past five and a half years, but instead consolidate and develop them. No other system so uniquely combines the principles of undivided and rational planning, concerted implementation, and full accountability that have been so instrumental in our surmounting crisis after crisis.

And if today, we stand to reap these fruits from our labors, let it be said that you of the Constabulary and you of the Integrated National Police have been in part their creator, and will surely be their guardian.

And let it be said too that those members of the corps who have fallen in the line of duty — in the countless missions that the Constabulary has had to undertake against subversives, secessionists, and criminal elements and those who would utilize violence to attain their ends, will find their full vindication in a political order worthy of their deeds and their sacrifice.

The work of our police and constabulary forces will continue to be the life-support of the best of our vision in the political, economic, and social spheres. And it appears to me no small source of reassurance that the service continues to strengthen itself in its organization, in the expansion of its services, and in the improvement of its overall vigilance over the nation.

Camp Bagong Diwa is but one of the many projects undertaken by the Constabulary, but in a way its story captures the spirit of the entire service. In a miniature scale, it is symbolic of the peaceful transformation of our national life from anarchy and chaos to the emergence of the new Society.

Formerly a part of the vast Fort Bonifacio Military Reservation of the Philippine Army, and before that of Fort William Mckinley, this camp used to be the haven of squatters who live disorderly lives. The squatters were relocated, given new homes at Dasmariñas, Cavite and provided the opportunity to pursue decent means of livelihood. Then the PC moved in, and what was once a 47.8-hectare wasteland grew into the military camp that it is today. Two of the engineers who participated in the planning and development of this Camp have just been awarded the medal to which they are entitled.

This positive example of the constructive work of the Philippine Constabulary assumes greater significance when we consider that Camp Bagong Diwa is the home of the PC Brigade, the mother unit of several battalions committed in Mindanao. The honor guard was composed of the 61st PC Batallion, on its 2nd assignment to Mindanao and is leaving soon.

And it is to my mind fitting that this camp should gather us here as the Philippine Constabulary and the Integrated National Police enter into another year of service to the nation. This week, the Constabulary/INP take another positive step toward further strengthening the foundations of peace and national security, with the full activation of 13 PC/INP Regional Commands, corresponding to the 13 administrative regions of the country.

With the breaking up of the former four PC/INP Zones into 13 Regional Commands, each of the 13 regions becomes more manageable in size. In effect, this organizational setup will enable each regional commander to give adequate attention and control over his area of jurisdiction insofar as law enforcement and maintenance of law and order are concerned. More important, however, is that with the regionalization of the PC/INP commands, greater cooperation and coordination of development efforts can be achieved among the PC/INP, the civil officials, and the population as a whole.

I have no doubt that the regionalization of the PC/INP command will enable us to synchronize even more effectively the work of our law enforcement forces with the tasks of development planners and government administrators.

It is a development which in itself already encapsulates the total thrust of national development effort — which says to all that our vision is a total one, that our tasks are a single cooperative venture, and that all of us in government and in the Armed Forces sustain and support one another.

Before I forget, I would like to sign in your presence the decree which authorizes the payment of police hazardous duty pay under certain conditions.

It is indeed true that in many instances the police are the first force that meet the enemy. And while the Constabulary personnel are entitled to hazardous duty pay, as well as the other civilian officials of the government, the police have never been given this right. I now sign a decree which entitles personnel of the Integrated National Police to hazardous duty pay when engaged in the following hazardous duties.

(a) Combat operations in critical and embattled areas of the country against insurgents, rebels and/or terrorists.

(b) Crime prevention or suppression operations against armed criminals.

(c) Fire-fighting operations which require the rescue of persons that are trapped inside burning buildings or structures.

(d) Exposure to radiation hazards and to danger in connection with the disarming and disposal of bombs, mines, grenades and other lethal or explosive devices and chemicals.

In your presence I sign this decree.

In view of the alarming increase in death and injury to persons and losses and damage to property from fire, I now sign a Letter of Instruction creating a National Fire Safety Council addressed to no less than 15 officers, 8 ministers, and 7 other officers in government, including the private sector, to constitute a Fire Safety Council. I sign it in your presence.

Inasmuch as one of the causes in the proliferation of arson seems to be in the delay in the prosecution of the same, I hereby order that the crime of arson and other crimes involving destruction as defined under Article 320 to 326 of the Revised Penal Code will now fall under the exclusive jurisdiction of the military tribunal. I sign this in your presence.

In order to give the Constabulary and the INP the equipment in which to fight the fires that had caused so much problems in the past few months, I have ordered defense establishment, the Constabulary, and the Armed Forces to procure all the necessary fire-fighting equipment. I hereby order the Ministry of the Budget, as well as the Secretary of Finance to support this with both budgetary and borrowed funds in the procurement of about 120 fire-fighting units for the whole country. I sign the approval in your presence.

Once again, I repeat, I greet our auxiliaries and colleagues, as well as the soldiers of the Constabulary and INP. I close with this ideal and this theme — One Nation, One Spirit. We shall always be the foundation and the basis for the progress of our country.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].