Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Diamond Anniversary of the Philippine Rotary Club

[Delivered at the PICC, March 2, 1979]

An Era of Transition and Change

I AM GLAD to have this opportunity to participate in this commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the Philippine Rotary, and to salute on behalf of our people and government what all those years have meant in terms of service to our people and our country.

Among fellowship organizations, the Rotary is justly regarded here in our country, as elsewhere around the world, as more than just a social club; it is a major force for civic action. Indeed, it has seemed to me that the story to the Rotary is intimately bound up with our affairs as a nation.

And this proud tradition of the Philippine Rotary is nowhere more vividly signified than in the persons of your brightest luminaries — of the likes of Gen. Carlos P. Romulo, former Sen. Gil Puyat, and of many Cabinet members and business leaders who have found a second home in the folds of the Rotary.

In fact it is often said that when we can’t get a quorum in the Cabinet, all we have to do is to find out if there is a Rotary meeting.

Of course, there is a certain liability in being closely identified with the formidable grey eminence of the likes of General Romulo. Many people seem to think that the Rotary is for octogenarian stalwarts like him, and I understand that other fellowship organizations have seized upon this to recruit younger people to their own movements.

But if I am to judge by this assembly, the Philippine Rotary is a happy blend of youthful dynamism and ageless probity, and we need never fear that the club will cease to carry on its redoubtable tradition of service to our national community.

When I speak to the gentlemen and ladies of the Rotary, I am aware that I speak to a community of opinion leaders for whom national affairs is of more than passing interest, and for whom the goal of national development and stability is of the greatest concern.

I think it therefore apt that on this commemorative occasion, when most of you are reminiscing over the last 60 years, I should complement the recollections by now directing your thoughts towards the future. For I fully believe that if the last 60 years had been meaningful and significant for your organization, consider what the next 60 years will be like in this most revolutionary of eras in human history.

The first three quarters of the 20th century have come under many names in the course of their unfolding. Many Rotarians will no doubt still remember the slogans back in the twenties proclaiming that this was to be the century of the common man, the century of progress, and the century of human achievement.

In many respects these bold predictions of human achievement in this century have been fulfilled. As one statesman once described it, “Humanity has formed more nations, established more self-government, cast more ballots, built more schools, studied more books, cured more diseases, and ministered to more needy than ever before,” without even mentioning the fact that in this century man has reached the moon.

But there is another side to the ledger, and this is the fact, as Winston Churchill pointed out, that during this period, “More men were killing each other with greater facility than in any other five centuries put together.”

And since the past is prologue to the future, we can predictably expect that the future will be laced with opportunities and dangers in equal measure, and the test will as ever be the probity and ability of humanity to deal with them.

Indeed, we seem now to be astride an era of major transition and change; some have even started to call it a time of revolution, in which comfortable arrangements, systems and assumptions about global affairs are decisively being altered.

One face of the transition is the increasing urgency and gravity of global problems, and the sense of inter-dependence of the entire human family. A crisis for instance in Iran is rapidly turning into a crisis of the entire world, for all humanity. Scarcity of resources put to challenge all nations, regardless of their wealth. Poverty and hunger is no longer thought of as the sole anxiety of the poor nations: they also put to challenge the wealthy countries.

By the same token, we seem to be facing a new complication in the tenuous system of international security. Within a brief span of less than two months, we have seen two major conflicts erupt on Asian continent: first, Vietnam’s intervention in Kampuchea, and more recently, China’s invasion of Vietnam. And both conflicts are nowhere near resolution today than they were at first flush of violence.

How ominously these events, coupled with the turbulence in Africa and the Middle East, have raised the specter of cataclysmic confrontation among the powers, one can only guess at. But clearly, the dangers are great, and the uncertainty of many nations only accentuate the fact.

For us who live so close to the scene of these bitter conflicts, there is the added factor that they are inimical to the strides our country is making in the way of engineering the development of and forging closer relations with our Asian neighbors. Suddenly, after what has seemed a period of amicable co existence, following the resolution of the Vietnam war, there is once again a cloud hanging over all of Asia, threatening to engulf all.

At this point, neither the actions of the United Nations nor the efforts of mediation by third parties has brought some light to the events in Indochina. There is more dark than light on the events today.

A third face of the transition taking place in international life is the emergence of the Third World as an independent voice in international affairs. While we have seen the Third World emerge during this decade, the fulfillment or frustration of its aspirations lie in the next decade and beyond.

Of this force, we already know that it seeks a more equitable arrangement in the flow and trade of resources, that it seeks a firmer place in the family of nations, that it aspires to develop the underprivileged two-thirds of mankind, to enable them to share in the fruits of 20th century progress.

I have spoken about these global challenges first, because I believe they preface the fulfillment of our own national efforts to achieve full national modernization and development.

Of all nations, the developing countries like the Philippines stand most to lose in the conflicts now raging and threatening to widen, because only stability and peace can provide them the chance to achieve their targets in development. Conflict has a way of stifling the growth of economies, even if the given economy is physically removed from the area of strife.

For this reason, we must look toward an early resolution of the conflicts taking place in Indochina today.

As it is, we are already beginning to feel the pinch of confrontations and conflicts upon our economic life. The ASEAN program may suffer from the Indochina developments. Turbulence in Iran threatens the stability of oil prices, with the recent news that some OPEC nations will take advantage of the situation to raise prices well beyond the increases scheduled at the meeting of OPEC last October.

Predictably also, the situation has fed global inflation and contributed to trade problems, which we all know is gravely detrimental to the development efforts of the Third World. In our case, even after a year of prolonged pressure, 1979 becomes a particularly worrisome prognosis, considering the complexion of recent and contemporary events.

It serves us well in the present situation that internally, we have a stronger sense of unity as a people, that our reforms have found some stability, that our programs are well-laid in a total national effort at transformation, and that overall there is a sense of domestic tranquility and poise in our affairs.

Personally, I have no doubt that we have now the capability and the will to accomplish what it takes to develop our economy and transform our social, economic and political life. I have no doubt that it is within our capacity to fulfill the targets set in the development plans for the entire period from now up to the end of the century.

The problematic aspect inhere in affairs beyond our borders, in the larger life of the family of nations, which at present totters on the precipice of terrifying conflict.

What may turn out to be a problem is that some members of our society may still continue to be daydreaming in the past, continue to live in another kind of world, the rosy world of yesteryears, a world without any cares, threats, dangers, inflation, no increase in the prices of gasoline, in short, the world that we knew several decades back. And yet we live in the present world of crisis. This is the reality. This is a global crisis caused by external factors beyond our control. Complaining about such a world crisis or the external factors, or refusing to acknowledge such a crisis will not change reality.

Higher prices, for instance, are a reality. The earlier we accept these the earlier we can solve them — solve the economic dislocations, possibly the shortages that will follow. The solution of course is the fair distribution of whatever difficulties, burdens, sufferings we as a people must bear, the equitable distribution of the burdens to all sectors of our society, so no single sector can take advantage of these dislocations to the prejudice of all others.

In 1971 prior to the establishment of the New Society, in an analysis of social, economic and political ills of our nation, I wrote in the book which I entitled Today’s Revolution: Democr acy, that “The poignant wish for a tranquil life will find no sanctuary in today’s world. We live in a revolutionary era. It is an era of swift, violent, often disruptive change, and rather than lament this vainly, we have to decide whether we should be the masters or the victims of change. It is time we accepted the role of mastering circumstance rather than submitting to its tyranny.”

And it would seem to me that if this year the nations acting together can ride over the present turmoil, and find common cause again in preserving the delicate fabric of peace, our larger hopes for the rest of this century will be fulfilled.

There would be firmer hope that the nations of the Third World will succeed in instituting a more equitable global system.

There would be hope, even certitude, in more phenomenal achievements in the sciences, in technology, and in the arts.

There would be hope that what we once regarded as the inaccessible millennium in the human story may yet be the possession of man within the next 60 years.

The building of such hope for human progress is one of those commitments which the Rotary has traditionally espoused all over the world. May our common prayers therefore be fulfilled.

Some of us of course may not longer be there in the next 60 years. But we hope that whoever succeeds us, you in the Rotary and me in government, will see the attainment of all these prayers and hopes.

I wish you once again a most happy diamond anniversary commemoration.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].