Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Third Meeting of ASEAN Energy Ministers

[Delivered on October 8, 1981]

I am happy to address this elite group of ASEAN delegates as you prepare to embark on your third meeting of ASEAN Economic Ministers on Energy Cooperation. It is a pleasure for me to be with you today and, in the best tradition of the Filipino people, allow me to welcome you to the Philippines. We in ASEAN have nurtured a time honored tradition of hospitality and, in the native spirit of ASEAN, I hope that you would enjoy your brief stay in our premier city, Manila.

I am sure that you will find in our country a number of things which are akin to your cultures. After all in our geographical closeness to one another we share a common race and a strikingly similar social and cultural life. But most important of these commonalities is our strong determination to forge ties and work toward development in the face of various world crises which confront us.

I note with satisfaction and pride the fruits borne by the firm resolve of our peoples. Never in its fourteen years of existence has ASEAN been as determined to achieve regional cooperation as it has today. While we were still in our formative years cynics often postulated that ASEAN would go the way of similar cooperative international aggrupations which tended to deteriorate into debating societies. But this has not been so with respect to ASEAN.

Cooperation among the member states has transcended the mere exchange of information on technical and legal matters. It has materialized to beneficial arrangements such as according priority to the supply of the individual member country’s needs in critical circumstances.

That ASEAN has gained recognition as an effective regional aggrupation should not be an excuse for us to ease up in our efforts. If the progress we have so far achieved is to be sustained we should not tire of exploring new cooperative endeavors which would promote an improved quality of life for our peoples.

What I consider significant in ASEAN’s ability to attune itself to the changing times was the ASEAN concord issued in Bali in 1976. As an offshoot of our meeting food and energy have been singled out as two basic commodities where cooperation in supply and production among the individual states shall be accorded priority.

The importance that we accorded to energy—second only to food—sprang from the all too unavoidable reality that in this day and age energy is one commodity all our societies cannot do without. It is the most essential variable, the most fundamental factor that will determine our capacity to achieve a better, more secure and more progressive quality of life for our people.

For us in the third world food and energy are the two most important commodities critical to our survival and progress. In a few weeks from now I shall attend a summit for survival in Cancun, Mexico where a North-South Dialogue will be held involving the rich developed countries and the poor third world nations. I shall be privileged to present in that summit conference the shared sentiments and aspirations of the group of 77 and certain proposals relating to the problems plaguing the international community. Invariably, energy surfaces as a predominant concern in today’s economic and political scenario and energy cooperation is the only humane solution to achieve peace and world order.

We in ASEAN would like to think that the goal of energy cooperation is gradually being achieved. The problems of the world we share in our regional interaction, that cannot be helped. But unlike most of the rest of the world we have become more keenly aware of the intimate ties that bind the individual destinies of each ASEAN member nation with the rest of the region. we have formulated and have even begun to implement those mechanisms that would finally render this elusive goal a reality.

Your meeting then of Economic Ministers on Energy Cooperation provides special significance in the sense that this is once again another manifestation of how ASEAN is achieving regional development that contributed toward international order.

There is no doubt that ASEAN is blessed with a considerable amount of energy resources that vary from country to country. Much can, therefore, be afforded in adopting a regional approach to the use and management of these resources. The fact that there is a noteworthy differentiation of available resources within the region makes all the more possible and, in fact, desirable regional energy cooperation. The only technical impediment that I perceive refers to a basic system that would quantify the values to be attached to these resources. Each ASEAN member nation possesses certain specific endowments that all the other ASEAN nations require. Certainly with this starting point as a pragmatic rationale for energy cooperation we would be better able to surge ahead towards the goal total regional collaboration.

Our search for solutions to the energy crisis has an urgency addressed to the eighties. Knowing this I am certain that under your able guidance and responsible leadership as ministers many more paths toward cooperation would be forged; paths that are significant and far reaching; paths that are truly ASEAN.

While energy cooperation is conventionally meant to refer to cooperation with petroleum as the basic commodity we must not allow ourselves to be delimited to the matter of oil alone. We must, of course, continue and persist in our efforts to explore and tap petroleum resources in the region. On the other hand, we must learn to look ahead particularly on an issue as sensitive and crucial as energy. We must also devote ourselves to the search for development and utilization of alternative and renewable sources of energy. I would even venture that we to say that we must undertake this task with the same intensity, seriousness and sense of urgency that we give to our quest for more conventional energy sources. Already we have begun to feel that petroleum and other non-renewable energy sources are ultimately not limitless.

Although the journey toward establishing a self-reliant and prosperous region is long and winding we have every reason to be optimistic especially in the area of energy cooperation. A lot has already been achieved in the past. We can expect a lot more in the future.

Much of our hopes today are pinned on the structures of cooperation that this meeting of yours has been tasked to organize. We have reached that point in the development of ASEAN that energy cooperation must be pursued and sustained on the ministerial level. We, therefore, cannot but wholeheartedly support the timely suggestion to set up the proper mechanisms of cooperation for the useful exchange of information in primary and secondary sources of energy, research and development, and the transfer of energy technology. We therefore cannot but endorse the organization of the ASEAN Committee on Energy Cooperation.

Before ASEAN, every achievement had been a breakthrough, pioneering effort. But as we now move forward together, I see in every victory of ASEAN the distinguished and patient work of the ministers who have facilitated the work of the heads of government. I am confident of it. We heads of government often claim the honor of having performed the work but we know who did the bulk of the work. And to you, I extend my congratulations—the Energy Ministers, the Economic Ministers, Foreign Ministers and Ambassadors.

On behalf of the Filipino people I would like to assure this body of our commitment to foster this authentic spirit of cooperation in all our endeavors, the deep commitment of the Filipino to ASEAN—its philosophy, its strategy, its viewpoint.

With all these thoughts in mind, I take great pleasure in declaring this third meeting of ASEAN economic ministers on energy cooperation officially open. I wish you abiding success.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.