Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the awarding of land titles for NHA Projects

I am pleased to once again be with the citizens who are truly the foundation of our Republic and our country. You are the Filipino masses. You comprise the force that drives the machinery of industry. You are the reason why the entire nation enjoys the blessings from the natural resources of our land and seas. You are the citizens, who throughout the history of our race, are only now being valued by the government. You are the former poor who are now bestowed with the dignity and recognition that is rightfully due to true Filipinos.

The primary objective of our New Society is to destroy the chains of poverty that have long hindered the progress of the citizens.

The roots of this poverty are many, but among all the administrations that have passed through the history of our government, none of them directly addressed the problems of our citizens. Instead of protecting the condition of the poor, they prioritized the interests of the oligarchs and other ruling classes. Instead of defending the small, they trampled on the rights of ordinary citizens to have a decent livelihood. It is clear that the long period you wasted just to achieve a humane life is evidence of neglect. But now… your waiting is over. Your dream of being recognized as an important part of our society is now being realized.

This occasion is one of the great signs of the tireless efforts of our government to restore to every Filipino his honor. To call you squatters is a shame. A shame not only for you who are belittled by this term, but it is even more shameful for past governments because the old administrations allowed Filipinos to be called squatters in our country. It is a twisted logic to call Filipinos squatters who have an inherent right to their ancestral lands. We are all Filipinos. The country we call the Philippines is our country. Therefore, there should be no Filipino squatter in his own country.

The awarding of titles is a clear evidence of the plans of the New Society. It is a sign that the government is continuing programs that will sever the roots of hardship and poverty. Your government is ready to create opportunities and tools that will uplift even the humblest in our society. We do not only want to address the basic needs of the citizens, but more than that, we dream of lifting every Filipino from oppression and neglect. This is the vow of our reform movement. This is the stance of the New Society.

It has been exactly four years… since we launched a massive Slum Improvement and Resettlement Program, through Letters of Instruction 555 and 557. This program, which is currently under the BLISS Program of the Ministry of Human Settlements, addresses the needs of the urban poor, especially their desire to have a definite and secure ownership of the lands where their homes are built. Tondo Foreshore is the government’s main Slum Improvement Project. Before, Tondo was a place of hopelessness, Tondo today is a shining proof of the government’s intensive program for the urban poor.

In all areas of Metro Manila, as well as in other cities of our country, we are replicating the Tondo experience. Currently, there are thirteen (13) Priority Projects being implemented throughout the Greater Manila area. In addition, there are ninety (90) other projects being prepared and about to be implemented. There are also projects like this that have been initiated in the cities of Cebu, Bacolod, Davao and Cagayan de Oro.

The problem of housing in urban areas, especially in Metro Manila, is being definitively addressed by the government. We recognize that housing – as a problem – is inherent in the development of nations, and a sign of progress in cities. The problems of squatters, shanties, and underdeveloped communities are manifestations of a broader problem. However, because this is a serious and sensitive problem for the poor in cities, the government has decided to face the housing problem head-on.

The BLISS program is a response not only to the housing problem. More than that, this program identifies the problem of poverty. Although the government’s capacities and capabilities are limited, we have decided to transfer these capabilities where they are most needed. The government’s primary goal is to improve the condition and livelihood of the small people. This is why the government’s housing program is a program involving various government agencies.

Therefore, this program addresses not only the physical construction of housing. This program includes an economic program. The program attempts to develop production and expand the sources of income for each member of the community. This plan is very important so that we can finally solve the enormous problem of poverty throughout the country.

These must be carried out without conditions and without doubt. What is needed here is discipline to clearly define the future of our country. Only through this can the long-held aspirations of the citizens be fulfilled. This is the aspiration of the New Society. This is redemption from poverty and hardship.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.