Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 33rd anniversary of Besang Pass

[Delivered at Fort Bonifacio, June 14, 1978]

A Vindication of Filipino Soldiery

IN COMMEMORATION OF the 33rd anniversary of the fall of Besang Pass, we are gathered at the tomb of the Unknown Soldier, this symbolic resting place of our fallen comrades.

In the Battle of Besang Pass proper, without taking into account the previous and preliminary battles that were fought, 1,441 men fell and about 5,000 were wounded. A total of about 21,000 troops were committed to this battle. But more were actually engaged in the operations all over Northern Luzon. It is in remembrance of all these men, living and dead that we gather here every 14th of June, which has been proclaimed as Besang Pass Day.

The nation remembers the surrender of our troops in Bataan and in Corregidor, surrenders under the United States Armed Forces of the Far East or the USAFFE. It celebrates the martial spirit with which such a surrender was done because they symbolize the capability of the two nations, the United States and the Philippines, to meet the crucible of war together.

Besang Pass, however, was a battle principally fought by Philippine troops, led by men who had participated in the surrender of Bataan and also in Corregidor.

It is therefore meet and proper that whatever our daily preoccupations, whatever the immediate and the urgent demands of the times, we pause at noon of every 14th of June to remember the day we planted our flag on top of the Pass, which opened the back door of the enemy, the Japanese, under their commanding general, General Tomoyuki Yamashita — and ultimately led to his surrender at Loog Valley later on, sometime in August, 1945. For while Manila had been liberated as early as February 1945, fighting continued in the northern provinces.

It is our hope that those who follow us will remember Besang Pass, for it was indeed a battle that is a unifying symbol of all the battles that are being fought or were fought by Filipino troops, both regular and irregular.

I see the presence here of other underground or guerrilla commanders. Besang Pass symbolizes all the battles that they had fought, the Bulacan Military area, the Markings guerrillas, the LAPHAM, RAMSIS, Central Luzon guerrillas, and all the others who fought and who ultimately participated in the liberation of the entire Philippines.

From my point of view, it is best that we remember the victory of Filipino troops which Besang Pass was. For the American troops under General Kruger held back while the Filipino troops took over the fight and the battle. With the few artillery units and air support coming from American units, the Filipino troops dominated the action.

It should be our purpose to now continue with the program of identifying the points on which these battles were fought and setting up the monuments for them. I believe that part of our celebration should be for all of us to go back to Besang Pass which I intend to do next Saturday.

I regret that today’s preoccupation, the sessions of the Interim Batasang Pambansa, do not allow me to lead you on the pilgrimage to Besang Pass. I understand the Governor of Ilocos Sur has prepared some choice lunch with five head of cattle each from the three provinces. This will be at Tagudin, the old base hospital and the initial command post of the 121st Infantry. I believe we can attend to these preparations next Saturday.

It is my desire that you transmit to the preparation committees our hopes that we will be able to reach this destination and this objective after we have done away with the obstacles in our path.

So to your question as to whether there is lunch today, my answer is: There is lunch on Saturday. There will be lunch on Saturday at Tagudin at the site of the old base hospital. To old guerrilla warriors like you, who I know often ate only once a day, this should not be a strange thing. Of course, you and I have grown too far for such self-denials. But it is, perhaps, nice to think about them once in a while. And as the Spanish say: “Basta conmentencion.”

We had the good fortune and we count our blessings that we are alive today, 33 years after the battle to come and remember the capture of Besang Pass, which for many of us who surrendered in Bataan was a vindication and a just retribution against the enemy by Filipino soldiery.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].