Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Third Conference of the ASEAN Chambers of Commerce and Industry

[Delivered on November 3, 1977]

Towards a Community of Asean Businessmen

IT CERTAINLY IS an honor for me to be able to address this Third Conference of the ASEAN Chambers of Commerce and Industry. This organization stands high in the life of our ASEAN community, as the collective representation of the private sector in our region and as a manifest of its desire to serve the cause of regional cooperation and solidarity in our part of the world.

The honor therefore of hosting this conference, is great not only for the Philippine Chamber of Commerce, but also for the people and the government of the Philippines. And it is an added source of pride for us to learn that during the next two years, Manila shall be the seat of the ASEAN-CCI presidency.

And this—at a time when many new exciting developments are taking place throughout our region, when new opportunities for interaction are opening before our peoples and communities, and when the climate for economic enterprise is everywhere brightening in Southeast Asia.

I cannot let this opportunity pass without commending, on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and of the ASEAN heads of governments, the constructive work which this organization has exerted in bringing the private sector of our whole community to the service of the goals, the programs, the very vision of our ASEAN community.

Long before the affairs of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations is sued in new initiatives to accelerate the process of regionalism in our part of the world, this organization already commenced exploration of the ways in which the private sector can participate in the building of our ASEAN community. Before we formulated our ambitious ASEAN Programme of Action, the private sectors of our respective countries already sought to organize themselves into one regional body, and to study the ways and means whereby their collective action could serve and learn from the evolving life of the region.

I do not find it therefore in the least surprising that in the wave of ferment that has overtaken the region and ASEAN during the past two years, we should find this organization at the forefront of efforts to shape the future of our regional community.

And I am not surprised to find the business leaders of Southeast Asia today in the thickets of deliberations and discussions vital to the immediate and long-term prospects of our regional economy.

The strength of this commitment to ASEAN goals and purpose is well-reflected in the theme which you have chosen for your conference and council meetings’ here in Manila. ASEAN-CCI in professing to respond to the ASEAN Summit of 1977 underscores a concern that is of equal import to the association: and that is the need for fullest participation of the private sector in the implementation and fulfillment of ASEAN programs and projects.

It is of course only logical that a region roughly homogeneous in the character of its economic life and institutions and seeking greater harmonization in economic activities, should look to the vigor and vision of private enterprise in the achievement of community.

But sentiment and theory are no substitute for the realization of harmony and cooperation. And we must judge the true beneficence of what we profess in common by the kind of structures we are able to build in our region now and in the years to come.

As in the case of the ASEAN governments, we must test the rapport and the understanding that you have built among the private sectors of the region in terms of concrete projects and programs that will have practical effect on regional economic cooperation and development.

And then, too, we must extend beyond the sphere of consultation the relationship that you have developed and are developing with the ASEAN machinery and the ASEAN governments. For while we have started a wide-ranging process in the private sector, the specific projects, the specific ways in which our communal hopes can fructify into action remain to be defined and unleashed.

This is not an expression of impatience on my part on the progress of economic cooperation in the region, but only a cautionary note useful as a way of reminding ourselves that the vital and the sticky part of our work is not behind, but before us.

For there is a real danger, particularly in this heady period of euphoria, and of optimism about ASEAN, that we may fail to consider this and fall prey together to the disease of failed expectations, that we may mistake shared ideals for the ramparts of community.

ASEAN did not remain for so long in incubation for nothing. For we took as our starting point the wide differences of perspectives and priorities of our respective countries, the problems that had dogged lofty plans for regional solidarity in the past; and if we persisted in our quest for community, it was because we realized it to be the common aspiration of our countries, though we immediately recognized it to be a difficult objective to fulfill.

I note, however, that the private sector, either on its own initiative but with the help of governments, has begun to cooperate in establishing closer communications between our countries. At the same time, it is also moving into communications and shipping. Shipping is one of the principal obstacles to more intensified trade within the regions. I refer to this only as examples of immediate and concrete projects that the private sector can move into outside of industrial complementation in which governments are very actively engaged.

But since we knew the course of regionalism to be a difficult one, we did not fall into the trap of forcing the process of cooperation or of establishing artificial structures that in a fortnight would collapse. And in time, we were well rewarded by the patient and even plodding work of laying the foundations for our ASEAN community.

This is why, almost nine years after its birth, ASEAN could forge the historic declaration and agreements in Bali, and why a year thereafter, in the second summit of ASEAN heads of governments, we could raise another step the ongoing work of the community.

The important point to remember is that we are working on a long-term vision of the future, and that at every step of the way a harmonization of viewpoints is an essential condition for success. Regardless of the kind of cooperation we have achieved, we must ever acknowledge that the relative strengths and weaknesses of our economies are discrete, and there will be points on which some member countries will readily agree to which other member countries will not be able to similarly respond.

But it bears pointing out, after acknowledging this formula, that a declared initiative, once adopted by the association, ought to be implemented and pursued resolutely. That certainly applies now to the ASEAN Programme of Action, particularly on economic matters.

Some of our problems of implementation have to do with the quality of our machinery, and it is certainly a critical part of the ASEAN agenda to improve and to recast where necessary the efficiency of our consultative and implementing apparatus.

Progress in the industrial complementation scheme is certainly a case in point. The status of projects that have been approved is widely different, and in the case of the Philippines, it is necessary to seek approval for a different project altogether.

In the area of trade liberalization, initial progress has been made, but it remains problematical how soon and to what extent the stimulation of intra-ASEAN trade can be pushed.

In the emergency sharing of vital resources, such as food and petroleum, a major breakthrough has been made through the agreement on an Emergency Sharing Scheme. And it remains only to establish now the precise ways in which the scheme can be implemented. Recently, it was our pleasure to host the annual meeting of the ASEAN Council on Petroleum, at which new decisions were made by the governing body.

I stress the improvement of the processes and apparatus of consultation and decision-making as a central key to the acceleration of regional economic cooperation. For it is at this level, where initiatives of the community sometimes fail to fructify. As our initiatives multiply, so must we widen the scope and extent of consultation among governments and sectors.

And I would say that it is at this level where the ASEAN Chambers of Commerce and Industry can most effectively show participation in ASEAN affairs.

I personally believe that the more effectively ASEAN consults with the private sectors of the region, the faster can we ride over the various problems that detain cooperation in certain areas, and the more speedily can we implement decisions by the governments.

Anxiety on the part of the private sector that it is not consulted enough on vital matters affecting the ASEAN program, and doubts on the part of the public sector about the readiness and real capacity of private enterprise to undertake regional endeavors can be considerably eased if a continuing process of consultation and counsel is maintained between the two sectors. And this is only possible if the private sectors are well organized in our respective countries and if they can speak with a single voice in ASEAN.

My hope, and I believe this is shared by all of you, is that eventually the ASEAN-CCI, as an organization of the national chambers, will be the principal consultative machinery for the private sector concerning regional endeavors, that its activities will be a sieve for the association to judge the climate of opinion in your sector, and that it will serve as a primal instrument for implementing ASEAN programs.

Certainly, I can promise you that here in the Philippines, the government will continue to consult with the private sector represented by, what I hope, will be the united Philippines Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

I am certain that your discussions here in Manila will have much to say that will not only be of value to your own regional organization, but to the work of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

In the work of the individual governments and of the ASEAN Committees and the Secretariat, let me say that I am certain that you have much to contribute to the development of economic, social, and political activity in the region.

I therefore encourage the participation of the private sector in all matters which may have any bearing whatsoever on economic matters, whether directly or indirectly.

And I hope that you will have a pleasant and fruitful conference.

And what I see today when I look across our country is a people and a nation, alive to the challenges of the times and confident about their prospects for the future.

I sense new life taking root among our rural masses, those for whom life until now has been a continuous struggle against adversity.

I sense it among the young, who not so long ago spilled into the streets to challenge our government and our institutions.

And it is finally this resource — vital, dynamic, and expectant — that we shall be privileged to harness in the attainment of our goals.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1979). Presidential speeches (Vol. 7). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].