Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Fourth General Assembly and Third Asian Congress of Pharmaceutical Sciences

[Delivered at the Philamlife Auditorium, November 17, 1970]

Health Problems in Asia

I AM VERY glad that I came to this assembly. Indeed there are about 6,000 pharmacists in the Philippines. I do not know how this compares with other countries but it seems to me that pharmacists outnumber even our lawyers in this country. I have always said that if there are any people to be exported we should start with the lawyers and the politicians, and I do not mean those in the political opposition either.

I am impressed by the unity of the profession demonstrated here today. I gather that this is the Fourth Assembly and the Third Asian Congress of Pharmaceutical Sciences under the auspices of the Federation of Asian Pharmaceutical Associations, which was organized in 1964.

Permit me to welcome the delegates who have come from other lands. I am glad that you came here after the typhoons and the floods, but if you come from other Asian countries, then you must realize and understand that this is a natural phenomenon over which we do not have control. Now the weather is a little better and I do hope that you will feel at home and that your brief stay here will be both pleasant and fruitful. And I am certain that with the congeniality demonstrated in the opening ceremonies, it cannot be anything else but fruitful and pleasant.

I am gratified to note that the theme of this conference is Asian Unity through Pharmacy. In a region of diverse cultures, historical backgrounds, and racial temperaments, unity in this very diversity is our goal. It is your goal in pharmacy, it is our goal in government, the goal of our ideology and statesmanship. This congress and assembly is itself a very laudable contribution to this goal, coming as it does from a highly specialized sector of the regional community, the pharmaceutical profession in Asia.

I note in your brochures that you are particularly interested in the establishment of uniform regulations on drug and food additives in Asia, fair practices in drug and food trading, and the protection and improvement of the health of all Asians. Towards those specific ends and the other objectives that you wish to achieve through regional cooperation, it is my pleasure today to come to you and say, I pledge wholeheartedly the support of the Philippine government. While I am President, you can rely on the cooperations that shall be extended by every office and agency of the national and local governments of the Republic of the Philippines. It has been said that statesmen and leaders, leaders of government and heads of state, do indeed want unity in this world. Only a fool, a hopeless fool seeks dissent and disunity or seeks to wage war. The active conference tables all over the world are proof and evidence of the efforts of state leaders, of government heads, to bring about the oneness of men and of humanity. But while man has succeeded in pushing beyond the known frontiers of natural science, political science has lagged behind. The human element has been an almost unconquerable obstacle in the search for unity among men.

It is my hope that where the statesmen and the government leaders have failed, you who are committed to science, you who are engaged in pushing forward the scientific frontiers for the well-being of man, individually and as nations, will succeed as individuals and as an association in this endeavor.

Inasmuch as you are interested in the protection and improvement of the health of Asians, and I daresay of the health of all men throughout the world, permit me to give to you an idea of the health picture in the Philippines.

Since the turn of the century the people of the Philippines have slowly but progressively improved their level of health as a result of a number of factors which include: (1) the continued interest and support of the government in the prosecution and promotion of the health of the people, (2) the more active cooperation and participation on the part of the population, (3) the application of developments in the medical and para-medical sciences, and (4) the contribution of international cooperation in the global fight to control if not eradicate human disease.

This progress in the state of health of the people may be seen in the following changes:

1. The expectation of life at birth of Filipinos increased from a little more than 25 years in 1918 to slightly more than 55 years in the 1965-69 period.

2. Reported deaths from all causes per 1000 population decreased from about 20 in 1920 to 7.0 in 1967. From 1950 to 1967 deaths from all causes per 1000 population decreased from 11.1 to 7.0 or about 37 per cent decrease.

3. Reported infant deaths from all causes per 1000 live births decreased from about 160 in 1926 to about 65 in 1967. During the period from 1950 to 1967 the infant death rate decreased from 101.6 infant deaths from all causes per 1000 live births to 65.2 or a decrease of about 36 per cent.

4. Significant decreases in mortality from specific diseases such as pneumonia, tuberculosis, and malaria have also been reported in scientific data and journals.

On the basis of all these significant developments, the population of the Philippines increased from 7.6 million in 1903 to about 37.1 million in 1967 or nearly a 5-fold increase in 66 years. Because of the improvement of health conditions, every minute in the Philippines two babies are born alive and kept alive. Every day 3200 babies are born in the Philippines. The average number of children per family, believe it or not, is six children. Every year there is an increase in our population by 1 million. Because of this explosive population growth, one of the highest in the world, the Filipino people are faced with the problem of controlling the birth rate to a level that cannot be supported by our resources. It is easy for us to be complacent, we who belong to my generation, because we shall not feel the painful impact of this population explosion today; but 15 to 20 years from now our children will.

The population of the Philippines increases by about one million new Filipinos every year, representing a growth rate of 3.5 per cent. It is beginning to be realized that the high population growth rate makes attempts to improve the living standards of the population almost impossible. Under my administration our goal has been to build 400,000 houses every year. We have not been able to accomplish this and yet with this increase in population we will have to double and treble the rate of construction of dwellings for our people.

It is perhaps also worth noting that while reported deaths with medical attention increased from 32 per cent in 1960 to 46 per cent in 1967, the fact remains that nearly 50 per cent of reported deaths did not have the benefit of medical attendance before I became President, indicating that progress in medical sciences failed to reach these individuals in their hour of need. When I first became President about six years ago, I conducted a survey and these figures came out. They are specially true in the rural areas of the Philippines. This was the reason for the reorganization of the health department of the government. Before I became President, there were only about 300 rural health units, that is, complete rural health units. Now, there are 1,400 rural health units or one rural health unit with a doctor, a nurse, a midwife and a dentist for every municipality, for the 1,400 municipalities or towns in the country. And if you think that it was an easy job to do, I hope to see you try it.

The irony here is that while the Philippines has a relatively satisfactory ratio of population to health manpower there is apparent maldistribution of doctors, dentists, pharmacists, nurses, midwives, and sanitary inspectors all over the country. Our professionals tend to practice in the urban centers leaving the countryside largely untended. This situation is complicated by the steady exodus of our health manpower to other countries, particularly the United States.

Measures are of course now being taken to regulate the outflow of Filipino professionals who are needed here. There is also a definite need to make the training in our medical and para-medical schools relevant to our needs. In this respect perhaps I should say that the training should be relevant not only to the Philippines but to other parts of Asia in this day and age of regional cooperation and exchange.

In the face of all these developments, you may be interested in what the Philippine government is doing. The improvement of health services for the people, especially for those in the rural communities, is a principal program of my administration, as I have already indicated.

We have a program providing free medicines to the indigent population, we have, as I said, established rural health units and nutrition centers. We have encouraged volunteer work from all sectors of the community. Yesterday, participated in the fund campaign of the League of Puericulture Centers, of which there are 802 throughout the country. It is a purely voluntary service, it is voluntary work undertaken by the private sector, usually initiated and established by the women’s club in every municipality and community.

We are now engaged in an information campaign not just for the people in the rural areas, but for the entire populace, a campaign to promote health consciousness through education.

We are instituting a more systematic and comprehensive health planning at the municipal, provincial, regional and national levels consistent with the policy of greater autonomy for the local governments and in the context of our national development planning.

These notes on the health situation in the Philippines may be useful to you who are concerned not only with the specific requirements of the pharmaceutical profession in Asia but with the related and over-all aspects of health in this country and in your countries and in all the Asian countries.

Incidentally, I remember being berated and severely criticized for distributing free medicines, through what was called Marcos Pharmaceutical Kits, throughout the country sometime ago. It started in 1967 and went on through 1968, and when the elections in 1969 came up and the distribution went on, everybody thought that it was a campaign gimmick. Well, the elections are over and we are still distributing medicines free to the medically indigent, and the Marcos Pharmaceutical Kit is still in great demand.

Now it is hoped that government will be able to coordinate with the pharmacists in the different municipalities in making medicines available to the people. I have hoped for this since my attention was called to the fact that the sales of local pharmacists have allegedly gone down when I started distributing free medicine. I am going to order the Secretary of Health, and I am in fact ordering him now, to get together with the heads of the pharmacist associations, and find the means of preventing any adverse effects on local pharmacies arising from the activities of the government in the health field.

There is much to be done and much to be achieved when professionals and scientists in the same field but from many diverse countries come together I am impressed by your objectives. I am impressed by the resolutions on the formulation of policies regarding Pan-Asiatic Drug regulation, pharmaceutical education and research in Asia, publication of an Asian Formulary, drug information, and drug marketing in this region. I welcome your special emphasis on drug information and drug marketing, because there is a growing problem of drug addiction among the juveniles in this country and in other countries. We are now waging a campaign against drug addiction, a campaign directed not only to the students themselves but to their parents as well, and I ask you to cooperate in this campaign.

I wish you success in all your undertaking, and I trust that in the event at there should be any need for cooperation at my level or at any other level in government., you will not hesitate to come to me. I invite the President of the Asian Federation of Pharmaceutical Associations, Doctor Taningco, to come to the Palace any time on any matter which may be of importance to you and which should be taken up with the President.

It is my hope that by thus giving assistance to you, we also give assistance to your efforts to establish unity here in Asia. And, again, I say, and I mean this sincerely, it is my hope that you as scientists in this region will succeed where apparently the statesmen, the leaders of state and government have failed. And may God go with you.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].