Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Joint Graduation Exercises of the National Defense College and the Command and General Staff College

[Delivered at the Camp Aguinaldo Officers Club, May 25, 1971]

Leadership in a Time of Challenge

I TAKE SPECIAL pride in being here today to officiate at the Joint Graduation Exercises of the National Security Course of the National Defense College of the Philippines and the Associate Command and General Staff Course of the AFP Command and General Staff College.

I am heartened to see more and more of our civil government officials appreciate the need of sending their executives to the National Defense College for national security is the equal concern of both the civilian and the military. I am likewise heartened to note the continuing turnout of Command General Staff graduates who will eventually occupy positions of leadership in the Armed Forces.

Recently, I lifted the General Staff Corps eligibility as a requirement for promotion. It does not mean, however, that I have reduced the worth and importance of this eligibility. I do continue to recognize its necessity in the development of professionalism among the senior officers of our Armed Forces, especially officers of the line. All other factors being equal, an officer with the eligibility has a better likelihood of putting in a creditable performance than one who does not. The same is true for the course offered by the National Defense College. It is therefore my desire that both programs be pursued aggressively.

The seventies present formidable challenges to the nation and its leadership. Our nation is in a state of transition; it is entering a new phase in its political life. The transition is taking place amidst difficulties and obstacles. To many of our people, fazed perhaps by the tremendous odds, this has become a time of uncertainty. All facets of our national life are being challenged by potent social, economic and political realities.

Important decisions will have to be made, decisions that will call for wisdom, vision, a thorough awareness of the realities, the options available, and the course to make the right, even if painful, decisions.

These decisions will have to be made at a time in Asian history when upheavals have engulfed the rimland of Southeast Asia. The United Kingdom has modified its east of Suez politics, and the United States’ Nixon Doctrine is about to realize itself. The ascendancy of Japan as a major power in Asia is becoming a reality. While Red China is perceptively changing its attitude towards the rest of the world, the problems of security it poses to the emerging nations in Asia remain.

This rapidly changing social and political environment is happening at a point in our national history when we are experiencing a spectacular physical growth.

To cite only a few of the accepted indicators of national progress: For successive years since 1966, the first year of my administration, we have consistently exceeded the growth rates we established as our targets. In Fiscal Year 1966-67, we planned a growth rate in the Gross National Product of 5.7%; actually, however, we achieved a growth rate of 6.2%. Again, in 1967-68, our target was a growth rate of 5.8%; our actual growth rate was 6.3%. And once again, in 1968-69, we planned a growth rate of 5.5%; our actual growth rate was 6.4%, or 1.1% more than we had planned.

The steady growth of the Gross National Product is even more graphic in its absolute figures from year to year. In 1968, GNP was P28,837 million; in 1969, it rose to P31,737 million; and in 1970, it climbed to P37,549 million.

Fiscal Year 1970 was an unusual year, because of our accumulated balance of payments situation. But even with the difficulties we had to suffer in this respect, we have, through sound fiscal management that the International Monetary Fund itself has acknowledged, been able to maintain a considerable momentum of national growth. From month to month last year, for instance, our operating cash deficits were considerably reduced or turned into surpluses, so that by the end of Calendar Year 1970, we had accumulated— in one year— a cash surplus of P168.8 million. If you compare this to the deficit of P946.81 million the previous year, which had been caused by necessary investments in the form of expenditures for roads and bridges, irrigation systems, schools, farm credit and barrio improvement, among others equally vital to progress, you have a vivid picture of our new national vigor.

Similarly, the total exports in Fiscal Year 1970 rose to $932 million, an increase of 11.1 per cent over the previous Fiscal Year. On the other hand, imports decreased by 5.5%, indicating not only the soundness and validity of our strategy in bridging our trade gap but our ability to discipline and direct ourselves.

Likewise, unemployment has been reduced from a high point of 9.5% in 1962 to 6.7% in 1969, contrary to the claims of our detractors.

The population has grown considerably. Our agricultural revolution has just been launched. Our economic growth in the final analysis has been healthy, even vigorous. Our social evolution has been dynamic. We have better communication and transportation systems than at any previous time in our history. Our maritime vessels now sail the high seas. Our aerial flag travels the routes of Europe, the Middle East and the Pacific.

There are those, however, who for reasons of their own would rather shut their eyes to these signs of undeniable growth and gain. There are incontrovertible evidences of attempts to erode our strength and stability through subversion, rumor-mongering and other maneuvers.

Today, these forces have shifted their assault to the AFP. The central issue of the day against the AFP is a simple directive of the Chief of Constabulary to his command — a reminder, no more no less, to enforce the law. Yet the concerted attack launched against it is out of proportion. Our critics want to make it appear that a “mailed fist” policy is in the offing. We are suddenly accused of stifling dissent, of attempting to impose a fascistic rule. May I ask, has anyone been arrested in this country and held under detention beyond the normal period without a formal hearing? How many have been incarcerated for having extremist views or for libeling me and my family?

Today, we find Maoist converts holding demonstrations and rallies in the streets, exalting the virtues of communism, openly glorifying the local communist leaders and inciting people to revolt. Yet they have not been arrested nor made to account for their unlawful acts.

This is my answer to the self-serving, unfounded charges that we have stifled dissent and the unfair charge of fascism.

I am pleased to know that the National Defense College and the Command and Staff College have markedly modified their respective curricula to reflect contemporary and foreseeable changes. Both colleges are responding to the demands of change.

Significant shifts are expected in the Command and General Staff College this year. There will be marked changes in its basic character, although the central purpose and objectives will remain the same.

For both colleges to maintain their effectiveness, as well as their j responsiveness, innovative changes will be required from time to time.

These changes would require enlightened management, a clear-cut sense of direction and a realistic assessment of the performance of its graduates in their new responsibilities or positions.

I have been informed that by direction of the Secretary of National Defense, the programs of instruction of both the AFP Command and Central Staff College and the National Defense College have been revised to be more responsive to the needs of the Armed Forces and the country as a whole. I would like to congratulate Secretary Enrile for taking this step.

It is always a pleasure to see that more qualified people join the ranks of educated officials to fill the ever increasing needs of national security. For our,major task remains the attainment of a political, economic and social climate that is conducive to the fulfillment of our people’s aspirations and the preservation of our freedom.

We face challenging times. But our response to the challenge gives cause for hope. Our Gross National Product, as I have said, has increased; a favorable balance in our export-import trade now obtains; an orderly restructuring of our society is in the offing with the coming Constitutional Convention.

But to advance these gains and at the same time preserve our way of life, we as a people must change.

What we seriously need today is change within ourselves, a change in some of our traditionally personal-centered values, a redirection of our attitude outward, a change that starts from the individual and is directed towards the community, a change that asks especially of us in the government what we can give to, rather than what we can get from, the people.

This attitude begins with involvement, an involvement that comes from genuine concern for the people, a concern rooted in a positive approach regarding the exercise of authority. The Christian concept of authority is service; in a democratic country, therefore, authority connotes service to the people from whom this authority is derived. Service to be truly meaningful must be active, purposeful and altruistic.

It is with this in mind that I pose this challenge to you as graduates, to apply your newly acquired education to a positive activism that will overcome the inertia of complacency and cynicism, to an involvement that will answer those who agitate for violent change, and to a revitalized leadership that will allow maintaining our options for bringing about change in our society without first, destroying it.

I shall lead this change as I have pledged to lead a democratic revolution that is truly Filipino — proud, tolerant and free.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].