Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the PMA Alumni Association

[Delivered on February 10, 1982]

This annual fellowship luncheon of the Philippine Military Academy Alumni Association coincides with the 77th Foundation Anniversary of our country’s premier institution for military training. And if it’s true what they say in numerology that there is significance in numbers, then perhaps this is a particularly auspicious time for us to meet and renew the ties we bear with one another.

I look upon this community as a vital force in the life of our nation, not only as an indispensable part of our military service and its history, but also as a creative source of leadership in many sectors of our society. You are all alumni of an institution of learning with a long and illustrious existence. Not only has the Philippine Military Academy given us a distinctive breed of military leaders and fighting men to meet the direct exigencies facing our nation in, times of open conflict; PMA Alumni have ever been a steadfast source of inspired and effective leadership in times of peace. Today, we find them in the highest levels of government service, in private enterprise as well as in the various echelons of the military service. We need look no farther than this gathering of its alumni for ample proof of the academy’s distinguished tradition of excellence and dedication in the service of the nation.

On this day of commemoration, therefore, I congratulate the academy and you, who symbolize the embodiment of its highest ideals.

When I address you last year, it was on the eve of our holding of Presidential Elections and the subsequent founding of our new Republic. I spoke then of the need for our people to come together in a decisive effort to erect normal democratic government in our country.

Today, a full year later, we can surely say that our audacious program of normalization and the establishment of our new republic have proceeded in pace with our goals and expectations. Contrary to the skepticism of others, we have made a fresh start. Where yesterday, many were apprehensive that the end of crisis government could trigger new perils for the nation, today we bear witness to the clear advances we have made in normalizing political processes and in strengthening the apparatus of normal democratic government.

Clearly, the nation has not been set back by the termination of Martial Law. Instead, we have been able to demonstrate that the reforms and changes we struggled for during the period of recovery and stabilization, can be conserved and enhanced. We have shown that democratic government need not be ineffective to meet challenges and problems, whatever the kind.

But let us never presume that effective government is something that flows naturally from conditions in society. For it is true, as it has ever been, that effectiveness is won only by effort and vigilance.

We have won for ourselves a degree of political stability unparalleled in our recent national history, but that same stability continues to be challenged by the various problems which we must face in our quest for development, and by various forces which however weak or fragmented today continue to work against the state.

I have said before and will say again that fundamentally the threats to our national security are internal not external to us. Insurgency and rebellion are the malaise that afflict everywhere developing societies like ours, which still must struggle for their true course towards the future. And these phenomena do not disappear even after democratic political orders succeed in meeting their attempts to overthrow government. They continue their work within society, and if it so happens that the members of society and the government become complacent, they rise anew to challenge the very safety of the nation.

We find ourselves at such a point today. After the setbacks suffered in recent years by the subversives and insurgents, there have followed a renewed effort to rebuild and reinforce their decimated ranks. And we detect today the signs of resurgent agitation and rebellion in some parts of the country, no doubt taking advantage of the normalization measures we have instituted.

There is no question as to the capability of our armed forces and our government to meet these new threats. But it is important to remind ourselves that there is only security in the steadfastness of our vigilance, and in the resolution of our efforts to meet insurgency in the countryside and in the cities. In the military as well as in government, resolution must never waver in our supreme goal of strengthening our new republic against the threats of all who aspire to bring it down.

And we all know exactly what this means.

It means first of all capability to meet every armed threat against the state with the preparedness of our military forces; but it also means and should mean, the even more demanding work of proving the efficacy of our political system in resolving national problems and in advancing the aspirations of our people. For insurgency never challenges simply the armed might of the state; even more so does it undermine and challenge its fundamental ideals and goals. The struggle in short is finally and truly an ideological one. And only a society that believes in itself can successfully resist the pressures of a dedicated band of subversives.

For this very reason, our entire national program under our new republic is founded on an authentic ideology and vision of our national future. And it is a key part of national policy to meet the challenge of insurgency with programs not only for pacification, but programs for the progressive development and liberation of our local communities. In those isolated parts of the country, where insurgents have traditionally and presently built their most potent threats, we have focused our energies on developing the productive capacities of our people for their welfare and that of their communities.

And if, as we believe, we have succeeded in freeing so many areas from the grip of insurgency and rebellion. We have succeeded thus socio-economic programs.

This policy has always implied that our men in uniform, and especially our officer corps, should be imbued with an appreciation of the military life and of the civic life. They are believers in the supreme dictum that national development is the key to national security and stability. And there is nothing that does the recent history of our Armed Forces more proud than their achievements in developmental endeavors, alongside with their heroic work in the military sphere.

Last year at your convention, I had the occasion to suggest that the Armed Forces, as an establishment, and its officials and men in their individual capacities should direct their unique abilities and resources towards a major contribution in the achievement of our economic development goals. I am gratified to learn of the immediate response that the PMA Alumni Association has given to this call through its establishment of the PMAAA Development Foundation. That you have conceived it in relation to the objectives of the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran is very opportune indeed. It would not come as a surprise to me if the association were to develop their own prototype of an effectively managed; modest-sized livelihood project that would be replicable not only among its membership but in other parts of the country as well. Various PMA Alumni have proven their superior abilities in large-scale operations now as they have in the past. I Am confident that they can perform just as well along more modest proportions.

With as much confidence as I have depended on you for your cooperation in the past you can count on the assistance of the Office of the President in your noteworthy endeavors. Let your achievements in this important area prove to one and all that the Filipino soldier is equal to all not only in the field of battle but also as effective agents of change and development in our march toward our destiny as a nation.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.