Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Batasang Pambansa

[Delivered on October 11, 1982]

Mr. Speaker, Distinguished Members of the Batasang Pambansa:

In keeping with constitutional duty, I stand again on this rostrum to report to this Assembly and to the nation on the work of government and the course of national life.

It is both inevitable and prudent that in the present discharge of this responsibility, I should look at national affairs in profound awareness of the larger world we live in. For I address you today in the wake of a long journey overseas that has enabled us to feel at first hand the pulse of developments abroad and to assess their meaning to the nation.

Nearly a month ago, on the fourteenth of September, we left Manila to fulfill a diplomatic obligation to make an official visit to the United States of America. For sixteen days, we travelled across the oceans and through the vast country of America, on a journey that is the longest I have undertaken in the years of my Presidency. My mind at this moment is filled with vivid recollections of my meetings with President Reagan and the other leaders of the American nation; of my dialogues with the representatives of various sectors of American society; of my visit and exchanges with the entire breadth of leadership in the United Nations; of reunions with thousands of our Filipino brothers who now make their home in America; and of the many sights and impressions that have overwhelmingly reminded us how diverse, how vast, and how troubled is the world community today.

A journey of this magnitude is an enligthening experience. On the one hand it has opened our eyes anew to the authentic strength and closeness of our ties as a people and nation to the United States of America. On the other, it has served as a signal moment of recognition of our larger links with the world community and of the high importance that world events play in our journey towards the future.

No man, it is said, is an island unto itself. So is it also true of nations. Thousands of miles away from home and close to the very throb of life in other parts of our world community—this perhaps was the first and most important insight confirmed by our journey.

We look at events and developments here at home against the larger canvas of a world in ferment, and we see how irrevocably our lives are joined to the fortunes of all humanity. We consider our strivings as a nation in the broad sweep of events on the global stage, and we realize to what extent our success depends critically on the strengths of our ties with other peoples and nations similarly striving for stability, for peace and for progress.

It is therefore with a keen sense of the world out there that I shall venture here today to review the highlights of our recent journey and to address those issues which are of grave national concern today: the problem of security and the challenge of development.

Expectations and Results

It will perhaps be recorded by historians, as it has already been said by contemporary observers, that no visit by a Filipino President to America was ever undertaken with less expectations, and none has proven in the event more fruitful of understanding and productive of results, than our recent journey.

Our state visit to the United States was mainly undertaken to honor a promise to President Reagan to make an official visit to Washington, and to return his own visit to our country back in 1969. In a broader way, it was our hope that through this visit, we would gain deeper understanding and confirmation of the new orientation of American foreign policy today, specifically as this relates to the nations of the Third World and to the issues of world peace and development.

At the same time, we must say frankly that on the very eve of our departure for Washington, there were in fact many misgivings and doubts as to the probable results of our journey. Among our people and within this Assembly itself, great was the apprehension that our visit would do nothing to advance relations between our countries. Many were the reminders made to me of the serious fluctuations in policy that for nearly a decade have marked American attitudes towards us and toward the cause of the developing nations.

The mood of uncertainty that shadowed our visit arose mainly from a period of disarray in international relations, and a prolonged period of ambivalence in our bilateral ties. The last ten years have profoundly reminded all nations of the fragility of bilateral and multilateral relationships, and of the rise of isolationist sentiments in many nations in the face of the travails that bedevil all—developed and developing nations alike.

But in the event, our journey has confirmed that the bonds which unite America and the Philippines are stronger than the uncertainties and fears of the day. And our links with various communities in the United States and with the larger family of man are more supple and promising than we have imagined.

In this supreme time of travail for our world community, we have received from the United States of America an earnest reaffirmation of the paths and purposes which we pursue in common; and from the communities and forums with which we visited, a stirring reminder that our strivings as a nation are regarded with much encouragement and support.

This is not rhetorical extravagance for a ceremonial occasion. It is rather the hard, tough-minded reading of the results of our long, and sometimes physically punishing, journey to America.

In words which many of us will long remember, President Ronald Reagan set the tone for our entire journey in his welcome for us in Washington, D.C., and in our meetings at the White House. He took note of our own achievements and aspirations as a nation, and cited the contribution we are making to the cause of peace and progress in the world. To him, we are “a respected voice for reason and moderation in international forums,” and “a recognized force for peace and security in Southeast Asia.” and of our bilateral relations, he proclaimed that “the United States deeply values its close friendship and alliance with the Philippines.”

These were sentiments that fully found expression and content in the review that followed of the full range of our bilateral relations, and in the specific understandings and agreements that were concluded during our visit.

This new understanding I now proposed to review in detail.

The Problem of Security

The first cornerstone of our relations with the United States relates to the vital question of defense and security.

In the review of relations that took place, our two governments firmly concurred in affirming the importance of our security alliance to the maintenance of peace and security in the Pacific and the need for constant and close consultations between our governments on security matters.

Our security relationship derives its beginnings in the world that came into being at the twilight of the last war. Embodied in three agreements—covering mutual defense, military bases and military assistance—this relationship today derives its meaning and importance in a world that has vastly changed in the interval of three and a half decades, with its own profound challenges to the security of our nations, our region and the world.

There is no simplistic measure of the extent of the perils to security today, but we can immediately recognize its more alarming aspects which underlie our continuing commitment to our alliance with the United States.

First of all, there is the implacable reality of continuing tension and conflict in the world today. From region to region, nation to nation, the specter of conflict and confrontation goes on.

In the Middle East, the intervals of conflict are longer than the uneasy truces so often forged. Presentiments of a new Arab-Israeli War are rife on the heels of the tragic and disturbing events in Lebanon. The war between Iraq and Iran has taken on new dimensions, threatening to engulf the whole region in a wider war.

In Afghanistan, death continues its grim harvest as Afghan patriots struggle to regain their homeland from alien military occupation.

Nearer our shores, in mainland Southeast Asia, Kampuchean Nationalists continue their war to liberate their country from alien control.

And in various parts of Latin America and Africa, innumerable conflicts rage on, in various forms and with varying dangers to the stability of nations and regions.

Secondly, shadowing these conflicts is the larger rivalry of the superpowers, which has taken on wider dimensions than the earlier Cold War, as it now reaches the far-flung corners of the globe. Today this rivalry finds expression in proxy wars waged in the very heart of the developing world, and in contests for supremacy in key regions and superiority in arms.

Here in our part of the world we can be in no doubt about the dangers to security posed by the rising Soviet military presence that is unmatched by a countervailing presence of American power. As Asia and the Pacific have attained a new prominence in world affairs, so have intensified the need for a defense shield to ensure balance of power in the area.

Thirdly, there is the overwhelming buildup of armaments on a global scale that underlines the challenge to peace and security today. The quantum leap in nuclear armaments alone has already reached approximately 50,000 nuclear bombs, of which more than ninety-five percent are in the arsenals of the superpowers. Matching this buildup is the growth of weaponry in the hands of many developing countries, which vie with one another as customers of the one industry in the world today that is the most profitable and recession proof. Where three years ago, expenditures on arms were estimated at only 300-400 billion dollars annually; today, expenditures are now running close to $700 billion dollars annually.

This is a situation that can only be described as insane and maddening; yet the imperative cannot be avoided: we as a nation must work to attain a level of security against this backdrop of peril and tension. And we cannot escape our own obligation to contribute in every way we can to securing peace and stability in the Asia—Pacific region.

It is in this light that we reaffirm the continuing importance of our security relationship with the United States. This alliance, as President Reagan said during our visit and with which we fully concur, threatens no one, and seeks only to provide for an equilibrium of power within our region that can safegurad the peace. It does not trespass upon the lawful interests of other nations; neither does it threaten the security of others.

Within the ASEAN, we have spoken of our avowed goal to establish a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in Southeast Asia. Yet realistically we cannot but regard this as a long-range objective, that must be pursued step by step as its feasibility becomes more attainable. In the context of present realities, and in full realization that the United Nations today remains incapable of achieving the Pacific settlement of disputes and of exercising any real form of control over conflicts, we have to recognize one incontrovertible fact: that the only acceptable principle for the promotion of peace and security is through the balancing of power in our region. We recognize, as indeed our ASEAN partners likewise recognize, that the United States should be encouraged to maintain its presence in Asia.

This was the context within which we approached the matter of the military bases in our country and our mutual defense pact with the United States. And this, I believe, is how we must approach every effort from hereon to adjust our security alliance.

Specifically, our journey provided the occasion for an understanding between our two countries on the following points:

1. The renewal of our respective commitments under the mutual defense treaty;

2. The holding of regular consultations between our Governments at ministerial level beginning February of next year; and

3. The start of the scheduled five-year reveiw of the Military Bases Agreement in April 1983 in Manila. Such review will entail the examination of the provisions of the agreement to ensure that they continue to meet the needs and interests of both countries.

With respect to the bases, it is important to remember that the old bases agreement originally provided for the lease to the United States of over 400,000 hectares of land for 99 years for free . Moreover, Philippine sovereignty over the bases was not adequately covered by the agreement. And it was only through a long process of negotiation, characterized sometimes by important differences and irritants between our Governments, that the original provisions of the agreement have been successively revised and amended.

In 1956, the period of lease was reduced from 99 years to a period of 25 years starting from the date of this amendment.

In 1975, in the communique signed at the end of President Gerald Ford’s state visit to the Philippines, it was agreed that United States use of Philippine military bases should be conducted in clear recognition of Philippine sovereignty.

In 1976, the two countries further agreed to renegotiate their Military and Mutual Defense Agreements, with emphasis on the military bases.

From here, and as agreed upon during our state visit, our two Governments will now proceed to review the agreement commencing next year, including such matters as objectives, provisions, duration, and manner of implementations.

Beyond the agreement to commence the review of the bases agreement in April 1983, I will say now that it was my impression during the recent talks, that the United States views in a conciliatory light the various issues which we have raised in regard to the agreement. Certainly, we are convinced more than ever that there are no issues between our two countries in this regard that cannot be resolved through the auspices of negotiations.

This is therefore the spirit in which we should now approach on our part the need to periodically adjust the bases agreement and look toward eventual American withdrawal from the bases at some future time which would be conducive to the prospects of ASEAN neutralization and detente between the superpowers.

The Economic Relationship

The cordial spirit that attended discussion of our security relationship similarly characterized the broad and detailed discussion of economic relations between our two countries.

It was not our expectation that our visit would provide the venue for the writing of specific agreements between our Governments. The most that we truly expected was a frank and friendly discussion of outstanding problems in our bilateral economic relations and a broad consultation on the problems and prospects facing the global economy today.

The American economy, and American economic policies, plainly put, have an impact on the world economy as a whole, and on various national economies in particular, including our own, that is clearly without parallel in the international community today. This is not because our nation or others like us are economically dependent on the United States; this is simply a reflection of the way most countries today are affected by the size and influence of the large American market.

Moreover, in the prolonged state of recession that in recent years have plagued the world economy, the magnitude of this influence and impact has become virtually critical for every prognosis or hope of global economic recovery.

We sought therefore during our recent journey the temper of American perceptions and policies for economic recovery and economic cooperation with our country and the rest of the world. We wanted to see how these policies would mesh with our own plans for economic recovery and growth.

The result of this process of consultation and exchange has been invaluable in both the insights we have gained, and in the various agreements that in the event were forged during our visit.

American policy makers today, I am pleased to report, are neither unmindful of their responsibilities as a global economic power, nor insensitive to the problems and aspirations of countries like the Philippines and developing regions like the ASEAN. In a time of difficulty for the American economy, as for the rest of the world, nevertheless we have found in President Reagan’s administration the desire to make the necessary adjustments in policies and programs and to make common cause with other nations in turning the situation around.

This outlook of America’s preparedness to cooperate is well reflected in the various economic agreements that were the hallmark of this phase of our visit. These specific agreements cover the following areas:

1. The exchange of instruments of ratification for a Tax Treaty between the United States and the Philippines.

2. The completion of a Civil Aviation agreement which allows both countries to fly more frequencies up to 18 flights per week.

3. The conclusion of a Tourism Agreement designed to encourage reciprocal tourism between both countries.

4. The signing of an Agricultural Cooperation Agreement involving cooperative programs for agricultural development and scientific and technological exchange.

5. The conclusion of an agreement with the Export-Import Bank of the United States, subject to Congressional approval, that guarantees the amount of $204.5 million for the Bataan Nuclear Plant.

6. The conclusion of an agreement to explore new cooperative measures for the reduction of losses to life and property due to typhoons through the utilization of advance tracking and warning technologies.

7. The provision for a sustained dialogue between our Finance Ministries concerning finance and economic issues through a Joint Economic Commission.

8. The organization by the U.S. Government of an investment mission of American businessmen to the Philippines and other ASEAN countries in 1983.

Of great significance in reviewing the import and meaning of these understandings and agreements between our Governments is the fact that several of these were concluded at the initiative of our American hosts. In particular, we take note of the establishment of a Joint Economic Commission which will serve as a device to sort out problems and issues at ministerial level This is a consultative mechanism which has long been needed in our economic relationship, given the many outstanding issues and concerns that underlie such important links between our governments and our business communities.

Parenthetically, I take this opportunity to report to this Assembly that the various agreements forged during our U.S. visit are in the nature of executive agreements. Except for the agreement with the export-import bank which is subject to Congressional approval by the United States Congress, all the above agreements do not require ratification by either the United States Congress or our Batasang Pambansa. They are in the nature of agreements between our Ministries and their counterparts in American government.

This is not to say, however, that this Assembly had no part to play in the writing of these accords, and has none in the fulfillment henceforth of their provisions. For it is well known that our Parliament, working with our Cabinet of Ministers, has been fully part of the shaping of our position on the issues and concerns involved, as well as in the actual process of discussion in Washington.

And there is no question either that in the work that must now begin to fulfill the promise of this new understanding between the United States and the Philippines, this Assembly has a role to play in providing counsel and support to the executive machinery of government.

I shall submit forthwith to this body the texts of the various agreements signed, and shall here cite only the key provisions of several key agreements.

The real measure, however, of the benefits that have accrued to our economic relations with the United States resides not so much on the specific agreements signed, but on the earnest desire demonstrated by both governments to work and consult together, and to harmonize approaches to the principal problems that affect the global economy today.

In our meetings with American economic policy makers and American business leaders, there was much shared understanding of the factors for economic decline and difficulty in the world today, and of the way American policies at home affect profoundly conditions and developments in developing countries like the Philippines. There was tough-minded assessment on all sides of the problems, but there was also some optimism about the prosepcts for the future. As President Reagan himself pledged in his parting words to us: “we will all do more in the years to come, and our continuing commitment to one another. . . will be solid now and for the future.”

The Prospects of the National Economy

There is a sense in which the truly important achievement of our recent journey to the United States is the persepctive it has provided on our problems and prospects as a nation today.

It has made us conscious more than ever of our inescapable bond with the rest of the world in the economic travails of the day. But this journey has also been a time of realization of the fundamental strengths of our economy today and the prospects ahead of us as the world at this point in time perceives the first glimmers of global economic recovery.

The severeties of the economic crisis are the common lot of all nations today—developed and developing nation alike, oil importing and oil exporting countries together. In this period of prolonged recession, which has been running for three years now, the world may be in fact living through a state of profound depression.

Commodity prices are at their lowest point in nearly a decade. Sugar prices are at a new ten-year low. Copper prices, when duly adjusted to inflation, have never been so low since the days of the Great Depression. Coconut oil prices are at a new five-year low. And prices of wood products are at their lowest level in many years as housing starts have dramatically tapered off in the face of the recession.

On the other hand interest rates have nearly doubled what it was during the last 20 years. Unemployment is on the rise everywhere. And many countries are now facing severe difficulties in servicing their debt obligations.

In the midst of this specter of gloom, we now perceive the first cautious notes of recovery for the global economy. One such sign is the decline of interest rates in the United States, which many hopefully pray will be the prelude for new investments in the American economy. Still another is the surge of the American stock market to new unprecedented levels. And just as important perhaps is the major reversal of American policies on tax increases, which promises a reduction of the federal budget deficit, a matter of urgent concern to many countries.

Whether this hoped-for turn-around will indeed take place or the climate of depression will continue, only time will tell yet it is nonetheless demonstrably clear that as a nation we have lived through this period of difficulty stable and resilient; and if indeed the promised lift should transpire, we are in an excellent position to ride the tide of recovery and growth.

This verdict on our national economic performance is no subjective reading on our part. In its September issue for 1982, Euromoney rates the world economies according to three categories: economic performance, prospects up to the end of the century, and country risk ratings.

Significantly, the Philippines rated creditably in all three. We were ranked as number 18 in economic performance during the 1974-82 period among 81 countries, and number 11 among 20 best performing developing countries.

In the rating of prospects, we were classed among the “comet” group of new powers in the world economy, in contrast to the “falling star” group of countries which are projected to recede in importance.

Finally, in terms of country risk rating, we were ranked number 69 in a field of 117 countries. Under this category ratings from 80 and above are considered excellent risk and 25 below as worst risk standing.

This independent survey underline what we have long believed: that fundamentally we are a country with many strengths and pluses on our side, and with the full capability to achieve dynamic growth in a more hospitable international economic environment. By almost every indicators for economic health, performance and capability, we have a fundamentally sound economy.

Against the prognosis of the future therefore—be it auspicious or otherwise—let us remind ourselves of these strengths, and thereby measure how we will fare tomorrow.

First and foremost, let us take note of the composition of our exports today. Although our commodity exports declined by 27 percent over just a period of one year, our non-traditional exports compensated for the decrease with an increase by 17 percent despite the recession. Today our manufactured exports account for more than half of our total exports. Any improvement therefore in commodity prices will certainly and dramatically increase the volume and level of our export trade.

Secondly, there is the conservative debt management policy which we have judiciously followed and maintained at 20 percent of the previous year’s receipts. Today, our debt service ratio stands at 19.2 percent. The ratio has been high of late not because we have overspent, but because our receipts have gone down in the face of declining export prices.

It bears stressing that our proven capacity to manage our debt burden of $12 billion is creditable, especially when compared to other countries which today have debt burdens of over $50 billion and debt service ratios running as high as 50 percent and above.

Thirdly, there is fundamental strength provided by our energy development program. Our massive and farsighted investments in this program are now beginning to bear fruit. At the start of the program, our dependence on imported energy stood at 95 percent. Today this is below 70 percent, and the chances of continued accelerated improvement in this area are excellent.

Fourth, we have demonstrated our capability in food production for self-sufficiency. This has been most evident in the MASAGANA Program for rice production, which has consistently recorded surplus production for several years now. We expect to achieve the same in the MAISAGANA Program for corn production, and in other programs in our agricultural sector.

Fifth, we have effected major structural adjustments in industry in line with our policy to accelerate the development of small-scale, medium-scale and heavy industry. For many years, our industrial sector has been overprotected by high tariff walls that tended merely to encourage inefficiency. Today, we are in the midst of a major modernization process in the industrial sector, while decreasing at the same time protection for our industries. Tariff reform has been one major instrument in this process.

This is a case of taking the necessary medicine now to prepare the way for the more rational and dynamic growth of our industrial sector. For it is our belief that when recovery does come, this sector will be in a strong position to compete and develop at a rapid pace.

Sixth, the growth of foreign investments in the national economy today economy today has been rapid, particularly during the last two years. During this two-year period alone we have been registering $250 million a year in foreign investments, compared to a $70-million annual level during the previous 10 years. This is an international vote of confidence in the Philippine economy, at a time when capital in the rest of the world is said to be retrenching from new investments.

Seventh, inflation has decreased further to 10.5 percent as of the first three quarters of this year, as compared to the 13.2 percent recorded during the comparable period in 1981. In 1979 and 1980, the inflation rate stood at 18 percent.

Eighth, the level of domestic savings has continued to move upwards. As of August 1982′ the growth rates of savings, time deposits and deposit substitutes stood at 20.2 percent. This is yet another strong indicator of the reserves of strength in the national economy today.

Finally, for the first three quarters of the year the national economy recorded a real grwoth rate of 2.4 percent. This is clearly a deceleration from last year’s growth level, but it is remarkable nonetheless in the light of severe problems we have faced in our export trade. What I wish to emphasize in assessing the prospects of the nation today is the very basic fact: that the fundamentals are there for accelerated national development of our country. It has simply been our bad luck that for nearly three years in a row; our economic efforts have had to confront a prolonged recession in the global economy as a whole.

This is a conviction shared by many in the American business community with whom we had the occasion to meet in the course of our recent visit to the United States. They are bullish about the long-term prospects of the country. And they are prepared to back up that faith with investments in our economic future.

With even more concern and regard, I take this opportunity to pledge our full support to our private sector. We will not let you down. We will assist you in every way we can to weather this present time of difficulty.

I believe we have already made manifest our determination to help distressed sectors of economy in the actions we have taken in various industries. One clear example of this is our copper financing scheme, under which we are at present purchasing our copper production at 10 to 15 cents above world prices.

That policy of assistance and support to the private sector, I will say again, will continue.

At the same time, however, I should like to take careful note of the plaint of those who worry about government intervention in industry. Let me say this in reply. We have not done this out of choice. In those instances where we have intervened, it has been mainly because we have had no choice, and also because you asked us to intervene. To do otherwise would have been gravely injurious to the entire private sector, to industries in particular, and to the economy as a whole.

The primacy of the private sector is the keystone around which we seek to develop the economy. And I say now that it is fully our intent to give back to the private sector as soon as the occasion permits those enterprises which government has had to take over for reasons of necessity.

Conclusion

Judging, then, by the economic indicators, there are hopeful signs of recovery towards the end of the year. The recent re-activation of the American market, brought about no doubt by lower interest rates and a perception that there will be no tight credit policies, are only the beginnings of an American recovery from which the Philippines must inevitably benefit.

However, we must view this against the pervading gloom that has been called “euro-pessimism.” The O.E.C. D. (the European Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development) observes that European unemployment, which is 10%, will continue until next year. For this reason restrictive economic policies are expected. As the O.E.C.D. report concludes, “slow growth tends to engender slow growth.” There is a candid anxiety about political instability in the face of economic hardship.

How “euro-pessimism” will affect the International Economic Invironment, particularly the developing countries, requires our study and anticipation.

The worrisome region, therefore, is not ASEAN, which is fast growing, but Europe.

On the other hand, the energy crisis continues and it presents a formidable challenge to the so-called O.I.D.C.s, the oil-importing-developing countries, of which the Philippines is one. In a recent study by Althea L. Duersten and Arpad van Lazar in a book entitled, “Global Insecurity: A Strategy for Energy and Economic Renewal,” it is concluded that  “domestic growth rates may be threatened, equity objectives jeopardized, and the adjustment process slow and painful. In a world of shrinking resources for public investment programs, the pressing social or welfare programs will be the first candidates for curtailment and elimination. This may exacerbate social tensions in the O.I.D.C.s, particularly in countries with large disparities in income distribution and inequitable access to services. The warning is clear. The tenuous social contract that holds together the fragile body of societies in transition may well be strained beyond limits by a world of uncertain and expensive energy.”

This warning, fortunately, is not new to your leadership. We appreciated the signals long before this time and it is for this reason that we have earlier made plans for alternative sources of energy. All of us anticipated the strains on the social fabric by economic hardship. It is for this reason that we embarked early this year on the KKK, our massive program for the wide distribution of opportunity and economic enterprise.

But as I have said again and again, the world today is an interdependency from which there can be no escape. Although we can protect ourselves, we cannot insulate ourselves from external events and influences. What happens elsewhere in the world must affect us in one way or another.

Thus, American determination to solve economic problems concerns us. The pervading gloom of pessimism all over Europe is, for us, a matter of concern. Our reaction to all these is an exertion of political will, a greater and deeper commitment to self-reliance.

Thus, in my just-concluded visit to the United States, I expressed some anxiety over the efficiency of a political system which is characterized by a continuing conflict between the legislative and executive powers. The world is moving fast but our political processes are too slow. There has to be a restoration of political will and adequate response to crisis without sacrificing the essential democratic values.

As we see in Europe now, to quote a prominent European economist, “we have a race against time in Europe. The question is whether markets can produce positive results before the political system collapses under the strain of rising unemployment.”

The historical lesson is too recent for us to forget.

We have been lucky as a nation to have responded to crisis when we did—only a decade ago. Our political system has proved resilient in the face of crisis after crisis.

But luck has been informed by a sustained political will.

And so as we face the future, as we anticipate recovery, we must exert ourselves even more, for it is not enough to survive. We must above all, prosper. This cannot be accomplished short of national unity and collective resolution.

The task, then, before the Batasan, is to develop those mechanisms for initiation and response that have been so far, on an ad hoc manner, the basis of our survival in adversity.

There must be an intellectual focus, an economic and social concentration, on your deliberations. Individual political fortunes are, of course, important, but the national fortune is urgent.

The world has become more complex and precarious since we assumed the presidency sixteen years ago. The political perceptions of some of us have not kept up with this drastic change. A few of us still hanker for the past, being impotent before the present and fearful of the future. But no nation can survive which fears its history. No people can prevail who are blind to reality.

Nothing can touch us for so long as we remain united.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.