Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the closing ceremonies of Castasia II

[Delivered on March 30, 1982]

I had wanted to join you at the opening of this conference to welcome you in behalf of our country and our people, but as you all know I was out of the country on a most important mission on the day you began your deliberations. I am therefore grateful for the opportunity you have given me to do the next best thing to saying welcome, and that is bidding you all goodbye.

I hope you found our facilities and preparations for this important meeting adequate and suitable to your needs.

This is only the second conference of ministers responsible for the application of science and technology to development and those responsible for economic planning in Asia and the Pacific. But I can already sense a greater determination on the part of the representatives of the member states to grapple with larger issues and problems confronting our region today and a greater resolve to apply scientific and technological know-how in resolving such problems in a speedy but prudent manner.

During the first meeting in India, Castasia’s principal focus was on strengthening the institutions, the facilities and programs for the advancement of science and technology in individual member countries. Castasia II has moved into the higher plane of discussing the appropriate application and the impact of new knowledge and technology on member countries, and of evolving a series of important recommendations regarding the role science and technology must play in development plans as well as proposals for new areas of international cooperation.

I am sure that the sentiments you have expressed and the recommendations embodied in what you now refer to as the manila declaration will have a deep and lasting impact on the course of developments in our part of the world. The Manila declaration does not only reflect the consensus of the scientific community and of the economic planners of the countries represented in Castasia II, it also incorporates the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of Asia and the Pacific and their common wish to make science serve the ends of peace, prosperity and equality for all.

Let me therefore congratulate you all for adopting this historic document which should in time become a blueprint for the peaceful application of science and technology. In particular, I would like to mention the leadership and guidance exercised by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and its co-sponsor the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, not only during this conference but also in previous conferences in the past.

During the last few days, you have had the opportunity not only to discuss the state of science and technology in our region out also to dissect in some detail the social, economic and cultural settings in which they are being applied. The review of the situation in our region; I am sure, has clearly demonstrated the pressing need for science and technology to be brought to bear upon the many urgent problems of the region.

Statistics can never fully capture the full dimensions of the problems we are faced with; much less do they project the pains and miseries they merely quantify. The data which indicate the gross disparities in the par capita incomes among the nations of Asia and the Pacific which range from $100 for the poorest to $9,000 for the richest are bad enough. But what is even more disturbing is the very real possibility that the situation could turn for the worse in the future since the our region’s population is expected to double in a few year’s time from the estimated 2.7 billion at present.

Poverty we all recognize now spawns a host of problems, such as malnutrition, diseases, and illiteracy. The millions of hungry, sick and uneducated peoples in Asia and the Pacific now look up to their leaders, the scientists and the rest of the human family to help alleviate their misery. Science and technology offer the real hope for their deliverance from hunger and disease. Therein lies the significance of your conference here in Manila.

In the course of your conference, I am pleased to learn that you have succeeded in identifying the priority concerns that science and economic planning must immediately address. You have defined the modes and strategies for the accelerated transfer of technology. And you have also set priority areas for international cooperation.

What is left for us to do now is to summon the will and mobilize the resources that would hasten the adoption of new processes and technologies in the critical areas of each of our country’s development plans and programs. At the same time, the countries of Castasia II should now contribute their share towards the realization of cooperative programs and endeavors.

We in the Philippines are committed to help in every way and give substance to our commitment in regional cooperative tasks. We are also prepared to implement on our own the relevant recommendations you have suggested. Prime Minister Cesar Virata, I believe has already outlined for you the measures we have taken to promote scientific and technological research and development, including the creation of a new Philippine Science and Technology Authority which will be responsible for formulating and implementing policies, plans and programs for the development of science and technology.

We join you in asking the developed countries to share with us their vast storehouse of knowledge so that we can better provide for the most urgent needs of our people.

And finally we are with you in appealing to the superpowers to put an end to the headlong race towards arms superiority and instead devote their immense resources in science and technology to the noble task of combatting hunger, disease and the many ills afflicting the majority of mankind. For the cause of peace can be better advanced not through the massive manufacture of weapons of war but through the intensified development of tools for survival for the impoverished millions of the third world.

Allow me again to congratulate you for a most fruitful conference. You will soon be leaving with our sincere wishes for success in your efforts to to put science and technology to peaceful and productive uses for the benefit of the people in our region and the rest of the world.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.