Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the KBL Rally

[Delivered on May 14, 1981]

My friends and fellow countrymen:

Once again we come together as one party, one movement and one voice in the quest for the highest office within the gift of our people.

No man could be more proud and grateful than I am today after listening to your warm expressions of support for my candidacy for the Presidency of our Republic; and no one could feel more privileged than I in being granted anew the opportunity to seek the electoral mandate of our people. Yet it is not I alone who seek here today the majesty of that mandate in the coming elections.

We seek it also for a party and a cause which we all believe in.

A man may aspire and dream of attaining the high and lofty office of the Presidency. Yet only in concert with others and in the service of a cause much larger than himself, can he ever hope to win that office; and only with their help and powered by a shared vision of the future can he ever hope to bear its great burdens and discharge them with honor and distinction.

We stand here today as a party and a movement that believes in the justness and rightness of our bid to continue to lead the nation.

We stand here for a record of unparalleled and continued service to people and country, that has already carried the nation past the valley of crisis onto new plateaus of achievement and progress.

And we stand here above all for a cause greater than any one man’s or one party’s aspiration to lead; we stand here for the cause of stability, progress, and vitality in our national life.

With one voice, we proclaim here today the union of our movement with the hopes and aspirations of our people. And we ask of them nothing more than what is deserved by the record of our stewardship of Government and by the solemn vows we have made to continue the momentum of national achievement.

Others may speak during this campaign about their doubts and uncertainties in this historic time of opportunity in our country. For ourselves we speak of our confidence in the capabilities and genius of our people to meet crisis and to seize the opportunities of the day.

Others may shun the discomforts of an electoral battle, simply because they see little hope of victory at the polls. We on our part fully believe in the need for our people to render their verdict in the elections, and to provide a new mandate to Government.

Others may not now have a coherent vision of their program of Government and the future of the nation. We on our part stand by an authentic program of Government, a clear vision of the future, and a record of leadership that no less than the World Bank has described as “one of the most outstanding in the entire developing world.”

I have said before and I will say again that in this campaign and in the coming elections, regardless of the seeming lack of parity in political strength, my leadership and the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan will fully submit themselves to our people for judgment. They shall not avoid the rigors of public scrutiny — in regard to its policies and programs in the past, and in regard to its policies and programs for the future.

For we believe that this is what is supremely needed now: at this point when the nation will elect its first president under the amended Constitution. More important than the determination of victors at the polls, is the prudent and thorough assessment of the future shape and direction of Government.

And this is why I say we shall bring before our people during this campaign the cause which we represent as a party, and the program of Government which we pledge to carry out. We are prepared and we shall undertake to discuss with any group and in any forum every vital question of national life and the specific policy responses of our party to each of them.

If it is discussion that is wanted or needed, we shall discuss. If it is debate, we shall debate. Let no one ever doubt our readiness to present the case for every position, every policy and every program that constitute our total program of Government.

In elections in the past, there never was enough attention given to real issues and policy problems in government. Too much attention was given to the accidents of personalities and the time-worn issues that had been emptied of meaning.

In this campaign, we invite the opposition and the public to inquire with us earnestly into every sector of national life, to examine problems in detail, and to discuss alternative policies to them.

Fundamentally, the KBL Platform of Government stands for continuity with the reforms instituted by the New Society during the period of Martial Law, and for the institutionalization of these reforms under the climate of full political normalization.

We see the surmounting of crisis and the national reconstruction undertaken by crisis government as an essential bridge to the achievement of greater stability and progress for the nation.

In the maintenance of this link, we perceive the nation’s confident movement towards full development and modernization.

In the continuation of the process of reform, we see the venue whereby we can attain greater equality and justice among our people.

Specifically, what are the policies we stand for?

In the area of politics and government, we fully support the new framework of Government enshrined in our Constitution and in the amendments recently ratified in the plebiscite. That framework represents for us the assurance of political stability and efficacy in governmental processes.

We support a strong Batasang Pambansa that will be the legislating power in Government.

We support the conjunction of the legislative power with the executive power of Government.

And we support the vigorous development of Government in the local communities, from the regions, down to the provinces, to the municipalities and to the barangays. And we are committed to policies and programs that will strengthen Government at community level.

In the economy, we aim at progressively higher rates of real economic growth sufficient to match the needs of sustained industrialization.

Attention will be given to the development of industries, but the same importance will also be given to agriculture and agri-business enterprise, which today constitute a vital growth sector in the economy.

But we shall ever remember that the material well-being of every member of society is the object of development, and for this purpose we shall vigorously pursue policies towards the optimum sharing of the fruits of production.

The economic enfranchisement of our rural poor shall continue to be a principal objective in our economic programs, both in industry and agriculture.

Export development, as an essential policy to meet payments problems and to generate industrial development, will be pursued, particularly in the area of manufactured goods.

For the purpose of establishing balance in urban and rural development, there will be continuous efforts to spread development projects equitably between the urban centers and the countryside.

For every region, specific regional development programs will be pursued, consonant to the unique resources and needs of each. The specific developmental thrusts for all the regions are specified in the KBL Platform of Government.

Finally, we shall continue to support the position of private enterprise as our most important agent for economic productivity and expansion. Only in sectors where Government intervention is truly needed for lack of entrepreneurs, or for reasons of urgent national interest, will Government move and take on the task of economic effort.

In the area of social development, which basically involves social reform and the sharing of wealth, we shall give stress to the following policies:

First, there shall be representation for every sector in national decision-making; that is to say, for farmers, for workers, for the youth, and for the local barangays.

Second, land reform will continue to be a high priority program of the Government, and we shall pay utmost attention here to expand the benefits and coverage of the Land Reform Program.

Third, labor shall be entitled both to employment and to just and humane terms and conditions of employment. The full exercise of the workers’ right to strike shall be reinstated. And Government shall continue to provide protection and assistance to the working class.

Fourth, essential social services such as health, welfare and education shall be a strong focus of expansion and reform, along alines that will increase national self-reliance, dignity, and cultural identity.

Fifth, human settlements which is addressed to the 11 basic needs already identified will be accelerated, and there will be particular emphasis and expansion in the programs for housing, livelihood centers, and community development.

In the area of government administration, we shall squarely face up to the problems of graft and corruption and incompetence in government. In the one, we shall strengthen our systems for discipline and reform in the civil service. On the other, we shall continue to strengthen managerial skills in the government bureaucracy through the training of managers at the Development Academy of the Philippines and other Government institutions.

In the area of national security, we stand fully on the principle that the integrity of the national territory is sacred and cannot be compromised.

For this purpose we believe in the maintenance of a self-reliant and vigilant defence force.

Towards all groups that advocate the armed overthrow of the Government, towards subversion and insurgency, we are committed to pursue programs to meet such threats and to erode their base support.

In Mindanao, we shall continue to pursue our policies of reconciliation and rehabilitation of rebels who return to the fold, and the vigorous implementation of socio-economic development projects. But armed threats in the area will be met as they specifically warrant.

Terrorism, which has lately been perpetrated in our midst, will be met head-on, in such a manner as to banish completely this blight in our national life.

In the area of peace and order, we shall specifically pursue two parallel programs.

First, the upgrading and intensification of our law enforcement program, by such measures as will promote the vitality of our police agencies; and

Second, by the complementary democratization and humanization of the administration of justice. Rehabilitation of prisoners will be of particular concern to us as we move towards greater implementation of our Probation Law and improvements in our penal system.

Finally, in the area of international relations, we subscribe to the philosophy of “development diplomacy,” which recognizes the vital importance of foreign relations in the achievement of national development. The keystones of foreign policy under the New Society will be reinforced, and these are:

1. The establishment of friendly ties with all nations; 2. The promotion of ASEAN cooperation and community; 3. The continued reexamination and advancement of our ties with the United States and Western Europe; 4. Identification with the Third World and with the reform of the international economic order; and 5. The support of the principles and ideals of the United Nations system, and the support of initiatives to reform the U.N. Charter.

With regard to the U.S. military bases in the country, we are committed to the amended Bases Agreement which provides for periodic renegotiation and for Philippine jurisdiction over the bases. We reject the call of those who advocate immediate abrogation of the agreement as foolhardy and impracticable. On the other hand, we believe that the bases are vital to the wider framework of regional balance of power and stability in Asia.

In foreign relations, we have achieved over the last few years many major breakthroughs that have vastly expanded our contacts with the rest of the world and enhanced our position in the family of nations. We believe that in the new dangers rising now in the international scene, the basic thrust of our foreign policy if maintained and intensified provides invaluable inputs into the total strengthening and development of the nation.

These in the main underline the policy directions that our party and our movement stand for. It is a platform to which as leader of the party and as standard bearer in the Presidential Elections, I am fully committed to support. Indeed, I will say that a vital dimension to this platform is the outcome of my own personal beliefs and efforts, which have found support within the party.

In its totality, this platform is no mere recitation of promises to the nation; this is a platform rooted in policy choices and directions. This is a program of Government whose main outlines have been already seen by the nation and has been proven by performance.

What the philosophy of the New Society has already produced in the way of rebirth and renewal in our country, it can now transform into a momentum for national progress that cannot be deterred. Here lies our hope for permanence in the reforms that have been instituted. Here lies the promise of fulfillment for many of our aspirations as a nation.

The historic momentum that has been set must not be allowed to falter. The forward movement must continue.

This is not the vision of one man alone, or even of a party alone. It is rather the vision that for so many years now have gathered our talents and our energies in one common striving for the strengthening of national life.

It is your dream and mine. And I so ask you again, at this historic time of choice in our country, to join your hands once more with mine and pledge with me our undying commitment to the realization of this dream.

Thank you all and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.