Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 80th Anniversary of the Bureau of Customs

[Delivered on February 10, 1982]

Once again we are gathered here today to commemorate the anniversary of the Bureau of Customs. This is not an ordinary celebration because your Bureau turns 80 today, thus making it one of the oldest institutions of government. So while I congratulate you on this significant milestone in your history, I would like to express the wish that age will not weigh heavily on you and that instead the long years of experience will guide you to ever greater heights of achievement in the years to come.

In celebrating your 80th year, you are actually marking only the formal organization of your Bureau.

The tradition of a Philippine Customs Service actually dates back many centuries before then, when the first foreign traders started the practice of bringing gifts and paying tributes to the Rajas and Datus in exchange for the privilege of doing business with our forebears. In Spanish times, our colonizers also instituted a 10 percent levy on all goods being shipped in or out of the country and finally, the Bureau of Customs formally came into being with the promulgation of Administrative Act No. 335 on February 6, 1902.

I have tried to trace briefly the history of the customs service not only to emphasize the historical precedents that form the basis for the practice of exacting levies on foreign trade but also to underscore the vital importance of the role that you in the Bureau of Customs play in the life of the nation. While we can only surmise now as to how our ancient Datus or even the Spanish administrators put to use the duties that they imposed on our country’s export and imports, today we can say with certainty that every peso you collect goes to the improvement of the quality of life of our people. That your organization has endured for so long, is already clear and ample proof of the essential nature of the task our government and people has entrusted to you.

In a very real sense you make government run and propel our economy to growth and greater progress. Let me therefore congratulate you for making the last decade the most fruitful ever in the entire history of the Bureau of Customs.

The passing of another decade inevitably invites comparisons with previous ones and I am proud to say that during the last ten years, the Bureau of Customs has collected more than the total collections of the previous 70 years combined. You will recall that until 1971, the bureau could never collect one billion pesos in a single year. We passed the one billion mark in 1971, and since then we have increased that figure more than 10 times over with collections of P11.45 billion in 1980 and P10.79 billion last year.

This remarkable record was achieved through the institution of various measures designed to simplify procedures and reintroduce efficiency and honesty as the work ethic of the personnel in the Bureau of Customs. I suppose it was not mere coincidence that the most dramatic rise in the collections of the Bureau of Customs came in the year following the purge of the bureaucracy which we undertook in September 1972. In 1973, with the country already under Martial Law, collections totalled P2.19 billion. This amount increased to an astonishing P5 billion in 1974, an increase of 128 percent that has remained unmatched up to this time. The conclusion is sad, but there it is for all of us to see. But I am happy to note that the momentum of that record performance has been sustained up to this day and the ideals of the reform movement continue to motivate our customs personnel today.

Last year, we had a different story. For the first time in recent years collections actually fell 6 percent from the record 1980 collection of P11.45 billion to only P10.8 billion. But before anyone draws any unhealth conclusions about the shortfall, let me hasten to explain that 1981 was a particularly difficult for our exports, the lowering of tariff rates on certain commodities, the shift in the composition of Philippine imports towards essential and therefore low-tariff goods, like oil, have all contributed to the weakening of our foreign trade and thus the resulting decrease in customs collections. In fact, we projected that in 1981 revenues from the Bureau of Customs would amount to not more than P11 billion because of our trade difficulties. So we were well within our target for the year, and I do not believe it would be fair to consider this as a reflection of some kind of slackening in the efforts of the Bureau.

In fact, in the area of law enforcement, the bureau passed the year with concrete achievements. The National Customs Police intercepted and recovered highly dutiable goods which were brought into the country through fraudulent means; and from these efforts government realized a total revenue of P180.3 million through the imposition of additional levies and outright confiscation. Another law enforcement arm of the Bureau, the customs investigation and intelligence division, seized some P128.5 million worth of goods also during the year. These figures do not even include the cost of other commodities seized from the Manila International Airport and other ports in the provinces, but still they already represent a substantial increase over the 1980 total of P163 million.

While these figures are quite impressive by themselves, I consider it even more significant that the Bureau of Customs has time and again succeeded in checking the flow of prohibited items, like guns, bombs and explosives as well as harmful drugs. This is one area where I would urge every man and woman in the service to exercise extreme vigilance. And as I commend your past performance, I also expect all of you to join in the campaign to stop the importation of these dangerous items.

As you begin another decade of service to the nation, let us all pledge to uphold the highest standards of morality and integrity in government. By the very nature of your task, you are regarded as the barometer of morality in government. By and large, you have succeeded in rehabilitating your public image. But we must relentlessly pursue the objective of restoring in full our people’s confidence in you and in your Bureau. And this you can only achieve when every one cooperates towards its fulfillment.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.