Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Independence Day

[Delivered on June 12, 1984]

In keeping with the customs and traditions of a free people, we gather today, here in the Palace of our people and in hundreds of capitols and town halls throughout our land, to commemorate the birth of our nation.

Of all the legacies that a free people may prize in their heritage, there is none more precious than the bequest of national independence and freedom. It is also the most demanding of all.

For it is a legacy that is not to be enjoyed and kept save by conscious effort and sacrifice of those who are the heirs.

And we of all peoples are perhaps most aware of the costs and the perils of freedom because we know and we remember that our very First Republic that was born in Kawit, Cavite 86 years ago died soon after its founding, the victim of yet another colonial power.

We know and we remember how long it took and what sacrifices were required before we could recover our National Independence on July 4, 1946.

And we know and we remember the labors that we had to bear decade after decade thereafter, in order to preserve our right to be an independent nation and to make authentic and life-giving this blessing for our people.

To celebrate therefore, Independence Day in our country is not simply to mark by ceremony and ritual the history beginnings of our Republic; it is as ever a moment to renew those purposes upon which our nation stands and to review the difficult stages of our evolution into the nation we are today.

We are a nation today of 52 million people that is fully 26 times larger than the nation that came to birth 86 years ago.

In both the growth in size and in the time that has elapsed are vividly marked every trial that we have lived through, and every lesson that we have learned about the challenges that a free and independent nation must face.

As we learned long ago that National Independence is not won after one demonstration of the valor of our arms, so have we also known that the achievement of authentic national freedom involves many forms of struggle and effort. And it is thus the task of every generation of our people to show by deed how it can preserve, protect and promote that freedom,

In many ways the last decade and a half has been such a critical time for our country. For this has been a period when, by choice, we faced up to the many constraints on National Independence since 1946; and this has been a time too when we have had to confront grave challenges to the very life of our republic.

Our response’s to these problems and these issues have not always been fully known or understood, so it is apt that we should examine now these difficult stages of our evolution as a free nation on this day of commemoration of Independence Day.

It should be noted first of all that this period of national history has been a time of supreme challenge and defense of our republic. Some of us may no longer remember it as such, because the time of greatest danger is past, but at no time in our history did we have to confront simultaneously the threats of sedition and secession at their full might and capability in arms and men.

On one front, we faced the tides of communist insurgency which had long been feeding upon the restiveness and unrest in our countryside. Contained from time to time but never uprooted, the insurgency had by 1972 attained a capability to overthrow the state in combination with rightist elements in our society, because of deadlock and paralysis in our political and economic life

We met that challenge by repairing to the extra-ordinary recourse of crisis government, which on the one hand rallied our military forces to meet the armed threat, and on the other initiated the program of national transformation that eroded the base of the rebellion in our countryside and our cities. By 1976, we had succeeded in capturing the top leadership of the new people’s army and the Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas, and in addition we were able to effect the surrender of many rebels to the government side, this highlighted by the mass surrender of 3,000 hardcore PKP leaders and members in Aliaga, Nueva Ecija on Nov. 16, 1974.

It can be said now that our counter-insurgency effort was greatly aided, although we did not know it then, by the fact that we prudently stayed away from the war then raging in Vietnam. For it has been told us since by Russian leaders, during a trip of the First Lady to Moscow, that had we sent a combat unit to Vietnam, rather than the civic action group we did sent, the war would have been brought to our shores.

As it was, the insurgency struggle was an internal affair, albeit with outside arms flowing to the rebels’ side, and without aid from anyone on our part, relying solely on our resources, we succeeded in containing and decimating the communist insurgency.

The secessionist struggle in the south presented a different problem to national security. In this struggle, the rebel aims were not to overthrow our government but to establish an independent state in Mindanao, Palawan and Sulu, hence to dismember the national territory. It was a struggle in which initially 20,000 fully armed men, some of whom trained outside the Philippines, were set against our police and constabulary garrisons in the south, and this at a time when we were fully engaged in the insurgency fight in Luzon.

And it was not simply a test of arms. For the secessionist struggle was further complicated by the fact that from 1972 to 1974, the Philippines was blacklisted by Muslim oil producers on whom we depended then for 95% of our oil needs, and who were sympathetic to the Muslim separatist cause in the absence of knowledge of conditions in the country.

In this light it became necessary for us to balance our pacification efforts in the south with a campaign to demonstrate to Islamic countries the justice of our policies toward our Muslim brothers. Far from unleashing the full might of our arms on the secession, we worked earnestly for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

This is why the Tripoli agreement negotiated by the First Lady and Colonel Khadaffi of Libya and signed on December 23, 1976 is of such significance. It led to the cessation of hostilities and to the organization of two autonomous regions in the south, regions 9 and 12. And with the settlement too, amnesty was granted to 37,000 members of the Moro National Liberation Front, some of whom assumed positions of leadership in the autonomous regions, and socioeconomic programs began to gain headway in the troubled areas. Remnants of the rebellion of course still remain, but there is no question that the danger of a separatist government in the south is now past.

In looking at this twin struggle against sedition and secession in our country, it is of the greatest significance that we succeeded in meeting these challenges to our republic on our own and without the help of anyone. Indeed, we could not even purchase arms from our American allies, let alone receive assistance for our cause. We had to purchase arms from other countries, with rather limited resources. But nonetheless we prevailed.

Secondly, we can say of this critical period in national life, that we presided over the termination of a major source of doubt and anxiety about our national independence—the grant of parity rights to Americans upon the recovery of National Independence in 1946. On July 4, 1974 Parity Rights were fully terminated.

It can now be revealed that in the critical negotiations leading up to that historic termination, negotiations of the United States insisted on “National Rights” for Americans in our country, as a condition for the continued enjoyment of preferential trade with the United States, but we stood our grounds on full and total termination of the onerous parity provision.

Thirdly, let us take note that during this period too we began and concluded the renegotiation of our Military Bases Agreement with the United States. The original agreement provided for a term of 99 years, and I had no mechanism whatever for its termination.

It was only on December 7, 1975, following the writing of Ford-Marcos Communique, that renegotiation of the bases of agreement was agreed upon and that the same would be conducted under clear recognition of Philippine sovereignty over the military bases. Time was to elapse before representatives of the two governments would sit down to negotiate amendments to the Military Bases Agreement. But finally the renegotiation took place and in 1979, amendments to the agreements were agreed on, providing among others for periodic review of the agreement every five years until its termination in 1995 and giving clear recognition of Philippine sovereignty over the bases.

In 1983, the agreements were reviewed as scheduled, and further modifications were effected.

In this difficult course of amending and changing the whole tenor of our Military Bases Agreement with the United States it will be seen that the sovereignty of our country has been pursued with vigor and purpose, and short of abrogating the bases altogether, we have succeeded in asserting our national interests on this issue and only the conviction that these bases are important to the goals of peace and stability in our region have prevented us from seeking altogether the full termination of the Military Bases Agreement.

Fourth, during this period, we have sought to achieve the authentic freedom and sovereignty of our country in the conduct of our foreign relations. Where for a long time our view of the world had virtually been shaped according to the interests and dictates of others, we ended our isolation from one half of the world by opening our doors in 1975 to relations with all countries including the socialist world. In successive visits to China in 1975, to the Soviet Union in 1976, the substance of our relations with the rest of the world was fully revised in purpose and outlook. And it cannot be said ever again that our foreign policy serves the interests of nations other than our own.

Fifth, let us take that during this period we ratified a constitution written and by and for Filipinos, and that along with this historic change, we adopted a new system of government and established a New Republic on June 30, 1981.

Where our political fortunes in previous decades had virtually been shaped in mistaken devotion to the solicitude of others, we have now a constitution and a government that is entirely and deservedly our own.

Finally, let us take note that during this period we have embarked upon that essential course that completes and confirms meaning of national independence the economic liberation of our people.

This has been a time when we have braved the difficulties and perils of major reform in our country, a time when we boldly launched agrarian reform, labor reforms, and economic reforms to take control once and for all of our national destiny and to provide for the well-being of our millions. No previous period of national history has marked so purposive an effort to establish a new order; none has affected more profoundly the life of everyone in our land.

These strands of policy and national achievement, molded and consolidated over a period of time and through much labor and sacrifice, constitute the ramparts and structures of our life today as a free and independent state, and they are our basis for confidence in ourselves and in the future of the nation.

As we celebrate today the 86th year of National Independence, we face indeed a new time of difficulty and stress for; our country and people but crisis of even greater magnitude and gravity we have faced and surmounted before. And so will we again.

The greatest peril to a nation during a time of crisis is not to have control over her affairs and not to be free to pursue and protect her interests. But such control and such freedom we surely have now. And these blessings of a sovereign people, when combined with the resolves and loyalties that unite us as one people, are a mighty force against which no burden is too heavy to carry, no crisis so grave to dispel

To mark Independence Day is to renew this faith in ourselves and our purposes. Let us then renew this faith, and together let us move on and add to the proud annals of our nation and our race.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.