Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the formal acceptance of RPS Explorer of the Philippine Government from the Government of Japan

[Delivered on August 14, 1984]

The Filipino people has had a number of occasions to express grateful appreciation for the great benevolence of the Japanese government and its people. Today is another such occasion strongly manifesting that generosity and symbolism of true and lasting friendship between our two nations. In the past several years, the bureau of mines and geo-sciences under the Ministry of Natural Resources had been a most fortunate recipient of assistances in the implementation of its priority projects from the government of Japan. A year ago, I inaugurated the petrological, mineralogical and geochronological services laboratory or petrolab complete with modern equipment and apparatuses for geological research. Today, we formally receive an exploration vessel, also with modern and very sophisticated equipment for marine geological/geophysical surveys and offshore mineral exploration which will be used not only to scan the sea bottom but will be able as well to study its underlying strata. We hold these grants doubly significant because they not only manifest the Japanese scientist’s penchant for research, but a genuine expression as well of Japan’s desire to cooperate with us in our efforts at developing our mineral resources.

Indeed, the importance of the survey vessel cannot be overemphasized. It is a most responsive tool for geo-scientific research and an instrument for national development.

Recognizing the significance of the geological location of the Philippine archipelago at the crossroad of tectonically important events and geologically interesting features leading to better appreciation of the geologic evolution of the earth and comprehension of the Parageneses of mineral evolution, the Japanese Government, borne by its natural acumen for research, extended to the Philippine Government a unique research vessel. It should be remembered, however, that scientific research is only a means to an end. While science seeks to understand natural forces and phenomena, a man’s quest for an understanding and aspiration to harness these natural forces should be ultimately aimed at the betterment and comfort of mankind. An understanding of the Paragenesis of mineral evolution thru marine research will eventually lead to better exploration techniques and faster development of marine mineral resources. More responsive methods of mineral exploration and development will contribute much to the development of a stronger Philippine economy because traditionally, the Philippines is a mineral exporting country and our balance of payment relies heavily on exports of this natural resource. Statistics indicate that in the second half of the seventies, the share of mineral exports to total foreign exchange earnings grew from 14.21% to 17.82%.

This trend peaked in 1980 when 20.19% of our export receipts was contributed by the mineral industry. It was in this year when mineral export was our number one dollar earner with copper figuring prominently in its market. Lamentably, the following year, the industry started to feel the brunt of the worldwide recession and staggering inflation. Because of the skyrocketing operation costs, increased debt servicing requirements and depressed mineral commodity demand, the growth rate of the mineral industry plummeted from a high of 40.75%, in 1980 to 7.47% and 4.86% in 1981 and 1982, respectively. Mineral exports shrunk to hold only 17.13% in 19811 and 13.30% in 1982 of the total export earnings.

But the signs of worldwide economic recovery are apparent. In 1983, the mining industry distinguished itself of having achieved considerable gains with total mineral production value registering an increase of 42.89% from P11.30 billion to an estimated P16.15 billion. Export receipts from the mineral industry likewise contributed an estimated 17.21% of the total export receipts during the period.

The price of copper and gold has started to move in the face of indications that our traditional export markets like the U.S., Japan and Western Europe are experiencing robust economic turnaround. In anticipation of this event, without being over optimistic, a review of our basic policies on mineral development has been conducted vis-a-vis the present realities of the industry and the future conditions expected in the mining business.

To provide a better climate for the development of the mineral industry in order to achieve maximum economic returns and social benefits for our people and make the industry competitive in the world market while assuring adequate resource base, the government has evolved new policy directions on mineral development. These are:

Geared towards the attainment of these ends and aimed at alleviating the impact of the current economic difficulties and in preparation for a more favorable economic environment, the government, through the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences and the Ministry of Natural Resources shall intensify its exploration programs of highly mineralized areas with particular emphasis on gold, copper with high gold content and non-metallic minerals. These minerals are all favorably situated in marine environments.

It is also the observation that the mining industry in the country has been traditionally predominated by large-scale operations which require high capital exposure with equally high debt equity ratio. Such big scale operations need sophisticated and very costly, mechanization requiring high-level energy consumption. The ever increasing cost of energy, capital goods and money to maintain such operations at economically viable levels have saddled operators to the extent that the growth of the industry in the immediate past has continuously declined and even threatening its very existence.

To alleviate the situation and to give more impetus to regional development through increased contribution from the mining sector, I have decreed the establishment of small-scale mining as a new dimension in mineral development. It is a fact that scattered all over the country are small but commercially exploitable mineral deposits which if-properly exploited can contribute substantially to the economic upliftment of the areas wherein they are located and thus, to the total national economic well-being through foreign exchange generation. The abundance of cheap labor, minimum capital requirements, low fuel dependency and flexibility in operations, and much less destructive effects on the environment are among the best arguments supportive of small-scale mining development. Presidential Decree 1899 which I signed on the 23rd day of January this year therefore, encourages the promotion and development of small-scale mining operations. The promotional efforts shall be done through the provision of incentives such as tax-exemption, technical assistance from the bureau of mines and geo-sciences, and waiver of certain obstructive requirements from government instrumentalities which delay operationalization of projects. I have directed the minister of natural resources and the director of mines and geo-sciences to promulgate the implementing rules and regulations for the decree but in so doing to involve the various mining sectors, the very people who shall put into practice the intent of the law.

Our acquisition of RPS explorer comes at a time when worldwide interest is focused in the development and exploitation of sea-bed deposits. While the country’s traditional sources of metals, the onshore deposits could still supply our present demand and foreign commitments, it is to our best interest to immediately locate and evaluate our ocean mineral assets. Discovery of marine mineral deposits and possible horizons of hydrocarbon will surely stimulate participation of the private sector in the promotion and development of our mineral and fossil fuel resources. We, therefore, foresee, expanded mineral based economic activities.

The role of the RPS explorer in national planning and development becomes more significant in the light of recent developments in international jurisprudence governing virtually all uses for all parts of the ocean. The adoption of the archipelagic doctrine and the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) under the United Nations Convention on the law of the sea, to which we are a signatory, has given us substantial gains in marine areas and thus, a tremendous potential in terms of natural resources within the region. The Philippines prior to the approval of the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) concept, has a total offshore area of approximately 150 million hectares or more than four times the country’s land area. With our declaration of a 200-mile exclusive economic zone (EEZ), our total marine area increased to about 190 million hectares or by as much as 25% over our previous territorial limit, this area under our jurisdiction is a vast frontier for research and development. While 93% of the total land area of the country has been geologically mapped, only a few hectares of our offshore have been explored. Accordingly, high priority is given to offshore geo-scientific research and mineral and hydrocarbon development in the fundamental plan, the gathering of marine geological/geophysical data essential for National Planning and Development of our expanded marine area will be the primary function of this research vessel, implementing strategies for which, the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences has manifested in its offshore expi0ration project up to year 2000.

With the acquisition of this vessel, we expect to attain a rapid and systematic development of our offshore regions and to acquire up-date geological and geophysical data which could lead to a better understanding of the tectonic framework and evolution of the Philippines and the structural environment favorable to commercial concentration of not only economically exploitable minerals but hydrocarbon as well. Our acquisition of marine geoscientific data shall put us to better bargaining position vis-a-vis any foreign institution and private entities interested to explore and develop our offshore mineral and hydrocarbon resources. however, with these tasks and with only one research vessel it would be inevitable to augment our open ocean capability and manpower requirement in the not too distant future in order to expedite geoscientific research and mineral exploration of our vast marine area.

Until today, marine geological and geophysical exploration of Philippine waters had been relegated to interested foreign research institutions and to joint cooperative undertakings with geological institutions as part of our international commitments with the United Nations Research Agencies, like the studies of East Asian Tectonics and Resources (SEATAR), the Committee for Coordination of Joint Prospecting for Mineral Resources in Asian offshore areas (CCOP) and the International Decade of Oceanographic Expedition (IDOE). Foreign geophysical and geological survey vessels like the RV Thomas Washington of the Scripps Institution of oceanography of the University of California and RV Valdivia and RV Sonne of the Institute of Natural Resources and Geosciences of the Federal Republic of Germany had conducted geophysical and geological studies in the South Pacific, South China Sea and Sulu Sea.

Aside from the interesting findings from the point of view of geoscientific research the RV Sonne which conducted deep sea sampling in 1982 identified several areas in the Sulu and South China Sea where manganese nodules occur and thick sedimentary accumulation for possible hydrocarbon deposition. Chemical analyses show the samples to contain besides manganese and iron, nickel, copper, titanium, barium, vanadium, and molybdenum. other findings of the RV Sonne open specific areas of research for RPS explorer such as the delineation and evaluation of possible manganese nodule and hydrocarbon deposits in the Sulu sea and south china sea, and the possible occurrence of tin in Palawan resulting from the conclusion that part of northern Palawan was tore out of mainland Asia- other various ocean surveys show considerable wealth of minerals deposited on sea bottom. Vast amounts of manganese nodules are known to exist in the Pacific Ocean floor. gold, platinum, chromite, and other heavy minerals rich in iron. Tin and lead are widely scattered in the ocean floor. Large Phosphorite accumulations are also believed deposited on the sea bottom and these could be exploited to provide fertilizer for phosphate deficient areas. Glauconite, a hydrated silicate of potassium, iron and aluminum is also existent in the continental shelf and accumulation of this mineral has been reported in the Philippine coastal areas.

In 1981, marine seismic and magnetic surveys were conducted along Leyte Gulf, Surigao strait, Dinagat sound and Hinatuan passage. Indications of thick accumulation of sediments which offer potential for magnetite sand deposits in the eastern portion of Leyte Gulf and northward up to San Pedro bay were interpreted from seismic reflection profiles. Hinatuan passage has been identified as a trough for the possible deposition of detrital gold. These offshore deposits, if properly identified and developed, will undoubtedly be a boom to our economy. It is now the responsibility of the RPS explorer within the limits of its capability to continue and expand the area of geological research in the country and delineate the areas with potential mineral deposits within the Philippine waters.

The tasks ahead for this vessel are too great that without responsible planning and conscientious implementation of its assigned mission such tasks will be impossible to accomplish. For this reason, our support, logistics or otherwise, should always be with those who will participate in all the activities of the vessel. There should be a continuous training program, here and abroad. For all participants to the project of this vessel, as well as for other geoscientists of the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences, to keep them updated of the modern techniques and methods in geoscientific research and mineral exploration and development. The remunerations of these geo-scientists and support personnel of the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences should likewise be reevaluated to keep up with the changes of the time and to rightfully compensate them for their services. and in response to the budgetary requirements for the maximum operation of the full capability of the vessel, I hereby approve and instruct the Ministry of the Budget to make available funds in the amount of P6 million for operational expenses of the RPS explorer for CY 1984 from the special activity fund of the office of the President and to include and ensure availability of funds for the operation of the vessel in the regular budget of the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences in the succeeding years.

But as we prepare our plans for the maximum utilization of this vessel and dream of what it can accomplish. However ambitious, let us not forget the ever cooperative Japan International Cooperation Agency or JICA, the Toyo Menka Kaisha, Ltd., the Overseas Shipbuilding Cooperation Centre (OSCC), the American Bureau of Shipping (ABS), the former Ambassador Hideho Tanaka and the incumbent Japanese Ambassador Yoshio Okawa, as well as Dr. Akihiko Sugimura of the Fuji Economic Planning Corporation of Japan and our own Ambassador Carlos J. Valdez and Minister Teodoro Q. Peña. All of them worked together to put our ambition of acquiring a geological/geophysical survey vessel come true. I commend their collective efforts.

I also congratulate the builder of the vessel, the Ishikawajima Harima-Heavy Industries Co., Ltd., (IHI) and Ishikawajima Ship and Chemical Plant Co., Ltd., (ISC) of Japan particularly Mr. Hirotaro Nemoto, President of IHI and Mr. Tadao Kanauchi, President of ISC and their staff, as well as the man who dreamt of this vessel, Director Juanito C. Fernandez of the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences. Above all, I wish to cite the magnanimity of the Japanese people.

Again, allow me to reiterate the gratitude and acknowledgement of the Philippine Government for the numerous grants which the Japanese Government has extended to our country particularly this geophysical/geological research vessel which we believe will take a long way in welding a true friendship between the Japanese people and the Filipino people.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.