Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 24th Biennial Congress of the International College of Surgeons

[Delivered on December 2, 1984]

It is a matter of deep regret to me that I am unable to honor personally your kind invitation to address this 24th Biennial Congress of the International College of Surgeons, and to join in welcoming to our capital the many delegates who have traveled far from their homeland for this important meeting.

In choosing Manila as the site for this congress, you honor immeasurably our country and our people, and you could not have impressed upon the world more clearly your regard and concern as medical professionals for the peoples of the third world.

The Philippines is but one middle-sized nation of the developing world, but in many ways we are representative both of the problems being faced by the developing nations in the field of health, and of the valiant efforts being undertaken today by medical science in the battle against disease, ill-health and malnutrition.

Here in our country, we have faced for the better part of this century the manifold health problems that have confronted the nations of the world. And here, too we have seen a measure of the victories recorded by medical science in this struggle, and the kind of advances that a comparatively small nation can make by dint of resolution and imagination.

It may be that in holding this congress here in our country, you mean to recognize the achievements of Philippine Medical Science and the corps of dedicated professionals who man the National Health Program.

But without doubt you also mean to focus on the magnitude of the challenge that has to be faced by medical science in nearly two-thirds of the world today. And more specifically, you mean to invite discussion and recommendations on the crucial gap between the great achievements of medical research in our time and the reach of medical services to the millions who inhabit the earth.

The profound paradox between what we medically know today and how. Far this knowledge is truly alleviating human suffering has long been recognized. Yet no lasting solution has yet been found to resolve it. And today we have reason to fear that the disturbing imbalances are growing rather than easing up.

Action in proportion to the need is clearly needed. Not tomorrow but today.

We get a vivid idea of the problems even in the cold bareness of statistics and figures. Among the least developed countries of the world, life expectancy in 1980 averaged approximately 50 years compared with 60 years among middle-developing nations like the Philippines and 74 years in developed nations. Infant mortality rates averaged about 155 in the least developed countries compared with about 110 in the middle-developing countries and 27 in developed countries.

What makes the picture of health in many countries even more distressing is the fact that medical care is an extremely scarce social service. Recent data reveal that in the late 70s, the number of doctors per 100,000 people averaged only 9.7 in the least developed countries compared with 158 in the developed countries. The ratio of hospital beds is just as divergent between the two sets of nations. Moreover, when we realize that most medical facilities in the third world are concentrated in urban areas where only 25 percent of the population are situated, then the woefully inadequate provision of health care to the masses of the poor becomes strikingly clear.

Despite the best efforts of our medical community and our government, we in the Philippines have not done nearly enough to truly cope with the challenge. Through the years we have managed to construct a total of 1,416 hospitals located in various parts of the archipelago; nevertheless, there are on the average only 13 hospital beds available for every 10,000 Filipinos. History and circumstance have provided the Philippines with some of the best medical schools in our part of the world; and yet we continually find ourselves in desperate need of physicians. At present there are only 13.5 physicians for every 100,000 Filipinos and this is sad because our medical schools produce more than that year after year.

What I am leading to is the disturbing phenomenon that has seriously impaired the ability of developing countries to supply sufficient numbers of physicians to the very people who need them most.

Since the end of World War II the Philippines, like India and other developing countries, has been experiencing what is known as reverse transfer of technology, or brain drain. Not only are the developed countries unwilling to establish research and development and other facilities that could employ and train local skilled labor, but, paradoxically, the foreign countries in need of foreign assistance have become an important source of highly qualified professionals for the developed countries. UNCTAD has estimated that during the period between 1960 through 1975, skilled migration from the third world to the three major developed countries of immigration—the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom—amounted to over 300,000 persons. These highly-skilled migrants consisted of engineers, scientists, technical workers and physicians and surgeons. At the same time there has been a gradual shift in the skill-level composition of persons emigrating from the developing to the developed countries. Officials of developed countries have attempted to make their immigration policies responsive to their domestic labor requirements by applying more selective criteria for prospective immigrants. Consequently, scientists, engineers, doctors and surgeons and the more highly skilled are more likely to gain permission to enter, for instance, the United States. These policies evidently contribute to the brain drain from those countries desperately in need of building their indigenous technological capabilities.

Clearly, we need here the understanding and cooperation of the developed countries to help stem this cut-flow of those very same professionals who have the expertise and talents to combat underdevelopment—and consequently, disease and ill-health. But we are also aware that we ourselves must strive to stem the tide.

From the mistakes committed in the past, we are now aware that our economists may have concentrated their and our collective attention too narrowly on one or two aspects of human capital. We have come to realize that other aspects of a basic needs approach to development, which aim to improve the health and living conditions of the poor, should also be considered as building up a country’s human capital.

Exactly how improvements in health and related basic needs help increase productivity and growth in economy is difficult to pinpoint. The most apparent relationship is that healthy workers can produce more, work harder and longer, and so on. In addition, healthy students are apt to learn more. The prospect of a short life expectancy reduces the potential gain from long years of schooling.

These kinds of gains in productivity from investments in health and education are now being recognized as important as the return from investments in more standard forms of human capital. In other words, investing in people may be the best way to both eliminate the worst aspects of poverty and to increase the growth rate of economic production.

In the final analysis, I believe that the progress and welfare of peoples is what medicine is all about: the promotion of the human potential for advancement and fulfillment.

By the same token I am certain that in conventions like this surgeons and doctors of every field of specialization are sensitive to the highest purpose of their calling which is to serve humanity. The theme of your convention asks: “quo vadis, surgery.” at one level, we can regard this gathering as an effort among the world’s leading surgeons to share with each other and keep pace with new technologies and knowledge in an exciting field which has constantly amazed us with its advances. Yet at another and more important level, it underlines the parallel effort of surgeons and other medical practitioners to place their healing skills within the reach of all mankind.

I wish you in closing a most productive and pleasant meeting in Manila.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.