Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 7th anniversary of the Army Reserve Command

[Delivered on October 27, 1984]

I address you today, on this the seventh anniversary observance of the Army Reserve Command, at a solemn hour of reaffirmation of the loyalties and resolves that bring together our Armed Forces and our people under the flag and the Republic.

We all feel here an inescapable sense of sadness about the developments during the past few days that have placed some of our men in uniform under public doubt and accusation.

Yet in the face of this distressing development, we are also lifted by the knowledge that we are one in our resolve to uphold the rule of law in our country, that we respect and honor more than ever the bond of our Armed Forces with our people and Government.

Traditions and ties less strong than what we have could conceivably yield to upheaval and disorder when subjected to strain as has happened in other countries. But in our case, such is the strength of those ties that they only grow in purpose and meaning from the stresses that must occasionally be borne.

We have already said in no uncertain words that in this sad affair the law must take its course, and we have appealed to all to suspend prejudgment of this case so that judicial consideration can take place under a climate of reason and in full regard of the majesty of law.

To this call, our Armed Forces have been among the first to express support. We are especially glad that those who have been accused, led by no less than the Chief of Staff, have admirably and readily placed themselves before the justice of our courts of law, while professing their innocence of crimes now imputed to them. And more than just expressing faith in the justice of fairness of our judicial processes, immediately too there has now taken place within the Armed Forces a purposive effort to carry forward its “compelling and inescapable responsibility” as the defender of our national security and stability.

All these actions do credit to the corps; and they constitute an inestimable service to our efforts now to seek out the truth and render justice.

It is said to note, however, that the orderly workings of our judicial processes will apparently not lay to rest the aspirations of those who all this time have sought to use the Aquino case as an instrument to undermine the Government, and who appear to prefer that it not be resolved at all. Already we have heard, in the aftermath of the disclosure of the Fact-Finding Board’s reports, expressions of dissatisfaction and wild accusations against the Government. We know of course what this publicized hysterics are meant to promote. And we can well imagine what forms of pressure and intimidation they will strive to bring upon the system of due process.

And we are not unmindful either of the designs of other even more threatening forces in our society, who all along have profited most from this national tragedy and could conceivably seize the moment to step up its campaign of intimidation and terror to destabilize the Government.

These various forces, however, can only be major threats to the extent that our Government is overtaken by irresolution and doubt in the tasks before it. For truly, they feed mainly on the hope that the Government will fail the mandate of our people, that the loyalty of the Armed Forces to the Republic will be destroyed, and that the strength of our revered institutions will extend only as far as the persons of those who lead them.

But we know this is no more than the delusion of those who covet power. Already it is abundantly clear that our system of government, and the many institutions that sustain it, are well-tested, stable and effective, capable of making change where they must and competent to face up to the gravest challenges and crisis. Where weaknesses are known, we have sought to correct them. Where wrongdoing is proven, we have moved to set things aright. And where crises must be faced, action in the degree and scope required have been taken.

Nowhere perhaps is this resiliency and strength of the system so well demonstrated than in the undiminished recognition by our Armed Forces of the supremacy of our civilian government, and their continued dedication to their responsibilities. This is a fact that flows from our traditions as a people and as a nation. It has endured many years of crisis for the nation. And so will it survive stronger than ever, the present stresses now before us.

I underline this vital thread of, our national existence at this anniversary of our Army Reserve Command, because it is here where we actively nurture the idea of a truly citizen army, where we promote the deep connections between our people and our Armed Forces, where we unite in recognition that the defense of the nation is both the burden of the armed forces and our people.

It has simply never been the case for us to conveniently place in our standing regular Armed Forces the entire task of defense and security for the nation. Conversely, our Armed Forces have never had to live alone with awesome burden of this responsibility, trusting solely to its professionalism and capacity. Always the zeal of our citizenry has been an essential factor for national defense and civil order. Always, we have maintained that the active collaboration between the people and the Armed Forces is vital to success in fighting any threat to the Republic, from within or from without.

And the national experience that has flowed from this idea, throughout our history, has served to provide a lasting imprint of trust and fealty between our Armed Forces and our people. From Mactan to the Revolution, from Bataan and Corregidor until our final liberation, our fight for freedom and independence drew strength from the support of our citizens and the Citizen Army. And it was out of these historical experiences, that the concept of an armed forces composed of a small standing regular force and a citizen army was born. Thus our Constitution provides that: “the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall have a regular force and a Citizen Army composed of all able-bodied citizens of the Philippines who shall undergo training as prescribed by the National Defense Act. This Citizen Army shall have a corps of trained active officers and men as may be necessary to train, service and keep it in reasonable preparedness at all times.”

This corps is the Army Reserve Command which we organized only seven years ago. Since then I have noted that this command has lived up to its mission of organizing and training the Citizen Army. From a total force of 636,300 men and women in 1977, we have today a Citizen Army of more than one million citizens. Army reserves grow in number by as much as 10,000 each year. And from their ranks have been formed 23 battalions which are assembly-tested and combat-ready.

Our broad objective in creating the Army Reserve Command was to emphasize the development of the reserve force as an integral and vital part of our Armed Forces, because we have long known that the defense of the nation cannot be undertaken alone by the regular force, and because that standing force must of necessity be limited.

But even more than these reasons, I see in this Constitutional provision an attempt to reflect ideas and ideals we live by tested by historical experience and attuned to the challenges of the present.

As challenges to security and public order have more and more reflected covert and insidious threats to the vitality and life of our Republic, we see also more and more the need to nurture the vital tie between the military and the citizenry. No other band can better face up to insurgency and subversion in national life.

Also, we recognize that today the objective of attaining national security and order is intimately tied with the objective of achieving national development. What we recognize therefore as military aims are linked umbilically to civilian and community goals. And it is for this reason that more and more we have addressed ourselves to collective endeavors of both pacification and development.

In the Army Reserve Command, we have one program among many in which these purposes and ideals can be ably reflected and sustained. And it is indeed gladdening to note that after seven years the progress that has been made by this command is impressive and encouraging.

The problems we are facing at present are many and formidable, but but after a year of difficulty and stress, we are discovering now the real reserves of strength we have as a nation, and the real capabilities we have to surmount them.

A resolute economic recovery program is now in place and its prospects have been greatly advanced by success in our negotiations with financial institutions.

Similarly, in the political sphere, stability has been unequivocally demonstrated. And the many institutions of government and the processes that sustain our national life, are showing new resiliency and capacity for effecting change.

Recent developments therefore, and all the actions we are taking as a nation, are not signs of national decline but rather of renewed purpose and will. While we cannot change the desires of those who can only pray for the failure of the Government, we can surely and declaratively prove the vanity of such hopes by showing the world that our Republic survives and prospers.

We have already proven much in the interval of a year of great ferment and crisis. We can only do better at a time when events are yielding so much more to our control, and problems are submitting to our ministration and resolve.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.