Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Third Annual Convention of the Local Administration Development Program Alumni Association

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, July 25, 1978]

Men in Government

HAVE WE EVER asked ourselves why we are in government? Many of us are in government perhaps because circumstances, the tyranny of which is probably more exigent, more demanding, more exacting than any other kind of tyranny, often compels us into politics. But it does require some kind of a motivation, a faith, a cause, or an ideology to continue through the rough-and-tumble of politics, especially of local politics.

When I was starting out in life immediately after the war, I thought that I had gone through the most intense and passionate adventure probably available to man— that of being in a war. And therefore as a young man I sought to duplicate such an adventure in time of peace. The practice of law to which I was dedicated brought its monetary rewards that are the fruits of trial law, or of corporation law. As we used to say at the time, one practices corporation law to fill up one’s pocket. One practices criminal law to satisfy one’s conscience. And this, I did. But even then the adventure was part of the young and ever-visionary the man who felt that there was something lacking. And so pushed into politics because of the death of many of our leaders, including my father, I imagined that the best starting point would be local government; for there is no one closer to the people than the administrator of a town. The mayor attends to almost anything. And so I debated whether to run for governor or for membership in the House of Representatives.

But be that as it may, I address you who have decided with us to remain and continue in government. And throughout the long years that I have spent in public life, I have arrived at the conclusion that government is the great adventure of modern times. It used to be that the most noble, the most dedicated was the ministry in religion or soldiery in combat. They still are, but considering its impact upon the lives of people as well as the capability to fulfill visions and dreams, government is the answer.

Public service, taking risks for your people, is staking not only your life, your worldly belongings, but also your honor. For you people this is the great romance of the age.

Let us look around us: all the men of Jesus, the men of talent now go to government, and look to the government for this particular adventure and romance.

But government is not for the fainthearted. Government is for the daring. Government is not for the egoistic, for public service is self-abnegation. Fulfillment comes out of the attainment of the people’s dreams. It is your role, first, to look around, visualize, conceptualize, debate — grouping the yearnings of a people and articulating them into vision and dreams that can be implemented, achieved, attained, and converting these into a fighting faith, a cause, an ideology. For if everything else fails — in most developing countries the inadequacy of resources is the starting point of all efforts and of all enterprise— when such resources, when all other means fail, then you and I must fall back on the passion of a vision, on the motivation of a cause, and on the sustaining faith of an ideology.

I am certain that the course through which you have passed has given you the capability, the expertise, and perhaps the understanding of your role in the New Society, your role in a developing country like the Philippines.

Perhaps you are curious to find out why I came here. As I look around, at the age of 60 at those who are successful, for the men who will take over the reins of government, I remember Napoleon saying when he was asked after the fall of his regimental commander in a very pivotal battle, who would command the regiment, his answer was: “Whoever without order shall assume command and lead them in combat shall be the commander of the regiment.” And then he also said: “In every corporal’s knapsack is a marshall’s baton.”

I also say: In every mayor, in every Sanggunian Bayan’s role or position is a prime minister or a president in the main. I look around whether it is in the Batasang Pambansa or the governors or the city mayors, the Sanggunian Bayan, to* find out if there is that spirit of adventurism, of romance that pervades the activities of the men in whose hands lie the power of achievement or success in our country today. For without you the New Society is nothing.

You constitute a great reservoir of motivators, of crusaders for the New Society. More than anybody else you understand what the New Society is all about. You understand the need for change. Understand that you and I are like riders in a bicycle, once we start moving we must keep up the momentum. Otherwise we fall. For that is the very meaning of movement for change.

Today, I note a vague uneasiness about the continuous momentum. And once again you sometimes hear the voices of timidity, of hesitation, and they preach the gospel of fear, of pessimism and they ask you to hesitate. We have passed the day of hesitation. Do you remember that saying which you and I loved to repeat in days of danger and combat? It goes something like this: “On the beach of hesitation bleach the bones of millions who on the dawn of the day of victory hesitated, rested, and resting, died.”

Today, we have gained enough momentum for us to say, the society has an orientation and has a momentum, and has enough inertia, that whatever be the political, social or economic accident, it shall reach the goals that we have projected for it, if there are men who understand the objectives of the New Society.

It is for this reason that I have come, not just to look around for leaders who will assume the new obligation, and take over this new adventure, and engage in this lovely and beautiful romance, but also to see if I may in my modest way add to your inspiration, dedication, self-abnegation, to the resoluteness which, joined to the brilliance and insight of talented men, will bring about achievement.

Yes, government is an adventure, but at the same time, government is a plodding, tiring, and often thankless task. I have said that it shall be your role to risk not only your good name, your future and the future of your families— and in the very end perhaps be damned for it instead of being thanked by the people. That, too, is part of the adventure.

I am therefore very happy that you have invited me to come today to see how the — you call it an alumni association — how the local administrators have fared. It’s a little less romantic than I would like to have it. No, you are the fighters for our new society. You are the apostles, the men who will spread the gospel. Of course the apostles of Christ were also members of an alumni association.

I am happy that there is such a course. In fact, we should have such a course for all public officers, including the members of the Batasang Pambansa, as well as the Cabinet members. I am often appalled by the lack of, should we say, understanding of the workings of government. Let us not talk about the New Society. The New Society is alien to some of our people in government, and this is one of the things that we must immediately remedy.

I am aware that the gap between, say, the plans, projections, the visions and the dreams of the political and economic leadership, the economic managers or the political leadership, and the implementors is often so unbridgeable that one is often tempted to throw up one’s hands and say that it will take not just one generation but two generations to bring about a complete unity between planning, implementation, and the monitoring and further refinement of such plans. For as you very well know, today, we already have set plans for almost every contingency, every situation, every problem. Name the problem and the plans are there. The projections are there. But the important thing is, who knows about these plans and how to implement them. And when this old crop of leaders is eliminated by time—oh, yes, there is no compromising with time. Ultimately time succeeds in eliminating both the bad and the good, and that is the worst part about it. But ultimately there must be succession and this is one of the obligations of national leadership.

One is aware that such plans that have been conceived, worked out with so much effort and at such a price could be lost to the succeeding leadership. This is the tragedy. This would be the tragedy of our times. And thus every leader of course hopes that he will find among his countrymen, men who shall immediately grasp his dreams, his visions, his hopes, and be more pragmatic to be able to understand the mechanics by which such dreams and visions can be attained. And this is the effort in which, I presume, we the older leaders are engaged now.

Whenever I listen to anybody speak, immediately the question arises in my mind. What would he be doing if he were in my place? Would he be the timid type? Would he hesitate whenever there is any risk or danger to his reputation? Would he abandon the comfort of his home in order to wage battle against the vices that threaten to wreck our society? Would he be willing to risk everything in a single throw and take his loss like a man? Is he the type of leader who would pass the buck and say it is the other fellow’s fault, rather than assume responsibility for it and say, we committed quite an error there, but we are willing to change. However, if you think that it is too great an error, then let us pick another leader.

These are the tests of manhood in the political leadership, about which of course, only events can inform us.

Today, as I have said, we are moving by the test of past performance. We have certain set guidelines. Thus in 1974 when the oil crisis set in, all the small countries immediately turned inward and took stock of their available resources as against the dangers with which they were confronted. And the Philippines was no exception. We immediately determined whether inflation, unemployment, or recession was the greater danger. Because as you know, with the increase in oil prices, naturally there was a tendency for prices of goods and services to increase. Oil prices increased from $2 per barrel to about $12 per barrel. Let us say that it was a four- or five-fold increase. There would therefore be a corresponding increase in the prices of almost all the goods, at least, the essentials. And luxuries would be the worst. And you know that an inflationary situation prejudices the small people more than the rich. And since we have in our country a greater majority of poor people, then it would have caused a serious economic dislocation. So, what was the answer to all of these? The classic, traditional, scholarly answer which you find in all the books on economics is, pull back. Stop all the expansionary investments, cut down on government expenditures and try and cut your losses as it were. Pull back, shorten your lines, as you would put it in military terms, and forget about moving forward. Just stay put.

Many of the small developing countries adopted this in 1973 and 1974. The Philippines took the opposite course. We adopted the policy of dynamic flexibility, which meant that while attempting to balance the budget and while attempting to limit expenditures to productive enterprise, we have authorized borrowing in order that we could influence, incite and promote greater production—production which, in accordance with the law of supply and demand, brings about some of the prices. The key product, or as some of the economists call it, index commodity in our society, in Asian society, is rice.

Why is it the index commodity? Because it is the central requirement for daily living. If you don’t have rice, then you have almost nothing. When the price of rice goes up everything goes up. When the price of rice goes down, everything goes down.

The simplified solution therefore was, keep rice at a very even keel. We produce enough rice. And thus you note that we borrowed from the Central Bank. We actually went through the process of risking a little inflation in order that we could lend money to our farmers. We developed the small industries in the countryside. We lent out billions and billions of pesos and this was to generate more economic activity. Rather than stagnancy, we opted for energetic modernization. And energetic production. And thus you have a country which has a steady increase of the gross national product or per capital income, whichever indicator you wish to utilize.

But whatever it is, we have compared ourselves with other countries and we can say: from past performance, the policy of dynamic flexibility has come out better than the policy of constriction and of timidity.

The New Society therefore stands for innovation, for ingenuity, for boldness, for courage and for self-confidence. One of the weaknesses of Filipino tradition is the tradition of self-doubt. You and I from as far back have always been made to believe that we were incapable of achievement. Even the historians referred to the Filipino as being incapable of running a successful revolution. You remember what the Spanish governor-general answered the King of Spain when he was asked: What do you need in order to put down the revolution or rebellion in the Philippines? And his answer was: I need three things. First, gold; secondly, gold; and the third is gold. And he bought out some of the revolutionaries. This has always been a mark on our character as a people. And I fear such timidity has become ingrained in the Filipino character — this hesitation, this self-doubt, this feeling of guilt, this feeling of inadequacy, incapacity to dream, to achieve and to aspire and win.

Well, the New Society has sought to change all this. This is the meaning of the New Society.

When we speak of self-reliance, what do we mean? When we say we must be self-reliant, we say we must be confident. Hesitancy on the dawn of the day of victory, this is the fatal relapse.

Today, as we move forward, if I were asked what my advice is (as if I were an older man advising the younger generation), my advice would be: Forget about this weakness and this flaw in the Filipino character. There is no such thing. That was created by our colonizers. We must have confidence in ourselves. More than anything else, let us not doubt our enterprise. We’re too far gone now to start doubting ourselves. We have started it and we must go through with it. If we’re moving too fast, well, we can check it there. If you feel that we are precipitate, too hasty, then prudence dictates monitoring and feedback on the results. And from what I see, the results of this enterprise require a maintenance of the momentum. In short, my advice would be, let us keep the momentum of modernization. Keep the momentum of this enterprise. We cannot stop now. And at the same time, let us keep our flexibility.

One of the things that we have learned in dealing with the crisis that we have in the world today is that none of the set answers, the classical traditional answers even by the economists can fit any given situation. Flexibility, ingenuity, innovation is the answer. We must innovate. We must be flexible in order to attain our visions and our dreams.

I am quite aware that you probably have in mind the creation of the new Department on Human Settlements. What is the role of the Department on Human Settlements? Well, you are aware that it is the purpose of the national government to allocate the fruits of its achievements for the national welfare, not only for the urban centers, not only for a few, but for the many.

We always speak of the revolution of the poor “as if a verbal obeisance to its righteousness is sufficient. These days I notice even a cynical attitude towards this revolution of the poor. Whenever we have any doubts, why don’t we go back and ask ourselves, how did this whole thing start? And when we started this peaceful revolution, what did we have in mind? Next, we come to another flaw, a supposed flaw in the Filipino character — niñgas kugon. The psychologists and the historians always speak of the fact that Filipino has no steadiness and no strong resolution to carry through a given purpose. And I say, that is a lot of bunk.

We started out to emphasize the fact that indeed we must admit there is a gap between the rich and the poor and we must bridge it. And we intend to bridge that gap as we have started to. And thus we have the classical answers to it: land reform, labor reform, educational reform, political reform including the barangay — which is why you are all here — and now human settlements. We must spread the fruits of achievement. That is the meaning of human settlements. You cannot limit the reward of resolute conduct, of brave, bold innovation to only the City of Manila, the primate city of the Philippines. We cannot. For the test of the New Society is not found in the most prosperous enclaves. But such a test should be worked out. And the answers must come from the poorest of our towns.

Thus, human settlements seeks to spread these resources in order that all the towns may feel that they do belong to this revolution. For undoubtedly there still are many towns that do not feel the impact of the revolution, the peaceful revolution that is the New Society. Let us admit it. Yes, there have been increases in the income of farmers. But, I repeat. If we were to test our new society by the standards of the poorest towns of our country, what would be the answer? This, then, is your role. This is why you are here. This is why you are organized. This is why you now constitute this great corps of motivators, of innovators, of crusaders, the apostles of the New Society.

Perhaps many of you will say: Mr. President, you keep telling us about risking everything for the New Society, and later on, you might remove us from office. Well, I came here to assure you that I won’t remove the innovators, the efficient, the effective, the bright, and the bold from this government. On the contrary, I shall extend them the protection that can come from the power of the presidency and the prime ministry.

But for those who are corrupt, dishonest, ailing, weak, timid, hesitant, well, I think we better get together and say, don’t you think you are intended for another mission? You were meant for another mission in life, and it is not public service. Now the question has been raised as to: Are you going to call elections for the local officials? My answer to that is: Let the Batasang Pambansa settle down first before we even talk about local elections.

But don’t mistake me, we will have local elections. But one of the things that I have learned at a price is never try to solve all the problems at the same time. Never, don’t ever try it. You are not God. Even God took seven days, you know.

So let us work on this problem that we have now, the creation of a legislative assembly, the creation of the Legislative branch of our government, the transfer of powers to that legislature. And possibly work into it accomplishments of the eight missions of the interim or the Pansamantalang Batasang Pambansa.

Anyway, as I look at the entire country today from the prominence of the Presidency, which still is the primary office — You know they always ask me: How do you want to be addressed, Mr. President or Mr. Prime Minister? And I said: I want to be addressed the way the Constitution addresses me. Well, they said: But we cannot put “Prime Minister” in parenthesis. Well, in that case, I said: Let us settle it and stay with the old name until we have changed it. “President” comes first, “Prime Minister” comes in parenthesis in all those amendments that we approved in October of 1976, you remember? So, I guess the proper address should be still “President.” Anyway, I am not used to changing loyalties.

I was in a jocular mood when I said that perhaps it’s time that we also adopted a course for the high ranking officials in government other than the local officials. There are many things that you have learned in this course for the Institute of Public Administration of the University of the Philippines is well-known, reputable and one of its kind, not only in the Philippines but also in Asia.

You know what I’d like to see is, well, the DAP is there — the Development Academy of the Philippines — notwithstanding some criticisms that have been levelled at it lately. Then we have the JET for the Career Executive Service — the Junior Executive Training Course. And you have all kinds of courses. Sometimes when I am a little tired attending to those voluminous papers that they keep pushing at my face everyday and attending to the requirements of all the communities and all municipalities — I wish I were back to my old love: teaching. Just go around, do nothing but teach a course on public administration. Can you imagine the wealth of information that I can transfer to the would-be leaders of this country. And I have not given up yet, I might just compel everybody to attend those courses, you know.

However, may I say that the idea of these courses was an inspired one. I congratulate the Department of Local Governments. I understand they are still financing the Institute of Public Administration on these courses. I do wish more of the ministries would finance courses of this nature for their respective ministries.

Now with respect to the Batasang Pambansa — I was not kidding when I said that. I think all of us have the interest to go back and study, you know. Although, I probably would be the uninhibited type of student, standing up and questioning the teacher every time he said something wrong which, of course, was the habit in my time. My generation was allowed in the University of the Philippines to stand up and question the teacher on anything that they doubted. And we often did this. This often led to some clarifications as well as strained relations between the students and the faculty. Whatever it is, I do believe that the idea of going back to school should not be considered ignominious by high ranking officials. I always go back to school, I read. And reading is just like listening to a lecture except that you cannot question the one who wrote that tract which you may not believe in. But I read all kinds of manuscripts, books, articles. I don’t always believe anything that I read, especially if written by the Western press. But it pays to know both sides of the question. The unfortunate part is, we tend to terminate scholarship with our formal education. And this, of course, is my last point.

Scholarship will always be the basis for innovation, for ingenuity. Let not anybody say that ingenuity is inspired by the heavens. Ingenuity is the result of hard work. Innovation is the result of continuous, tireless study. And when anybody stands up to question the decisions of government, he may not know that into that position went perhaps not only one year but several years of study. And there may be fast and apparently precipitate decisions made by the political leadership. But the truth of the matter is: you have anticipated such a situation, you have anticipated such a problem long before it occurs. And you have indexed in your mind your options. If this thing happens, I am going to do that; if the other thing happens, I am going to do this. But if they don’t happen, I’ll probably not do anything, I just lie low and watch the developments until that thing happens and I will do this. So, what may sound or look like hasty, precipitate action is, if you look farther, actually a deliberate decision, perhaps a risk. But it is a calculated risk, because you have thought it out.

I recommend this system of scholarship to all of you: Anticipate. You know the problems in your localities, you can anticipate. You know more or less what will happen next. I was, for instance, surprised when somebody from the opposition in the Batasang Pambansa asked: Why should we have any contingent fund? I was tempted to tell him: Does he know that there are at least 19 typhoons every year in the Philippines? And that whenever those 19 typhoons occur, the President receives hundreds of requests for releases. Now, don’t tell me I have to call a session of the Batasang Pambansa in order to approve a contingent fund for a typhoon especially when it hits Cebu or Mindanao!

But this is a part of the growing process. For instance, the question: Why should you give aid to the local governments? I wanted to send a note to the Ministers of the Budget to say: Don’t you remember the history of that particular item? That item was the result of the re-allocation of the funds arising from local taxation as well as those collected by the Internal Revenue through the income tax. The re-allocation of the income tax. You remember that? You remember that many of you lost out in this re-allocation, especially the big cities and the big provinces. Rizal, for instance — how much did it lose? It lost about P20 million. And so it was necessary to put in a lump sum appropriation from which to draw these amounts. And while it is a lump sum appropriation, actually there is a detailed listing of how this is going to be spent. Because from past performance, you know that you are going to spend so much for, say, 19 typhoons, you are going to spend so much for 50 fires, you are going to spend so much for aid to Mindanao where there is fighting. Tawi-Tawi, for instance you can be sure they cannot support themselves. The province of Tawi-Tawi has been receiving annually aid from the national government of anywhere from 2 to 10 million pesos. Now, if you were to remove this particular item, Tawi-Tawi will probably return to the rebels. I have no doubt about it.

But these are the things of course at which the Minister of the Budget, being a former dean of the College of Business Administration, may not be adept — the rough-and-tumble game of politics. Now, if you are new around here, you probably would have stood up and raised hell with everybody. But this is part of a democratic dialogue. Everybody is free to say the most stupid things. But that’s the meaning of democratic dialogue. You can be brilliant if you would be brilliant. You can be stupid, but that doesn’t mean everybody will listen to your stupidity. This, too, is the meaning of the democratic dialogue. Provided that we don’t engage in violence, provided that we don’t promote bloodshed, the democratic dialogue should be able to embrace and include every aspect of exchange of opinions. And this is why we must encourage it.

So once again, I congratulate you for your assiduity, your dedication in going through this course. Let us try and get all the local officials through this particular course. I am certain that as the years go by, you will be able to look back to this course as the beginning of a great adventure. For you will widen the perspectives of everyone that goes through this course. You will see what others cannot see. And for the pragmatic visionary that all politicians are supposed to be, there will be the beginning of achievement.

So, to each and every one of you, may I say once again: Government is for us the great adventure, public service the romance of the age, but government is not for the faint-hearted.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].