Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 15th International Conference on Social Welfare

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, September 6, 1970]

The Quest for a New Society

FIRST OF ALL, let me extend to all of you the warm welcome and hospitality of the people of my country, the Philippines. We are greatly honored by your choice of our country as the site of your Conference. May you find your stay in the Philippines enjoyable and — most of all — fruitful.

You come at the tail of one of the worst floods in the history of the Philippines. You come at a time when our social welfare agencies, both public and private, are engaged in a great deal of work. It is my hope that there will be no flood during your conference.

I gather that the committee of representatives yesterday approved a resolution expressing the gratitude of all the participants to your friend and humble servant, the President of the Philippines, for my invitation to a reception to all the participants to the 15th International Conference on Social Welfare which you are attending. But in view of the disaster caused by the recent typhoon and the destructive flood, and many of our provinces to the north of the City of Manila are still under water, you have suggested that we cancel this reception that I have offered. I thank you for your commiseration for the sufferings of our people. It is my hope that while I am denied the privilege and the honor of meeting with you personally at Malacañang Palace, somehow we will meet each other under more auspicious circumstances.

Your conference theme— New Strategies for Social Development— to my mind, reflects a realistic and urgent recognition of the problems that challenge the modern world, especially that portion we call the Third World or developing countries. Indeed, new strategies are needed, not because the old ones have failed, but because new pressures, new problems are upon us.

I know that all of you are aware that social problems are the moral consequences of economic problems. It is said that if a man is hungry, we have an economic problem, but if a man is hungry and resents it, we have a social problem.

All of us are haunted by the glimmerings of an ideal society, the old Inca society, described by Prescott in the following terms:

“If no man could become rich in Peru, no man could become poor. No mendicant was tolerated in Peru. When a man was reduced to poverty or misfortune (it could never be by fault) the arm of the law was stretched out to administer relief. Not the stinted relief of private charity nor that which is doled out from the frozen reservoirs of the parish, but in generous measure, bringing no humiliation to the object of it and placing him on the level with the rest of his countrymen. . . Ambition, avarice, the love of change, the morbid spirit of discontent, those passions which most agitate the minds of men, found no place in the bosom of the Peruvian.” I reiterate, this was the old Inca society.

It would seem to me that most societies today aspire, more or less, to this condition. For is this not the tendency in the welfare of Scandinavia and Britain, and do we not now find traces of it in the United States itself? Everywhere you turn in the world today, you find the deep concern for the poor, the very young, the aged, the handicapped and the unemployed.

Modern morality rejects the ruthless doctrine of the survival of the fittest. Liberty, equality, and, above all, fraternity shape the desires of all humanity.

You meet at a particular time, when we are, as has been stated here by Secretary Abello, on the threshold of the Second Development Decade. The f, first decade has not been dramatically successful, and we hope that the new decade will be better. And we hope that the conditions of the world will improve, since all of us know that without peace, many of our countries cannot prosper as they should.

Good societies are established over decades of peace and tranquility, over decades of unhindered efforts towards the achievement of desired goals. And for us in the developing nations, they can only be achieved when there is no exploitation, and, where there is need for it, assistance without humiliation— in the same manner that the old Inca society assisted its poor.

It would seem that the developing peoples require and demand too much to achieve their goals. This is unfortunately so, apart from the fact that we must also require and demand very much of ourselves.

Our economic conditions determine our social conditions, but in many ways, our own social attitudes will dictate how much economic growth we can achieve. Our societies still retain certain traditional features which hinder development. But we must understand that these traditional features often reflect our own regard for what is human in us, as we can see, for example, in our close family ties and friendship in the Philippines. Our problem is how to harness our humanitarian instincts in the service of national progress and prosperity. For there is little doubt that if we were to disregard these instincts, we could achieve economic development — but at the risk of dehumanizing our peoples.

On the other hand, excessive national poverty also dehumanizes. Especially national poverty in a world where some nations are too rich and too powerful. Here lies the root of agitation and “the morbid spirit of discontent.”

There was a time, perhaps, when the poor were ignorant of wealth. But in -this day and age of rapid transport and communications, it is no longer possible; to hide the wealth of the few amidst the poverty of the many. And more than that, the poor no longer blame their condition on the gods.

Gone are the days of the resigned poor. We have, to begin with, the intelligent, even the intellectual poor — the new poor. Universal education has destroyed the intellectual barrier between the rich and the poor; what remains merely is the social barrier. There is no other way of reading the student unrest especially in developing nations. It is a fact that we must face.

It is a fact all nations must face.

We are witnessing the emergence of a new generation mindful of the full possibilities of technology and the rationalization of production. It is a generation impatient with so-called sacrosanct economic laws and the arguments of vested interests, whether global or national. It demands a new or renewed sincerity.

To the aged, we can still explain the limitations of society in caring for them. For they matured in that same society. But to the young, the student and the unemployed young, the demand is action, not explanation, for in their own way, they have already explained the society in which they live. They demand a new society.

There are, to be sure, the dangers of impatience. A generation, no matter how dynamic or brilliant, rejects the wisdom of the past at its own peril. But as we counsel patience, we must somehow act with swiftness. And even as we act, we must demonstrate the superiority of challenging freedom over bovine slavery, we must show that all material things must be achieved for man—that the state, ultimately, exists for man and not man for the state.

This Conference, therefore, has awesome responsibilities. It presents to the minds of all its participants the anxieties of the age. It has to confront the quest for a new society.

Not one, not a few, but all are challenged.

In thus welcoming you once more, I earnestly pray for your success in meeting this challenge.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].