Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 22nd session of the Inter-Governmental Group on Rice of the Food and Agriculture Organization

[Delivered in Manila, March 20, 1979]

The World Rice Situation

I AM GRATIFIED with the introduction of the Minister of Agriculture. Seldom does a minister publicly allow the participation of higher authority in policies of his ministry. But you can see the reason for the continued failure in office of Minister Tanco.

I hasten to state accurately the manner in which the rice revolution in the Philippines was attained. Actually people were ripe for this type of a revolution. The fact that we have been spending for the past several decades a substantial portion of our foreign exchange earnings, (sometimes to the tune of $500 million during the periods when prices were down) on rice imports certainly brought to the consciousness of our people, who are of course oriented towards not only rice production but rice consumption, the need for cooperative action in the area of rice production.

As I will proceed to explain later on, the essential element in any kind of revolution, including the rice revolution, is political will. But political will — no matter the political, economic and social leadership — must spring from a strong motivation. And certainly our people were deeply motivated.

May I therefore transfer the honors heaped on me by Minister Tanco, to the people of the Republic of the Philippines, for the rice revolution which converted our country from an importer to an exporter of rice. But because of Minister Tanco, I am being a bad host.

Allow me, first of all, to welcome you and to say that you again do us honor in the ten years you’ve been holding sessions of the Inter-Governmental Group on Rice of the Food and Agriculture Organization.

The high importance that we and everybody attach to the subject makes of this honor all the greater a privilege.

Allow me therefore to express first, on behalf of the people and government of the Philippines, our warmest felicitations and welcome, and our most fervent wishes that your conference will not fail the expectations of so many nations and people all over the world.

Within the span of a decade, the concerns, the challenges and the problems that gathered this assembly back in 1969, have known considerable transformation and change. In some respects, there has been change for the better, as our rice production capabilities have unerringly improved from year to year. In other respects the changes of the decade have served to magnify the severity of the problems we face today.

Without a doubt many of the problems that dominated the previous meetings continue to haunt the present gathering. What is new is the over whelming sense of urgency that seems to shadow these deliberations, the sense that less than the best of our efforts will not be enough to tide us over.

What was in 1969 but the grim alarums of future crisis, has unfailingly become the pervasive situation of our time. The threat of global want, the growing insecurity over food, the problems of the world trade — these anxieties of an earlier period have come to be in the seventies, and they have been joined moreover by the specter of greater challenges and crises.

As you meet here in our country, we are already beginning to feel the repercussions of more recent events. Energy prices, long the scourge of this decade, threaten to become unhinged once again because of turbulent developments in Iran. Elsewhere, in various theaters long noted for tension, conflict has arisen, and this has not failed to have repercussions upon the global economy. Inflation once again is the great cloud hovering over many economies and threatening global economic stability. In the meantime, the developing countries, the most vulnerable to these economic forces, find themselves fighting an increasingly exacting struggle in their efforts to modernize and improve conditions. And it remains a question whether development, or the specter of poverty and hunger would proceed instead to envelop the developing countries altogether.

It is this context of challenge and crisis which lends special meaning and significance to this meeting on the status and prospects of global rice production.

For we see this meeting as an integral part of the global response to the looming food crisis, which during this decade has exercised the energies of so many nations and so many international organizations

And it is apt indeed that you should meet on this subject in Manila, for here in this part of the world, you will find it readily said that “rice” is the equivalent of survival.

And if there is one note that will seem to lighten the forbidding backdrop of crisis in the present time, it is surely the fact that almost everywhere in the world today, the challenge of food sufficiency is foremost in the agenda of all nations, developing and developed countries alike. No one believes anymore that meeting the challenge can be postponed to a later time, anymore than you can believe that it does not exist.

The consciousness of the situation we owe to the impact of the world food conference in 1974, which graphically outlines to the world the dimensions of the looming crisis, and called upon all governments to muster all resources to combat widespread hunger and malnutrition.

But if the world food conference has mobilized the most intensive and extensive food production efforts on a global scale, the fact remains that the challenge of hunger and food shortage is not yet behind us. A little less man half a billion people of the world still live in hunger and want. One third of the children born everyday are doomed to premature blight on their lives and their future.

The profound irony is that hunger and malnutrition persist despite a considerable improvement in global food production and production capabilities. While millions live in want, food producers seem to be headed towards a situation where a depression of food supplies is necessary to sustain prices.

The situation is dramatically evident in the world rice situation. And it is the core of the problem that this assembly must seek to resolve.

Records on world rice production for the last ten years definitely indicate an encouraging record of growth from a production of 281 million metric tons in 1968, production has risen to 375 million metric tons in 1978, or an average growth rate of 3.3 percent.

Crop year 1978 has been particularly favorable in so far as rice is concerned. Increased paddy production, arising from good weather, wider hectarage, and the utilization of high-yielding varieties, fertilizer and irrigation facilities, has brought about an overall surplus in rice. Specifically, rice surpluses have been reported in Burma, China, Thailand, India, Japan, Korea, Pakistan and the Philippines.

But while surplus production might immediately connote a most salutary situation, it conceals from immediate view a disturbing consequence: the decline of rice prices in the world market as a result of the buildup of surpluses. And the decline appears to be continuing.

And of course, the concomitant problem with declining export prices, is the threat of depressed production as a result of poor prices and surplus production.

But here we come to a most delicate aspect of the world rice situation: the fact that production levels are never assured, and the complementary fact that world rice prices are volatile.

Many factors, not the least of which are natural calamities, are still beyond the control of rice producers, and any such occurrence can easily reverse the present favorable situation. At the same time, there is no ignoring the fact that substantial segments of the global population still suffer from hunger, and that the population continues to grow at the rate of 1.7 percent.

We therefore believe that we cannot afford to be complacent about the present favorable situation. We must clearly pursue measures to improve and increase rice production on a global scale as a key to answering the challenge of food sufficiency.

As surpluses are produced, however, prices in the world market suffer wild fluctuations. As we all know, only eight to nine million tons, or less than four percent of total world rice production, are traded in the world market. A slight change in total production can result in either a sharp drop or a sharp rise in world prices. Thus, as a recent example, and consistent with production trends, world prices were as low as $73 per ton in 1973. This price dramatically rose to as high as $450 a ton in 1974 as a result of the food crisis during that year. As production slightly improved, the price dipped, and then recovered slightly in 1977-78, reaching about $300 per ton. Today, the world rice price is about $200 a ton. And this is so low that it is even below production cost.

These wild price fluctuations inherent in the world rice market underscore the need to create a mechanism which would provide for the accumulation of stocks during times of oversupply and release of stocks during times of short age. Such a mechanism will serve to ensure fair prices for producers and at the same time protect consumers from severe shortages and extremely high prices.

This leads us to believe that the establishment of an international rice agreement should seriously be considered as a means to stabilize the international rice trade.

Admittedly, there are many difficulties attendant to the forging of such an agreement, and these include such things as consumer taste, diversity of varieties and grades of rice in the world market. But even while acknowledging these difficulties, we need to explore the means to relieve the instability of the situation and at the same time spur rice production at high levels.

While therefore accepting that it is still premature to speak of an agreement on a global scale, we in ASEAN have taken the first step on a regional scale to establish an ASEAN emergency rice reserve of 50,000 tons, as was agreed among ASEAN heads of state at the Bali summit. With the establishment of this emergency reserve, we envision as the next step the study of the feasibility of establishing a full rice reserve with a mechanism for stock accumulation and release at predetermined trigger prices

It is our belief that this regional effort within ASEAN can serve as a model or precursor for a global mechanism to stabilize the rice trade, since we have within our association both large- and medium-size rice exporters and importers.

In any event, we must surely recognize the fact that the present surplus rice production is a touchstone to a tremendous surge in the productive capacities of many developing countries. Many of these countries, including the Philip pines, once imported rice, and the achievement of self-sufficiency and even surplus production is a gauge of the innate capacity of most Asian countries to relieve their rice deficit problems.

Speaking mainly on the situation in Asia, we cannot avoid remembering that 90 percent of the world’s rice is produced in Asia, and that 93 percent of the world’s rice is consumed in Asia. But if our recent experience is any gauge, Asia definitely has the capability now to solve its deficit problem right where it exists — in Asia. But only an earnest program of self-reliance and self-sufficiency can transform the present situation.

In this respect, our experience in the Philippines is perhaps instructive as to the developing countries’ potential for self-reliance, and their capacity to fill in the present gaps in technology and production and other factors.

In only five years, Masagana 99, our rice production program in the Philippines has enabled us to achieve not only full rice sufficiency, but even a modest surplus production. This was achieved after a process of fully harnessing our productive resources and of integrating within one package the vital aspects of credit, technology, pricing support, and political will, and perhaps some kind of political leadership. All these factors were important, but it was political will which was perhaps decisive in the success of our rice production effort.

For in essence, Masagana 99 involved a massive institutional change in our approach to rice production, a rechanneling of national energies, and foremost of all, a fundamental reform of the ownership of ricelands in the Philippines.

Under the program we revamped our entire credit system to allow our farmers to secure crop loans for the first time in our history, without collateral. We have loaned out under this daring scheme, close to half a billion dollars in only six years. More impressive is the 82 percent repayment record that speaks so well of the character and responsibility of the small Filipino rice farmer. We literally established “banks on wheels,” which penetrated the rural farms to extend financial assistance to farmers. The government subsidized fertilizer and at the same time induced farmers to use a new package of technology, including high-yielding varieties which were developed in the International Rice Research Institute in Los Baños, here in the Philippines.

On top of this, we instituted an effective price support program to guarantee our farmers a fair return on their efforts and investments.

Hand in hand, we continued to expand our irrigated areas and embarked on other rural infrastructure in support of production. The increase in irrigation areas must have been four times from the original increase in 1972.

Measured against our long history of deficit production, the Masagana 99 production records has been nothing less than phenomenal. From a low of 2.7 million-ton production in 1973, we have succeeded in raising production to 4.2 million-tons as of 1978, or an average increase of 9.3 per annum. For 1979 our self-sufficiency level is estimated at four million tons, leaving us therefore a 2 million-ton surplus rice production.

I endeavor to underscore the salient aspects of our rice production effort with a view to stressing before this body the real possibilities of an agricultural transformation in Asia today, and to underlying why is it essential that we take measures to prop up this vital upturn in Asian agricultural productivity.

Just as we must seek to encourage rice-deficit countries to achieve self reliance, so it is important to sustain the entire production machinery in our countries for the effort to surpass production levels and maintain surplus production.

We view it therefore as a necessary policy for our government to continue to provide incentives to rice farmers not only by searching for new markets, but significantly by expanding and developing domestic and new industrial uses for rice. It may also be possible for governments to provide export subsidies, in times of surplus production.

But beyond these measures, we plainly must think of means to maintain the currently encouraging rice production record in the midst of the potentially distressing decline of world prices. Production ought not to suffer because of the wild gyrations of international trade. Certainly, developing countries like the Philippines can ill-afford a situation now that will require it to cut down on rice production, for in a sense the rice production effort replicates the whole of what we aspire to do in the total modernization effort. It is a motive force for our total drive towards development.

And it may be that it is the appointed role of this assembly to lend its probity to the problems we face today in rice production and in the rice trade. Certainly, it appears to me that we cannot abstract from the deliberations of this body from the wider circle of inquiry in the global food situation.

There is a unity to our concerns, and that unity ought to be reflected in still more aggressive efforts to pull together in the direction of greater productivity and permanent relief to human hunger and want for this reason, we are most interested also in what the developed nations can do to help in alleviating the world food problem and in assisting us in this particular area of rice production.

Assistance in terms of technology and resources as well as increased investments in rice production is needed from the more capable countries as well as from international organizations. In terms of trade, special considerations should be given by developed countries with surplus stocks to developing countries to enable the latter to acquire the rice that they need immediately.

Specifically, we hope that this forum can take steps to implement policies that would primarily strengthen, rather than reduce, national rice production in both developed and developing countries.

As recommended during the 15th and 19th sessions of the Inter-Governmental group on rice, we favor the expansion of trade among developing countries, considering that increased import demand for rice in the years to come is likely to be mostly in the developing countries.

This assembly has not met under more auspicious circumstances than it does today. I say auspicious because we have before us the warming and encouraging fact of considerable, even prodigious achievement, in global rice production. This leads us to the firm conviction that in this particular part of global needs, our common and joint response will not be wanting.

But there are problems in the world rice situation that must still be faced, and I would hope that your deliberations will bring light upon these problems, and guide us to take the actions that befit the times.

The time is opportune for earnest and creative work together. Let us “work while it is yet day.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].