Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Interim Batasang Pambansa (IBP)

[Delivered on March 21, 1979]

An Equilibrium in Prices, Income and Wages

I HAVE COME to report to you that in the paramount and urgent interest of the nation, especially of our working masses, I have invoked my standby legislative power under the Constitution and caused by appropriate presidential decree and letter of instructions the establishment of a new equilibrium of prices, income and wages.

I wish you to know that I had to act in the face of a new threat posed to our economic stability and growth by a new round of increases in the price of crude oil, and that I had to act swiftly to cushion our people and our economy from the impact of these increases.

The new round of increases in the price of crude oil has gone beyond the official OPEC price of $14.55 per barrel and over the OPEC price increases of December, 1978, for which we had prepared ourselves. As of last week, the price of oil has risen to $15.75 per barrel and, in some cases, $18, $20 and even more per barrel. This unexpected increase was triggered by the disruption of oil production in Iran and although production in that country has been resumed to a certain extent, the new regime in Iran has several times announced that it will never again sell as much oil as it used to under the old regime nor under the old prices. Thus it is very doubtful if the new oil prices will soon, if ever, recede.

Other nations have followed the example of setting their own prices in disregard of the OPEC agreement. This example has been set by one or two countries and now it is being replicated at will by others.

The prospects in the local price and cost of gasoline and oil are now well known to every one of us. The studies by the government as well as by the sectors that have been consulted on this matter have suggested that the following prices may be the basis for further action by the Energy Board within the next several days, if not tomorrow.

For the current retail price of premium gasoline which was originally P1.81 per liter, there is an increase of 23.2 percent to a resultant retail price of P2.23; regular gasoline, from the current retail price of PI 66 to P2.07; kerosene, from the current retail price of P1.12 to P1.37; and diesel, retail price of P1.21 to P1.41.

There will be an average increase of about 23 percent. Notwithstanding our own discovery and exploitation of oil reserves at Palawan — the initial exploitation and drawing of oil having started as early as January 27, 1979 from the NIDO complex, which was formally celebrated in a ceremony at Malacañang Palace this morning during the awarding of the Presidential Merit Medal to Mr. Robert Sellers, chairman of the Cities Services — about 85 to 90 percent of our total oil requirements must still be imported. This situation makes us still highly vulnerable to any upward movement in oil prices as well as any scarcity or deficiency in oil supply.

We have been notified by the oil companies servicing us and with whom we have contracts that their delivery of oil will be lessened by 9 percent this year. We consume 220,000 barrels a day or a total of 19 million barrels a year at a total cost of about $1 billion.

So we have taken steps to reduce consumption by at least 10 percent. While some industries and economic activities such as transportation and electricity will be more affected than others, the current oil price increase will generally be reflected in higher prices for commodities covered by the government’s socialized pricing program.

The oil which we import is utilized in general as follows: 36 percent, which is the biggest allocation, goes to industry, and 19 percent goes to the generation or production of power.

A more serious threat is the worldwide repercussions of such developments to developing countries like the Philippines. The experience in 1973 indicates three possible serious problems that can hurt the economies of the developing countries.

First, the depressing effects of a sharp rise in oil prices on the aggregate demand of the major world markets imply that our export revenues may not grow as vigorously as we wish at a time when we most need the dollars generated from them.

Second, the added pressure on the operation of the international trading and financial system caused by a sudden transfer of income or of currency and funds from oil-importing countries to oil-exporting countries, will make more difficult the management and balancing of international payments. While I remain confident that our government will continue to be able to ease our international indebtedness through various sources of foreign exchange, I cannot help but sigh at what we could have done or could do for the further development of our country, with the funds that are flowing out of our economy every year to pay for our imported oil— which incidentally, represent the total of our balance of trade deficits valued before the increase in oil prices at one billion dollars and now expected to increase to $1.2 billion.

Third the impetus to cost-push inflation generated in the industrialized countries (as result of the higher fuel prices) will eventually be transmitted to importing countries like the Philippines. Various estimates have indicated that fuel prices can directly and indirectly affect as much as 15 percent of production costs in the manufacturing industries. But if we include the prices of other imported items, over which we also have no control, as much as 33 percent of production costs in these industries will be subject to upward adjustments. Inevitably, the added cost of oil will be translated into a higher cost of living for everyone.

In the face of this situation, the cost of living is projected to increase beyond the annual 7 percent as anticipated by the NEDA development plan. The inflation factor will likely be closer to the double-digit level, meaning beyond the 10 percent level and even slightly more. If such price movements had come at a period of relative price stability, the magnitude of change might not have caused as much concern to everyone. Unfortunately, this new development is only the latest round of rapid price increases in a period that has significantly reduced the purchasing power of the peso.

With 1972 as the base year, the consumer price index as measured by the Central Bank and the NEDA, has risen to 227 in January 1979, or more than double that of 1972. One peso in 1972 was worth P0.49 in 1978 in Metropolitan Manila.

During the last seven years, it has been our policy in times like this to cushion our people from the adverse effects of rising prices. Thus, we have provided our workers with emergency cost-of-living allowances, 13th month pay increases in minimum wages, and 11 paid legal holidays as well as overtime pay. Moreover, even in times of recession, we have made it a policy to promote economic expansion notwithstanding the difficulties in order to maintain existing jobs and generate new employment and opportunities. In addition, we have placed certain essential commodities under what we refer to as the socialized pricing program in order to keep their prices within the reach of the working masses. In the case of rice, our staple food, we have been subsidizing its production and regulating its supply and price.

It has been the policy of the government, as reflected in PD 1123 and 1389, to adjust and insure the peaceful and orderly establishment of an equilibrium in prices, income and wages. On the other hand, the impending price increases have threatened to erode the real income of workers. Against this backdrop, we have therefore, instituted certain measures aimed at restoring the buying power of the peso for the Filipino workers while at the same time ascertaining the continuing growth and expansion of our economy to insure the provision of employment opportunities for a growing labor force.

In view of the exigency, I took it upon myself last week to invoke the emergency powers to enact decrees vested in me by the Philippine Constitution as Prime Minister and President of the Republic in order to arrest an impending economic crisis which could seriously affect the well-being of our people and the entire performance of our economy. I refer here to my signing Presidential Decree 1614 last March 14 and, of course, Letter of Instructions 829 on the same date. I have also taken other governmental measures to counter the adverse effects of higher oil prices.

As I have said, I decided to exercise the standby legislative power under the Constitution because our workers and the great number of our people — the workers numbering 16 million — and their dependents needed immediate, urgent relief. To have made them wait, no matter how briefly, would have been to make them doubt the efficacy of the New Society in coming to their help on time. The New Society is founded on faith in the identity of interests and aspirations between the people and the government. We cannot permit any doubt to undermine such faith.

Presidential Decree 1614 is intended to cushion the wage earners from the impact of the scheduled rise in prices. This measure is based on the recommendation of the National Tripartite Conference on minimum wage adjustment, attended by representatives of organized labor, the business management sector, and the government, which was held last March 7 to 8 in Tagaytay City.

As you are well aware, the National Tripartite Conference is a mechanism that is enshrined in the Labor Code and it is a mechanism that brings together all the sectors of our economy in order to recommend to the President the adjustments that may be necessary on this subject of wages, income and prices.

On the recommendation of the participants of that conference, I have signed Presidential Decree No. 1614, adjusting the minimum wage as follows. Although this has been well published, allow me once again to put on record these adjustments: for non-agricultural workers in Metro Manila, P13 a day; for non-agricultural workers outside Metro Manila, P12 a day; for plantation agricultural workers, P10 a day; and for non-plantation agricultural workers, P9 a day.

These adjustments reflect a general two-peso increase in the legal minimum wage.

But this is not all. In addition to the minimum wage adjustments for workers, Presidential Decree 1614 also provides for a cost-of-living allowance to employees who receive less than P1 ,000 a month, based on the following schedule: for non-agricultural workers, P60 a month; for plantation agricultural workers, P40 a month; for non-plantation agricultural workers P40 a month.

All told, the effective take-home pay of agricultural and non-agricultural workers throughout the country will increase by an average 28 percent. For non-agricultural workers in Metro Manila, the increase will be P4.66 per day or 28 percent from the existing P16.64 to P21.30 per day; for non-agricultural workers outside Metro Manila, the increase is P4.67 per day or 30.1 percent from P15.52 to P20.19 per day; for plantation agricultural workers there ,s an increase of P3.86 per day or 29 percent increase from the original P13.29 to P17 15 per day. For non-plantation agricultural workers there is an increase of P3 08 per day or 25.3 percent from the original P12.17 to P15.25 per day.

Since the P8 minimum wage in 1972 is now equivalent to P19.78 in actual purchasing power, the new effective minimum wage for non-agricultural workers inside and outside Metro Manila has exceeded the 1972 minimum wage by 1.52. In agriculture, while the cost of living has increased by only 44 percent since 1972, the agricultural minimum wages have increased by 360 percent for plantation agriculture and 321 percent for non-plantation agriculture.

The increase in the cost of living since 1972 is 244 percent. In order to recoup this, we have increased the minimum wage in agricultural wages by 360 percent, and in non-plantation agriculture by 321 percent.

In relation to the American dollar, the effective minimum wage today can buy US$2.91, while the P4 minimum wage in 1951 could buy only $2 flat, and the P6 minimum wage today buys more than the minimum wages in 1951 and in 1972. Therefore, we have succeeded in protecting and even improving the purchasing power of wages of our low income groups during the last seven years in the face of the most savage assaults of inflation and recession the world over.

The new Minimum Wage Law has closed the last remaining gap between the real wages of 1972 and the real wages today, and as I said, in fact exceeds this further, goes further to improve upon the real wages of that index year. The index year we refer to is 1972.

Now with PD 1614, the new minimum wage or the new package add up, for Metropolitan Manila, to a total of P21.30 as against P16.64 before PD 1614. This consists of the basic minimum wage of P13 and the pre-existing cost of living allowance under PD 525 and PD 1123. For all workers receiving P600 monthly or less, or 64 percent of the wage earning population, the new cost of living allowance under PD 1614 is P2.39. For all workers receiving P1, 000 or less, or 90 percent of the entire wage-earning labor force, we have an additional P1.08. Eleven paid holidays, now including National Heroes Day under LOI 814, P0.47, for a total of P21.30.

In addition to the benefits already cited in the package under PD 1614, the workers under the Labor Code also enjoy 25 percent premium pay for overtime work, and 10 percent night differential pay; 100 percent additional pay for work on legal holidays; 30 percent premium pay for work rendered on weekly rest days and special holidays; and a minimum five-day vacation leave with pay which is commutable.

In addition to this minimum labor standard established by law, most of the organized workers numbering about two million enjoy wages and benefits significantly higher than those required by law.

There are a total of over 2,000 collective bargaining agreements which extend to the workers a wider range of benefits than those granted by law.

This timely wage adjustment was made in order to arrest the erosion of the purchasing power of the incomes of our wage earners, and at the same time ensure their financial capability to meet the additional expenses in the event that the cost of living will increase by more than 10 percent in 1979.

While the government is aware that the fixed income groups, especially the great mass of wage earners, have to be helped to cope with the higher cost of living, it has not failed to note the problems of industries and the other need of ensuring the continuing growth and expansion of industry and the provision of employment opportunities for a growing labor force. This is why I have issued Letter of Instructions No. 829, governing the implementation of PD 1614, to the Ministry of Labor with the end in view of establishing a viable equilibrium among prices, income and wages and relieving the temporarily distressed, labor-intensive and export-oriented industries of the difficulties that may arise resulting from the higher minimum wage levels. This is to ensure the viable operation of these industries and the continued employment of their workers.

Letter of Instructions No. 829, therefore, aims to avoid the dislocation of distressed enterprises and of those enterprises which because of their nature cannot readily adjust to higher minimum wage levels.

The cottage and handicrafts industry, for instance, will be exempt from PD No. 1614 until further notice, provided that the additional wage increase of P2 provided under PD 1389 will be implemented by all firms in the industry starting April 1, 1979. This means that the minimum wage shall be P10 for NACIDA-registered firms employing more than 30 workers, and for all other employers, P11 for workers outside Metro Manila and P12 in Metro Manila. The cottage and handicrafts industry accounts for 47 percent of all non-agricultural employment and is the main source of additional income in the rural areas.

As everybody knows, the sugar industry has been exempted from the minimum wage levels until the effective composite price of sugar to producers reaches 13 U.S. cents per picul at its peso equivalent.

However, I have ordered the Philippine Sugar Commission to allow the sale of sugar domestically at reasonably increased rates. This requires a study as to how the new minimum wage can now apply to sugar.

In the hotel and restaurant industry, 50 percent of the credited tips or service charges shall be included in the computation of the minimum wage for the purpose of compliance with PD 1614.

The labor-intensive export industries such as the shoe and leather industry, furniture, electronics and the garments industry shall be required to implement the new minimum wage on May 1, 1979 and the P60 allowance on June 1, 1979, in order to give them time for the necessary adjustments, especially with respect to their overseas contracts, which I understand, cover an advance period of six months at the very least.

For construction and service contractors, compliance with Presidential Decree 1614 shall be the joint and several liability of the contractor and the principal unless the contract provides for an automatic escalation clause.

In the retail and service establishments, the new minimum wage shall not apply to establishments employing not more than 10 employees. However, the PI increase scheduled on May 1, 1979 under PD 1389 shall be implemented on April 1, 1979, and another PI increase shall be implemented on May 1, 1980.

Private educational institutions shall comply only with the new minimum wage upon approval of their petitions for tuition fee increases by the Ministry of Education and Culture.

The measures we have adopted under PD 1614 and LOI 829, by themselves alone will not give the economy the necessary countervailing thrust to fight the recessionary effects of the oil price increase. Rather, these measures represent only a portion of the total package that will be used in order to ensure for us that our overall development programs will not be derailed.

Toward this end I have issued, or will issue, the following additional instructions:

1) I have authorized the creation of the Energy Development Fund with an initial capitalization of P500 million. This fund will be utilized to accelerate the exploration and development of both our oil and non-oil energy sources, such as the NIDO and Matinloc areas, the geothermal and hydro-power projects, and the coal development and other sources of energy under our programs. The objective is to reduce our total dependence on imported oil.

2) I have directed a reordering of government expenditures. Current government expenditures will be reduced by another 5 percent. This is in addition to the 10 percent reduction I had previously ordered. The funds from these savings will be channeled to government capital expenditures so that priority development projects will continue to be implemented without impediment. On the other hand, I have also relaxed the restrictions imposed by LOI 805 and 806 on the grant of personnel allowances, the filling up of vacancies, the hiring of casuals, temporary and emergency employees, including consultants and contractual personnel so as not to hamper essential services and activities of the government.

Under this proposal or order, we expect to save from our total budget an amount equivalent to P3.5 million. It is expected that we will require about P3 billion in additional cost for infrastructure.

3) In order to assist priority industries which may be seriously affected by the wage-price increases, I hereby instruct the economic ministries to revise the financial fiscal assistance and incentive packages which could be availed of by these industries. The ministries will submit these measures before April 1, 1979.

4) Corollary to this, I also hereby instruct the monetary authorities and the monetary board to recommend proposals to reduce the rates of interest in order to make available money on easy terms to priority industries.

5) In order to encourage the production of essential goods which have been placed under socialized pricing, the government has de-listed milk, sugar, textiles and school pads and notebooks except those made of newsprint. Other items like GI sheets, cement, cooking oil, laundry soap, selected drugs and medicines and infant dietetics are being considered for an increase in price ceilings or for de-listing.

It is expected that hearings will be conducted on this matter.

6).To help employees who are not covered by the wage increase, I have authorized the NGA to sell rice at subsidized prices to firms for the use of their affected employees and laborers.

7).To partially offset the expected tuition fee increases, I have directed our financial institutions to increase their loan fund for education — which now totals to about P40 million — by P5 million each. This is the Study Now Pay Later Plan — and to expand the coverage of the loan program to parents for educational purposes. This merely means that if the parents feel that they lack the funds for the schooling of their children, they themselves can apply to this loan fund.

8).To bring down the prices of certain prime commodities, I have instructed the Tariff Commission to submit to me a list of items — such as tin plates, tomato paste used in sardine manufacture, beef briskets for the manufacture and processing of meat products — for tariff reduction, if not complete elimination.

In the meantime, I have also directed the Ministry of Agriculture and the Bureau of Animal Industry to now directly handle the possible retailing thru the markets in Metropolitan Manila of chilled or frozen beef to bring down the price of meat and release funds to support the activity. This low-priced meat will be sold at every public market in Metropolitan Manila.

At the same time, I have ordered the entering of both government and the private sector into a contract with the biggest soya bean producers for soya bean products or what are referred to as textured vegetable protein. These are the products similar to meat but which are produced from soya bean and which sell at prices 30 to 40 percent less than beef or meat or chicken or pork.

9) I am also fully aware that the scheduled increase in prices will also affect our government workers and employees.

I have ordered the fiscal and budgetary authorities of our government to now start granting proper and corresponding salary increases to government officers and employees. I say officers and employees, but I am afraid this will not include the members of the Batasang Pambansa. The increase will total an expenditure of about P800 million to P1 billion. Its aim is to approximate the wage adjustment that workers and employees of the private sector will get.

I am, therefore, directing the Ministry of the Budget to submit to me a definite proposal to effect salary increases amounting to P800 million to PI billion for government employees.

10) Last, but not the least, I am reiterating my directive on energy conservation, as contained in LOI 328, to all agencies in the government and private sector. While it is a known fact that the Philippines is in a stage of rapid industrialization, which from the experience of many other countries is a point of increasing energy consumption, I am also certain that there is still enough leeway to cut wasteful and non-essential energy consumption.

I hereby immediately require all ministries, bureaus and agencies of the government, including all government-owned and controlled corporations to reduce their oil, electricity and power consumption by anywhere from five to ten percent and to institute energy conservation measures in their respective offices and operations. A report on this will be submitted directly to the Office of the President.

I am also asking and challenging the private sector not only to do the same but to take the active lead in this regard. For after all, such economies and conservation measures will redound to the benefit of these industries

I also hereby direct the various ministries, particularly the transport-related agencies and the Ministry of Finance to immediately review and recommend measures that will further encourage conservation, particularly in the areas of the use of transportation, both public and private, and other unnecessary use of electricity, like neon lights.

In spite of some difficulties that may lie ahead, let me also assure you that we still have a dynamic and flexible economy that is expected to grow in real terms by at least six percent annually, a rate still higher than the long-term historical record of our country and other developing countries. In fact, the Center for Research and Communication (CRC), a private research institution that is well known for liberal forecasts of the Philippine economy, is even bolder in a rare economic assessment which sees 1979, “as a year of recovery, not of recession,’ with the growth prospect better than the performance of 1979, notwithstanding the oil price increases.

In this rare optimistic forecast, the CRC economists view the wage price adjustments not only within reason and limits but as very essential to the overall economic health of the country. According to the CRC, “Business firms (after initial difficulties) will soon experience an improvement in consumer purchases, especially in the urban markets. Beyond that, they will have prepared for themselves a solid base that is, capacity expansion) for sustaining the economic recovery even into 1980.”

In effect, the various measures that we have instituted are not only in the right direction but are necessary and timely countervailing thrusts that will bring further expansion, instead of its being overwhelmed by external adverse forces.

These are the measures I have taken and will take in the near future to defend our people and our economy from the adverse effects of this new crisis that is a building throughout the world.

I have acted swiftly, and I reiterate that I have acted only after due consultations in accordance with the Labor Code, with the representative organizations of all our economic sector. I have acted to restore the real wages of the Filipino worker, not only to restore his purchasing power as of 1951 or 1972 but even beyond. At the same time, I have ascertained the future viability of our enterprises and the continued growth on the Philippine economy.

I have acted to alleviate specific hardships, but at the same time, I have acted to respond comprehensively and fundamentally to the problems raised by the new round of increases in oil prices.

In so acting, I believe I have vindicated before our people the capability of our government, the crisis government, to cope not only with political but with economic crisis as well.

We face uncertain and trying times ahead. And yet there is no doubt in my mind that we shall prevail. We shall succeed. We shall overcome all difficulties. The Filipino people have proven equal to all the challenges of the past and will no doubt prove equal to the present one. The crisis government we established seven years ago has always proven equal to the task of defending the national, as well as the economic, security and stability of our country; and will no doubt again prove equal to the present task of defending the people, the economy and the entire nation from the ravages of this economic crisis. Together, the Filipino people and their government meet this new challenge.

Together with you, the members of the Batasang Pambansa, I am confident that we shall be able to cope with the crisis and that we shall be able to avoid being detained in our national development efforts.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].