Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the First Regular Meeting of the Rotary Club of Manila

[Delivered on January 8, 1970]

No Cause for Fear

I AM HAPPY to announce that as of today, as of twelve o’clock, as of noon on the 8th of January, I am lifting the suspension of the grant of loans to export industries, especially mining and new industries, by the public financing institutions as well as the commercial banks.

There is some significance, I think, in my delivering my first general public speech this year before Rotarians. The motto of your organization is “Service above Self.” I wish this could be the motto of the entire Philippines and the entire Filipino people.

It is understandable that everybody thinks of his interest first before he thinks of the interests of the nation. The businessman, his enterprise; the laborer, his job. Well, not only the laborer because even the politician thinks first of his job. I refer to the Senate President, who has been exempted from a fine because he needs all the financing he can get for the coming fight. I would like to believe, however, that financing has nothing whatever to do with that kind of a job.

But it is the favorite pastime of everyone today, newspapers included, to blame the government for almost everything, and all the government officials for all the ills in the country as well as of humanity.

And this too is understandable.

I gather from my sources of information that yesterday some of the newspapers carried the headline to the effect that the United States has rejected special preferences for the Philippines in the Laurel-Langley Agreement. I want to announce that this certainly is news to me, because we have not received any word on this matter from any official or unofficial sources of the United States government. This just indicates, I guess, or provides a gauge of, the accuracy of most newspapers. And this is not to speak bitterly and in a satirical manner about newspapers, but rather to show that indeed there is some slanting and there are some mistakes committed in the newspaper business.

While I was young, my father always told me never to believe two sources of news. One, women and the other newspapers. If there are any ladies here present I apologize to them, but I am merely narrating an incident in the past. It is not to say that I believe my father’s advice about women, because I follow women, where they give the right advice.

Now, we are also told that the government has been spending much, especially in the last election. I would like to inform you that we spent more for public works in 1968 than we spent in 1969, and yet if you read the newspapers you will feel that the election was the principal motivation and reason for this splurge in infrastructure building. Then there is the news story that the projected deficit in the government this fiscal year is P1 billion. Now, even the supposed experts in the Central Bank — and I see some of them here — and in the Presidential Economic Staff and in the National Economic Council, and other high-ranking exponents of theoretical economics have not taken into account that we have a budgetary law; the Budget Commission can cut expenses before actual expenditures and even after the release of funds through treasury warrants.

So, what do we have? We have, for instance, cash balances in the hands of treasurers and disbursing officers amounting, as of October, to about P880 million not yet spent, and as of November, about P778 million. Out of this, about P300 million will not be spent. And yet this has been included in the projection.

In addition to this, we have releases through treasury warrants of public works funds, from 1967 to 1969. The savings from this again will be P300 million; and from January to June, or the end of June this year, there is going to be a savings of P100 million from current releases of the Budgetary Commission.

All these make a total savings of about P700 million, and this amount does not include the other savings that we are making now. So, in short, you would have the usual deficit, which is an annual thing that goes into capital expenditures and does not go into such things as salaries and operations of the government which are often referred to as general expenses of government, or what are generally itemized as General Government Expenditures as distinguished from Capital Outlay.

Anyway, we have P300 million let us say, although from my estimate, it will be about P230 million. Let us say we will have a deficit of P300 million. What do we intend to do with this deficit? We are going to finance this by tapping non-inflationary sources. Examples are the sales of treasury bills. The original proposal was for a total sale of treasury bills of about P200 million and another sale of about P200 million, and another sale of about P300 million to government bonds. I understand the Secretary of Finance, however, and the privates sector have agreed to limit sales in the first place and give first priority to treasury bills amounting to about P150 million or P120 million, to be projected into bigger amounts later on when necessary. The idea is to sell these to the people, utilizing the money that they already have and, therefore, not increasing the money supply.

Now, talking about money supply. We are all afraid of money supply. Does anybody ever study the distribution of the money that we have? Nobody has ever had. Everybody says, Oh, we will increase the money supply to P4.4 billion. And how much of this is in the form of demand deposit, and how much of this is money in circulation? Only P1.9 billion is money in circulation, the rest are demand deposits.

Now, out of this P1.9 billion, how much is in the hands of those in the centers of population and how much is in the hands of the great majority of our people? Only P500 million is in the hands of those in the provinces and P1.4 billion is in the hands of a few people in the centers of population, like Manila. Well, this is the reason for the alleged liquidity of the economy, because of the pressure exerted by all this money in the hands of a few people on our supply of goods and services.

And so, my friends, you have a phenomenon, where here in Manila, you have a possible scarcity of supply, although here again, the study indicates that there has not been any diminution. On the contrary, there has been an increase in supply in Manila and other areas of population. In the entire Philippines, for the present anyway, forget the next quarter or even the quarter after next — for the present, there has been no decrease in supply. Then why all this fear that there’s going to be some scarcity? Because everybody is talking of scarcity, of austerity; even the President is talking of austerity, and he has given away all his worldly goods, he has given up, he is desperate. Well no, I merely say that there is enough supply provided we continue the normal course of our lives.

But there has been a slight fear, starting with the housewives who buy four times more than they require, then the retailer, then the distributor, the wholesaler or whatever his name is, he who comes between the supplier and the distributor. Then the supplier or the importer or the producer, and this has produced a chain reaction. Everybody buys more than he usually does. And as you have the phenomenon of everybody buying more than the requirement for a normal period of, say, one week. Now they are buying for one month, or even three months, four months. Result: a temporary shortage of supply, and everybody sounds as if this is a permanent situation, and yet this is not so.

The supply is there, and are they content with this? No. Because of this abnormal and this distortion of demand, we have authorized the importation of an increased volume of essential commodities.

Now, let’s go to imports. Everybody has asked the question: why did the government allow all the people to import so much in excess of export earning? This is the fault of the Central Bank, this is the fault of the Monetary Board, this is the fault of the commercial banks, this is the fault of the President, it is the fault of the government.

Now let us see. We are living in a free society. We have not established controls. We have not imposed controls. You and I, all of us agreed we would do away with controls. You remember, there was some kind of a devaluation in 1965, and there was a lifting of controls by the previous administration. We did not impose any safeguards. That was the first mistake, and we did not then start to voluntarily agree how to use our earnings.

Now what is the complexion of imports in the Philippines? Did you know that 86.4 per cent are capital goods? Some of them are raw materials and the others are machineries: capital goods brought in here to industrialize our country. In short, therefore, there was an intensive effort to industrialize in this country, to convert our predominantly agricultural economy into an agro-based industrial economy; others call it a balanced agro-industrial economy. Now, let me repeat the percentage — 86.4 per cent of, all imports coming into the Philippines on which we spent our hard earned dollars were capital goods. And so my friends, it is quite obvious that the imports were legitimate and the intention was good. Yes, we are over-anxious and there are some industries that really have to re-structure and alter their pattern of activity and conduct. We have to convert the sources of our present raw materials from foreign to domestic, meaning, we have to produce our own raw materials; instead of bringing them from outside, we must produce these goods locally. An example is pulp. There are still a lot of people bringing in raw pulp. High-grade pulp can be produced from abaca and, yet, nobody has tried this, although there are some application now.

Tourism—we have to get involved more intensively in this. We are going to increase the number of tourists coming to the Philippines. As of this year, the record is 120,000. Is that correct, 120,000? And people who go to Bangkok total about 400,000, and to Hongkong, about 800,000 to 1 million. And to the Philippines, 120,000 tourists.

So, today, I have ordered that we now study the possibility of opening the airlanes to foreign traffic without limit for one year, for experimental purposes. I wanted to announce it here, thinking that Tony Roxas would place me on television, but apparently, he is on austerity too. Anyway, through the radio, which is covering me live, and I understand the Voice of the Philippines, I hereby announce that we are going to remove all the obstacles to tourism here in the country.

We are going to see what we can do about the air agreement with the United States too, because this was suspended in 1961. You will remember that there was already an air agreement between our two countries, but because of the reduction of the flights of the American carriers, the air agreement was suspended.I would like to see this air agreement renegotiated. We are ready to help those who will help us, and if the foreign airlines will promote the routes coming to Manila, we will open our airlines to them and allow them to land as often as possible in Manila.

I have given, and I am giving again, formal notice to the Immigration Bureau and to the Foreign Office to punish all officials who, because of discourtesy; timidity or, worse, laziness, do not attend to the tourists. According to the tourists I have talked to, they are made to feel as if they are not wanted here in the Philippines. The transit visa is good for seven days, extendable for another seven days up to a maximum of fifty-nine days. But the tourists are compelled to return every seven days to obtain an extension. Now we are going to change all of this.

And according to them, the people in the foreign Office and Immigration act as if they don’t care whether the tourists come here or not. I am giving notice to those’ employees: anyone caught doing this is going to be dismissed immediately. In addition, I am removing the requirement of a transit visa. The tourists can come in now without obtaining transit visa. And we are merely going to require, of course, a confirmed reservation in a hotel and a reservation to go back to where they come from. That alone will allow entry into the Philippines.

Then I have directed the protection of tourists in Manila and the development of a “tourist belt.” I would like Danding Romualdez to be sure that the P200,000 contribution of the Monetary Board for the Tourist Belt is approved by the Monetary Board. And I have directed the police of Manila to assign 25 men to patrol, in both uniform and plainclothes, the Roxas Boulevard area and Luneta Area, Ermita. Metrocom will also assign another 20 men and 5 patrol cars for this purpose alone.

At the same time, I have directed the development of Corregidor; the contracts for the development of that area which was formerly known as the Officer’s Beach Area will now go apace. Tagaytay, as you know, is being sold by the Philippine National Railways by public bidding, and the winner of the bid should develop the Tagaytay Lodge. Bataan, the Dambana ng Kagitingan, is now ready to receive tourists, but a restaurant has to be put up. All of these have been attended to.

I have also directed the temporary assignment of two military hydrofoils — one between Manila and Corregidor, one between Manila and Bataan — to the BTTI with the agreement that the cost of operation and maintenance will be at the expense of the BTTI, pending the reorganization by Tony Delgado and his group of a carrier system. All of these are instances of what we are doing.

With respect to the export industries, I would like you to know that we are studying the possibility of the retention scheme, meaning, 25 per cent of additional earnings in dollars of all export industries will be authorized to be retained by the exporter, provided he utilizes it for either expansion or any of the purposes that may be required for his own particular industry and does not sell it to a third party.

We are also studying the possibility of giving export incentives, by tax rebates, or tax exemptions. We are opening up the Free Trade Zone in Bataan. Two warehouses are up. In two or three months, all the other areas will be available and they will be leased to processing corporations at a minimal rate, at practically nothing. We are going to finish the roads and highways in Bataan that will connect the various towns with the main highway to Manila. One of the priority projects will be what is known as the Bataan causeway, from Manila to Bataan. There are proposals for the legalization of gambling. This, I would rather leave to Congress to decide later on. That will be one of the headaches of Senate President Gil Puyat when he gets reelected to the Presidency of the Senate.

I would like to say that we are doing everything to meet the present situation.

Are we in crisis? Sort of, but not the kind of crisis which you should fear or you should panic about. I would like you to go to the barrios and to the provinces. Do you know the atmosphere there? It is so different from the atmosphere here in Manila.

In Manila, it’s like going underwater. If you go skin-diving like me, you must know what this means. You feel the pressure on you and you feel the lack of air after a few minutes, especially if you have not got your tank on, and you have to go up for air. That’s Manila.

You go to the province and you feel the exhilaration, confidence, trust of the people and the ambition of the people. You feel the motivation towards a common goal. Here, everybody seems to think of himself alone and to gravitate only towards his own interest. But I am always gratified when I go to the provinces because there, you see everybody thinking of nation, of people, of the Philippines, of country. Here, you probably ask the question, what will happen to my business? There the question the people will ask is, what will happen to our country? What will happen to our nation? Are we going to fight all over again? If so, when? And I always answer no. We are not going to fight a war. This is a more sophisticated kind of war; perhaps, for that reason it’s a more difficult war.

And so, perhaps, it is necessary that I, as President, now clarify to you exactly the precise character of what is in the minds of everybody here, in this center of population — the balance of payments problem, and I shall then close with this.

Is it a crisis which should make us despair because it is unsolvable? No. It is manageable, it is temporary. The problem is not due to a collapse in our capacity to produce or to export. Our export earnings remain healthy. We have suffered in coconut, in the coconut products, by about 15 percent. So, there is more of an even balance. There was a drought in the last two years, but there has also been an acceleration of production in other areas of economic activity.

The next year or two will see a more vigorous acceleration of the growth of our exports.

Our exchange expenditures, of course, have risen rapidly, as I said, more rapidly than our earnings. But this problem is not one of export earnings and imports. No, it is one of the structures of our foreign exchange borrowing. It is not just current disbursement, purchases of essential consumer goods, raw materials, capital goods, because this would be quite easy to remedy. A simple budget that has been adopted by the Monetary Board will settle this immediately. What has made our present problem more serious, however, is the structure of our foreign obligations. You all know that our foreign obligations have been short-term. We have unfortunately financed the foreign exchange requirements of our development with credits of short maturities. Foreign exchange required to meet our maturing loans has begun to claim alarmingly large quantities of our foreign exchange reserves. I am told by my advisers that because of the increase in proportion of short-term debts, the total payment for interest and amortization of foreign obligations of the country this fiscal year ending June 30 will take over one-half of our export earnings.

Now, how much are our annual export earnings? P1,500,000,000. Now in order to provide the total and permanent solutions to the problem, we have taken the following steps:

First, a more direct action to program the use of our available foreign exchange. Now, what does this mean? It means budgeting of dollars. We earn $1.5, all right, let’s spend $1.2. We save so much. The target was $200 million, now we have compromised on $150 million savings, or 10 percent of our dollar earnings. By budgeting, what do we mean? We mean that we determine our income, then we say, we will not go beyond this income. On the contrary, we will spend less on this or that. So, we will have to make savings in some of the items of expenditures.

Second, we have requested the US Commercial Banks which have outstanding advances to the Central Bank of about, and I guess this is the first time that we talk of the total amount, US$242 million, to defer to the end of June, I this year, some US$172 million of maturing notes in order to give us time to work out a more permanent restructuring of our external obligations. We have made a similar request to European and British banks who have outstanding loans to our Central Bank of about US$38 million, of which US$35 million is maturing between how and the middle of this year.

Third, in order to meet our needs for some immediate working balance to tide us over the first quarter of this year, we have requested some 23 American banks to release us from a negative pledge of US$40 million worth of gold that we hold in our reserves. This will permit us to borrow an equivalent amount from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. They have granted us this particular request. We are also tapping other sources to advance up to US$ 100 million to our Central Bank for so-called working fund requirements.

Fourth, the severe measures that have been taken by the Central Bank to program the use of our foreign exchange by direct regulations are temporary and are emergency measures. We have thus asked the International Monetary Fund to assist us in firming up an adequate stabilization program and to mobilize adequate stand-by credits to stabilize our exchange situation.

Fifth, ultimately, we must finance our continued growth through the use of more suitable long-term credits. Since it will take us some time to develop the projects and negotiate suitable long-term project loans from financial agencies such as the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank and the credit institutions of our main trading partners in the United States, Japan and Europe, we are seeking government-to-government credits of long-term maturities to finance our major and essential import needs over the next three years. For this purpose we have asked the World Bank to assist us in organizing a group of capital exporting countries into a consortium to provide credit of suitable terms to the Philippines, and the World Bank has agreed to do this. They are sending a team later this month to work out the details.

The IMF consultative group is arriving on the 10th of January. That is why I decided to come here and deliver this speech on the 8th so that they know that I have spoken about these matters before they arrived.

Since these steps will need some time to work out, I have sounded a call for austerity and for sacrifice, but this does not mean that everybody is going to stop laughing and start digging his grave. I was surprised when they asked me, when I announced that I was giving away my properties or those that I can legitimately give away, whether I was preparing to go into a monastery or something. It’s just that I don’t want to be burdened with them. You travel faster when you travel light and I want to travel light. I don’t want to be held back by property and the demands of property, and I think that, as a leader, I must set an example. I hope that you will follow this example too.

I have repeatedly said, we cannot shape our future by despairing, by complaining or mourning. In the midst of all these problems, there are many opportunities and, I earnestly urge you to look for them. You are in a better position than many of us in government, to look into the situation and find out what the opportunities are.

I welcome your advice and I look forward to continued consultation with you. I have indicated to the Senate President my wish that I would meet with the different industries, repeatedly, periodically, especially the export-oriented industries. As I said, I have met with some of you who are in the importing business. I have met with those who are producers of products for domestic consumption. I have met with the exporters of logs, I have met with the exporters of coconut products.

I intend to meet with all the businessmen of our country and have a dialogue with them. We want to work with you. I am not going to strike out all alone and work out a solution to all your problems without consulting you. No, I am going to ask you to recommend what solution should be adopted by the government. And I will ask the legislative leaders to do the same. I will ask that there be continuous consultations between all the elements of our society. I am going to consult, too, the labor groups and perhaps the student groups, because this world we are building anyway is intended for the young. Many of the things that we are planting now we will never see grow and bear fruit; but the young will see the fruit of all our labors.

I have said that the leadership will be exercised by government. Yes, but leadership is nothing without the cooperation of those for whom that leadership is intended. You are the persons who make commerce and industry move. There is now need not merely of talking about partnership between the government and the private sector, but a need for us to really act as partners.

I call upon you to bring about a more productive partnership between the government and the private sector. On my part, I pledge to you, I shall utilize all my powers in order that this partnership will not only be initiated but may continue to bear fruit in the years to come.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 2). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].