Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Opening of the Constitutional Convention

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, June 1, 1971]

Drafting the New Constitution

I HAVE COME at your behest to express in person the fervent hope that I share with our people—that you may succeed in your noble task to meet the great expectations of our people in the framing of a new Philippine Constitution.

The great streams of our national history starting with the development of the ancient villages to the landing of the barangays in Panay, to the great migrations to the North, the revolution of 1896, Bataan and Corregidor, all these streams of the national history of our country have inexorably led to this high point of our history — this watershed. This was the great desire of our forbears, their vision, their one dream, this dream of freedom.

And today, at last, we come to its true fulfillment. For there is no greater act of freedom than the writing of a Constitution. As against this ultimate act in our history—all others are inert or at best a leisurely movement.

But the writing of a Constitution is the coming all at once together of the past, the present and the future in one great single movement, in one upheaval and in one cry.

For as our forbears in the past sought to establish the first republic in Asia, today you start to test a democratic principle, to test whether democracy is f self-regenerating:, self-recuperating, self-healing. Even if an unjust social and I economic order imposes itself upon a democratic community and corrupts it, the people can, if they so will, rectify such an error. Society can be revolutionized by constitutional means, not by destroying democratic institutions but by strengthening them.

Today, you start to perform this task for the previous Constitution, the old Constitution, was cast in a mold largely initiated and conceived by an alien power which ultimately approved it. But this Constitution you write beginning today must be, and I hope will be, a Philippine Constitution. The dreams that it I must fulfill must be Philippine must be Filipino dreams. The Constitution that you write is envisioned by our people as an embodiment of their own ideals, of the Filipino hope for a Philippine democratic society, for Philippine progress built upon Filipino energies, opportunities and resources.

And as you the distinguished delegates begin to perform this noble mission I feel that I too am called to an equal task. This task is the creation of an atmosphere, the moral climate of support and coordination, of cooperation, without which this great opportunity for human growth in this part of the world must certainly lapse unfulfilled. I have come today to offer this needed support and cooperation to the Constitutional Convention.

For the price of a successful Constitution, new or old, is national unity. The Constitution alone or the blueprint of ideals and principles by themselves cannot assure us that we will attain the abundant, the peaceful, the meaningful life which is the object of all our ardent desires. Freedom is an act of the will.

And so, today, my friends, as you begin your monumental task, go into this historic mission with the confidence of the entire Filipino people in your ability and willingness to discard narrow interests so that neither political ends, personal benefit, nor fatalism or fanaticism, shall stand in the way of a Charter, a Constitution, that shall accurately express the true and lofty aspirations not of any one exclusive segment of our people but of the entire Filipino people.

We shall pray, we shall hope, that a peaceful spirit shall descend upon the proceedings, and upon the delegates, so that harmony shall illumine the course of this convention, so that conflicting points of view may yield to common and harmonious comprehension, and so that ill-will or hostility shall not undermine the work of this convention.

The new tribalism which is engendered by organized anarchy must be discarded in favor of national unity. It is necessary once again that we demonstrate not only to our people, but to ourselves and to the world that the Filipino people indeed desire a democratic community which shall seek the lofty aspirations not only of the present generation but of all generations to come of Filipinos.

It is true indeed that no Constitution whether old or revised can by itself solve the intricate problems of any nation nor can it offer any magic or easy cures; but a Constitution is a testament to reason and, therefore, it can constitute rational basis for confronting national problems. Everyone in our nation knows that we embark upon a crucial national endeavor which is entitled to the fullest recognition, respect, and attention by everyone. For you write a Constitution which shall be the fountainhead of wisdom and if in the days to come our country should ever meet any new dangers, there shall be this Constitution that you write, guiding our people in acting with courage. And if in the long and tortuous years of this young, this small, this aspiring Republic, our people should ever be tempted into erratic and unwise acts, there shall be this Constitution that you write to lead our people back to sanity, back to wisdom, back to sobriety and to patience.

For the Constitution that you write shall be the bedrock of our Republic, and you start to write it today.

And so may God grant you the wisdom, the courage, and the nobility to make of this new enterprise a noble task.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].