Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the CESO Convocation for the launching of Oplan Pagpapaunlad ng Bayan

[Delivered on May 22, 1981]

It is always a pleasure for me to join my fellow workers in government, in occasions such as this which are addressed to the interest of reform and efficiency in the government service.

Many times in the past we have similarly gathered under the aegis of the Career Executive Service Officers Organization, to examine problems affecting the civil service and to improve upon our work as managers in government. And I have welcomed those meetings always in the firm faith that such conferences are productive of better morale and direction in government.

It is not my intent to turn this meeting today into a political meeting, simply because as you know I happen to be a candidate for President. But there is one respect in which the current electoral campaign and the ensuing normalization process that the elections are designed to usher in, impinges significantly upon our work in government. This is the sense in which the coming elections must be viewed as a moment of testing and judging of our work in government.

More than a choice of President is involved in these elections. This is, as I have said, an exercise of judgment upon the record of crisis government and the new society program of government. And for reasons also that are understandable, though sometimes a bit confusing, those who count themselves among the opposition, see the electoral campaign as an occasion to mount a bitter campaign against the administration.

Tests of strength have a way of polarizing issues, of consigning individuals into clearly differentiated, black-and-white positions. When the test involves political interests, the ensuing combat generally tends to throw out the window all widely held codes of polite, civil and even moral behavior.

At this early stage of the campaign for the presidential elections, this tendency has already begun to surface. character assassination, the outright and blatant distortion of facts, mudslinging, muckraking and irrelevant sloganeering mark the recent attempts to discredit the government. What all those who have chosen to range themselves against our administration so conveniently ignore is the undeniable record of palpable achievements that this government has been able to accomplish over the past years.

With the creation of the New Society we had hoped to establish a mode of public conduct consonant to the lofty aspirations, of our national reform movement. We had sought to rid out society not only of the social and economic ills that had plagued it for decades, even centuries; but also of the chicanery that for so long had characterized our political life. But in all the political exercises when we had encouraged the involvement of the opposition, the bickerings, the machinations, the prevarications have re-emerged. We were perhaps somewhat naive to expect those who have chosen never to understand our goals to behave in a manner that our people expect of them. Instead they continue to make regrettable spectacles of themselves with their petty intrigue. Their recalcitrance obviously explains their continuing inability to mobilize the people’s support for their ambitions. They have failed to detect the growing political maturity of our people; they fail to grasp the fact that our people are no longer excited by mere oratorical bombast. The quality and temper of government they have experienced over the past eight years have led them to view political issues, actions and leadership not on the basis of vague promises or lame excuses, but rather on the basis of actual accomplishments, concrete achievements.

This Assembly of the country’s Career Executive Service Officers is a welcome occasion for us to bring before our people the substantive reforms instituted in the government service and to set the records straight on what the government has been doing all along, while others merely cavil and talk.

All of you occupy strategic positions in the civil service. Each of you is charged with a mission to implement some facet of our total program for national development. You therefore, provide an important link between the “government and the people, with whom we are all expected to be in close touch. While we have often declared that the ultimate attainment of our national objectives rests on the people’s own willingness to participate in our development-oriented endeavors, such efforts would nevertheless become less efficient and less effective without the fundamental direction that civil servants such as you provide. In fact the entire approach of the Career Executive Service concerns itself with harnessing the talents and dedication of special individuals in the government service, of continually upgrading their capabilities, and thereafter of assigning them to posts where their abilities can be put into best use in the service of the nation. More than just streamlining the operations of government, the Career Executive Service has as one of its primary goals the further development of the leadership qualities of an extraordinary cadre of civil servants, in order that they be made more ready to assume greater responsibilities.

We who are now at the helm have placed great hope in you, and we foresee that from your own ranks will rise the men and women who will eventually comprise the future leadership of our nation. And we are similarly confident that this emerging generation of career executives in government will carry on the work we have begun; perhaps it is they who will finally benefit from the fruits of development. If you see yourselves as belonging to this coming generation of leaders; if you intend to bring your service to our people to even greater heights, then it is necessary for all of you to come together and forestall any attempts to frustrate and abort our thrusts towards National development.

The recent pronouncements of the opposition make only too clear that they intend to divert from the current direction of national advancement. They have publicly declared that they will dismantle those very same mechanisms that have helped to shield our people and our country from the potentially devastating effects of the global economic crisis. They would deny from our people the newly established institutions that have enfranchised the masses within our political system. Publicly, they have vowed to reinstate long discarded practices that in the past contributed to political and social anarchy. In short, they would return our nation to chaos. And frankly the advances they have been able to gain over the past few months, though still minimal to be considered as a real threat, are disturbing.

Though the government recognizes the basic wisdom of the people, it would be foolhardy for any of us to assume that they would immediately sympathize with all our efforts, no matter how well-intentioned. If with nothing else, public service must always be accompanied with a great deal of patience, because for too long the people have labored under past social and political systems, and their collective forbearance has worn thin. On the other hand, arrogance and a seeming aloofness for the day-to-day cares of the masses would in the long run negate even our grandest schemes for progress. From the government, our people demand not only farsighted planning and direction but just as important, sensitivity and compassion. Alongside the construction of infrastructure and the delivery of social services, the government and its men must be able to manifest a genuine concern for the predicaments of the people.

Our inability to adequately sense the real pulse of the masses may, in part, explain the limited success that the opposition has been able to garner in certain sections of the country, albeit isolated. During the last plebiscite a number of our citizenry rejected the amendments we had proposed for the Constitution.

While the motives for the rejection may be varied, I would like to think that it is a clear manifestation of the dissatisfaction some of our people may have for government action or agency, or both. In each “no” vote I see a black mark in the generally commendable record of our government; nevertheless they should indicate to us the areas where a reevaluation of our policies and actions is badly needed. The implications of these instances of rejection in our ability to continue with the work of development are far ranging. Its effects on the maintenance of the security of the state are obvious. It requires that the problems must be viewed not only from the standpoint of the national leadership but also down to the level of career executive service officials, inasmuch as they are part of the structure of government who are in closest contact with the people. We have to determine where government services have failed or have not been sufficiently delivered. We have to reexamine those areas where the residents perceive government neglect for their plight; we have to clarify misconceptions about certain policy decisions; we have to assuage misgivings about the health of our economy; we have to check and penalize acts of official abuse; we have to redouble our efforts at informing the masses on the true intentions of government.

Clearly, the solution to these problems would require the interlinking of a number of government agencies. Even with the best intention of government to produce a better quality of life of our people, there are those who had been left out in the process of establishing priorities. You of the career executive service have the individual and collective resources, particularly the manpower and the expertise, to expedite the work of nation-building, as well as to correct some of the shortcomings our government may have somehow committed.

I, therefore, would like to congratulate the Career Executive Service for having voluntarily assessed the current political situation and for having drawn up a plan addressed towards the rectification of certain inadequacies in the operations of government.

On the basis of the recommendations as formulated in Oplan “Pagpapaunlad ng Bayan” of the Career Executive Service Development Program Alumni Association, I have issued Letter of Instructions no. 1128 addressed to all heads of government offices and agencies, to all governors, city mayors and barangay captains, and to all others concerned to take immediate steps to further improve, maximize and expedite efforts in the prosecution of government programs, projects and activities in the areas of economic development and infrastructure projects; extension services and livelihood projects; medical services, public assistance and other outreach programs; information dissemination and the gathering of feedback on the sentiments and reactions of the people towards government policies and programs and their effectiveness; individual and team performance, dedication and commitment to the public service, morality and integrity; and efficient and effective public service in general in order to bring the government closer to the people. I have directed all officials and employees of the government to take part in this nationwide campaign to upgrade government performance and operations. It will also receive the necessary assistance and support of all heads of offices, governors, city and municipal mayors and barangay captains.

We can do no less than succeed in this effort to improve the quality and effectiveness of government service; we must succeed if we are to earn the continued faith and confidence of the people in the government and in the national leadership. For it is only with this faith and confidence that we can carry on with our program of development.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.