Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the First National Conference on Children and Youth

[Delivered on December 4, 1972]

The Care and Development of the Young

I WELCOME EACH and everyone of you to Maharlika Hall, the hall for freemen, the hall for noble men. I consider addressing this conference quite important because the program for the development of the young and of the children is one of the most important programs of, government.

Under Executive Order No. 310 which I signed on April 16, 1971, I created this Inter-Departmental Committee. It is composed, as you know, of representatives from the government as well as from the private sector and a representative from the Office of the President.

Perhaps, more than any other developing country, the Philippines must attend to its youth. Sixty two percent of our population are below 25 years of age. We probably have one of the highest percentages of youth and children in relation to the population in the entire world. Thirty one percent of our population range from age 12 to age 25. This is indeed a very young country. Of course, the increase in birth rate for the past 25 years has something to do with this. You will remember that when the war started in 1941, we were estimated to be only about 18 million people and now we are anywhere from 38 to million people.

I stated that when I proclaimed martial law I was thinking of the young. Why the young? Those who belong to my generation should know the reason. We have known too many battles and too much suffering whether in time of war or in time of peace. We fought against the status quo. We fought against the leftist, the rightist, the bigoted; we fought so many battles that it was my feeling that the young, our children, my children and the children of those who knew the last war and the fighting against the communists in the 1950’s should never fight those battles all over again. Anyone who has fought in a war become a most passionate oppositionist to war, no matter how many medals he may have won. I am not unacquainted with those medals that they gave you after you ‘ have gone out, fought and got almost killed. They pin a piece of medal and a nice looking ribbon on your chest and send you back to kill some more.

Now, the medals are all right because they are symbolic of the appreciation of your people, of your government, of your Republic and your comrades. For in many instances you have to fight for your country and for your people. But the wise leader certainly will not invite war, will not invite bloodshed; and if he can prevent violence through peaceful reform and change, then, he must do everything in his power to do so. This is the meaning of all the efforts that we are engaged in.

This conference is something that I have looked forward to. This is the first national conference on children and youth and I wish to extend a hearty welcome to each and everyone of you. It is almost axiomatic to say the young are the foundation of our national, economic, and social well-being. It is also commonplace to say that from your generation will come the future leaders of our country. Actually, it is literally so. It is literally so because the statistics will bear me out. If 62 per cent of the population are below the age of 25, then, of necessity the leaders must come from that group of young men and women of our country.

I attach a great importance to the role of human beings as decisive elements in nation building. It has been well said that the most valuable resources of a country are its people not the mines, the forests and the other natural resources but the people, the human beings.

However, they are not just resources serving the needs of nation building, but they actually are the very ends of nation building. For this is the purpose of a Republic — that a society and a government be established to uphold the dignity of man in contradiction to that ideology we are fighting against which seeks to uphold the dignity of the state over and above that of the individual.

Economic development must be grounded firmly on the development of human resources. Social justice and the national interest demand that every Filipino youth be given the opportunity for the full development of his personality, his talents, his abilities so that he can participate actively in the challenge of development. Because if 62 per cent of our people do not participate, then the great majority will be a drag on the entire society.

And thus it is that from the statistics alone the role of the youth is well marked out. But more than this, the young constitute the extension of all the dreams and the aspirations of the old. We who are a little bit older — but not too old—are just getting to that stage when we start feeling the pains of age. No one among us — whether he is 55 years old like me or a little bit older — likes to be identified as belonging to the older generation. But in the years to come, one simply will have to admit it.

And so, we have looked forward; ten years from now, depending upon the will of the Almighty, many of us will not be here but the young will be here and therefore, the young must continue our labor otherwise this nation will be lost. But for them to participate they must understand. No one is motivated unless he knows the objectives, believes in them and in the program to attain them.

The young are therefore a continuation of our present. When I think of the young, I think in terms of what they would like to have, let’s say, ten years from now. And actually, this should be the driving force for the older generation. For as our great hero, Jose Rizal said, one does not plant a tree expecting to sit in its shade. No, you do not, but you know that your children will someday sit in that shade. And so, it has got to be a good tree. It has got to be a well developed and luxuriant growing tree, because the frailties of humanity are such that one can’t plan and work only for a limited time. One finds strength and inspiration from the fact that the young will carry the same banner and bring it forward. The young will be there to nurture the same tree that we have brought to life. Being great in number in our country, they constitute a very potent force that can bemobilized for national development or be misused for destruction.

It is my feeling that our young today are much better trained and better informed, better oriented than the older generation when they were young.

When I created the Inter-Departmental Committee on Children and Youth my aim was, of course, to provide an integrated approach to the important problems and opportunities concerning the youth. Towards this end, the Committee must assist other agencies concerned with the youth.

I have always said that the father takes care and looks after the youngest. Look into any family. When you see a family moving about, whom does the father take care of first? The young, the young baby who can’t walk. He carried him.

The same thing is true with the nation. I happen to have been elected as your President and, therefore, I am some kind of a father to everybody. I am not that old but that is the role of a President. More than anything else the President has to be some kind of a father. Now then, as a father what do you think of? What is your purpose? The purpose is to protect the nation. But in protecting the nation you must think of the young—those who cannot take care of themselves, those whom you are depending on to take over when you stand aside and let others take over your place. So we take care of the young.

But in government the various agencies that are engaged in taking care of the young may, in many instances, not be coordinated. Thus, the need for the Inter-Departmental Committee. When the Department of Education, let us attend to its functions, it does so as a basic national policy. Its programs do consider whether the student is young or old. But there must be a program that aimed directly at the young because the young have problems which are not necessarily the problems of the old. And so the young must be given special attention. The redirection of the energies and the idealism of the young is an age-old problem and many countries have special organizations, governmental and private, in order to attend to this. In the Philippines there are many in the private sector, there are many in the public sector who are supposed to attend to this. But I repeat. In many instances they may work at cross purposes and the reason therefore for this committee and your convention is to work out an approach to a program which will brush aside the contradiction and the conflicts that may arise out of enthusiasm and from the petty jealousies and envy that may arise from the frictions of joint action. The needs of the young are varied. They are complex and embrace several sectors such as education, health and nutrition, social welfare, housing, labor and employment.

The role of education in preparing the youth as responsible and productive citizens needs no further emphasis. The youth’s basic training at home must be supplemented by a strong educational system, so as to instill in them discipline, self-confidence and the desire to achieve, as well as to impart to them the basic skills demanded of a productive citizenry. Complementary to this is the provision of vocational training programs, preferable at the community level, for the youth who are out-of-school.

The educational program of the Philippines, as you know, is being reformed because it has no relation whatsoever to our economic and social development program.

Health and nutrition are likewise important. There is no need to explain that ill-health saps the vitality and energies of the young and reduces their effectiveness. Moreover, social welfare and housing provide the youth with the environment that is conducive to the youth’s physical, mental and moral development.

The area of labor and employment is very critical to our total development drive in general and to youth development in particular. Among the unemployed, a large portion belongs to the 10 years to 19 years age group. It is unfortunate but it is true that in the accounting of the labor force children at the age of 10 are included.

But in statistical studies anybody who is ten years old is a part of the labor force. I am sure this is a surprise to you, but it is true. It is true everywhere else. It’s not only true here, it is true in every country of the world. The ten-year-old child is part of the statistical base for the determination of the labor force. And in our country, in 1971, this age group that is from 10 years to 19 years constituted close to 31 per cent of total unemployment. Within the next four years, roughly 2 million “entrants” to the labor force are anticipated, posing a major challenge that demands immediate and vigorous action.

In any case, the child is the ultimate beneficiary of greater employment and higher incomes. The welfare of children can be uplifted most effectively by providing gainful employment to the heads of families. The provision of greater employment opportunities for the labor force will ensure that the benefits of development will reach the children of low-income families. The social welfare and health programs of government sometimes partake of the nature of dole outs or outright philanthropy—the giving of specific amounts of food, clothing, shelter. But, in order to develop a dignified, self-reliant race, we should do away with all these doles, all encouragement to beggarly pursuit and instead develop people who can by themselves assert their own dignity. We don’t want to create dignity for others. Every man must create his own kind of dignity and he does so by being self-reliant, by being self-sufficient, which means he must earn his own livelihood. No man is dignified who does nothing but receive from the government his food, clothing and shelter, and I don’t know of any Filipino who would like to do this. Everyone whether Filipino or not, I believe, would like to be able to earn his own food, earn his own clothing and earn his own housing. And this is the reason for the reorientation of government policy towards creating job opportunities and employment more than just giving out doles to people no matter how hard-up they may be. Yes, there are periods of calamity during which people have to be helped. Of course, when a person is injured you have to pick him up from the street and bring him to the hospital. That’s one of the times when he can’t help himself. When there are floods and there is dislocation, you must give out doles. But this should be temporary and we must not encourage the prolongation of such a program. This is the reason for the effort to build up in everyone, especially the young, the habit of self-reliance and of discipline.

Realizing the potentials of the youth and the need of developing the young so that these potentials can be harnessed and put to effective use, we have started to formulate the plans for the development of the young. I say started because the task of improving the young’s health and his education, of shaping his attitudes and ambitions, of redirecting his energies and his idealism to constructive causes cannot be achieved within one day or by government alone. This requires a national effort. This requires the effort of everyone whether in government or outside government. There will be a great need for the resources and services of agencies and organizations outside the government. There will be a need to mobilize free and voluntary services dedicated to the welfare and development of the youth. Unfortunately, many of the parents must answer for some, if not many, of the ills of our society. Many of our parents think that after they have sent the children to school their responsibility is finished. This is hot true and many regrettable mistakes in our society are due to the fact that the parents have failed in many instances in performing their role in society. And yet we blame the young. We keep on blaming the young. When we speak of drug addiction and we speak of the waywardness of the young, we have an inclination and a tendency to point to them and say, they belong to this drug-addicted generation. Perhaps, we should look inward and into our ourselves and ask ourselves how far have we as parents fallen on our job. I speak as a parent. As President I am a busy man. I sometimes work up to 3 or 4 o’clock in the morning and yet, I have a feeling that notwithstanding the fact that we may be very busy there are certain obligations you and I cannot shy away from and they have to do with the care of our children. When my children were here, even if I was very tired or very occupied, I always tried to see them before they went to bed. When they were working on their lessons or when they were whiling away their time I tried to talk to them even for just a few minutes. I am certain that many of those who are drug addicts among our children will say, will tell us, that it was because we the older generation didn’t care enough that they turned out that way.

I will not sermonize, but I think that you and I know that this is one of the important areas wherein there must be collective action if we are going to move forward.

We have, therefore, encouraged and invited private agencies and organizations to participate in the government’s drive for youth development. These agencies in fact form an integral part of our plans and programs for the youth.

An example of such a collaborative effort is the Youth Organizations to Undertake Reforms (YOUR) under the Presidential Youth Development Program. This is a program intended to coordinate the activities of both private and government agencies involved with the youth.

The main objectives of the Program are: (1) the identification of the development areas of priorities for the involvement of the youth; (2) the redirection and supervision of existing programs and services towards the defined objectives of the New Society; (3) the participation of the youth in the planning and implementation of specific socio-economic development projects; and (4) is the development and implementation of redefined training programs for YOUR ‘leaders and youth organizers.

Now, what are the agencies involved in this? Let me mention them as a form of acknowledgement of their participation. We have the Young Men’s Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, the Girl Scouts of the Philippines, the Philippine Youth Welfare Coordinating Council, the Red Cross Youth, the 4-H Club under the APC and the CAREFOR, the Philippine Business for Social Progress, Rizal Youth Development Foundation, the Department of Social Welfare and, of course, the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

The following priority areas for action have been identified; reforestation, and reform, food crop production, livestock production, vocational training and infrastructure development. I would like to call attention to the that fact land reform involves all kinds of scientific farming and it also involves cooperatives. At present, YOUR is initially launching the following pilot projects: irrigation repair in Bacolor, Pampanga, reforestation in the Arayat Reforestation Area—and later other reforestation areas in Bataan and perhaps, in Benguet Mt. Province— and the pasture improvement for livestock in Sto. Tomas Baguio. Larger projects are planned for the Christmas vacation and will be undertaken on a nationwide basis come summer of 1973.

What I dream of is the young participating in a summer program wherein they would undertake projects which may directly affect the less privileged our country.

I have previously stated that Philippine education is an exercise in solipsism, is misaligned and needs the saving grace of relevance. In short, educational policy-making must dovetail with national development.

In line with this, the Department of Education has evolved a Youth Civil Action Program involving both in-school-youth and out-of-school youth. The in-school youth program encompasses all levels of education involving some 11 million youth and is designed to provide practical work as part of the school curriculum in order to heighten the civic and social consciousness of students and to encourage them to participate more actively in the task of national development. This program will provide rich and varied opportunities for students to apply and test classroom principles in real life situations and to be involved to community development, thus affording them opportunities for self-realization and infusing their lives with direction, with value, with purpose greater and meaning.

Several activities have been lined up for this program, some of which are participation in the green revolution, participation in the beautification and cleanliness drives, participation in reforestation activities, supervised farming programs, cooperative training programs, community health and sanitation courses relevant to national development such as agrarian reform, cooperatives, taxation and family planning.

For the youth who are out of school, programs are likewise being undertaken to enable them to respond to the needs of development despite their lack of schooling. Under the Bureau of Private Schools we have special vocational schools, colleges and institutes. Furthermore, we have what I have referred to as the manpower training program. Many of us don’t know it, but the Philippine Manpower Training Program has been adopted as a model by Asian governments. In the Bureau of Vocational Education and Bureau of Public School we see such manpower training programs in cooperation with the Nations, Manpower and Youth Council of the Department of Labor. I have given orders to the agencies concerned to make the training programs community-based, so as to make such training more effective.

Meanwhile, the NMYC is reshaping its over-all training and development programs for the out-of-school youth on the basis of important information obtained from a survey of out-of-school youth all over the country. This survey has just been updated and surprisingly, we were met with enthusiasm by these youth who have missed formal schooling. It is necessary that we recover these wasting human resources. They constitute not only a burden but a danger to our society and therefore, we must do something to recover them. Most societies throw them into the wastebasket of disregard and disaffection. But a modern society must learn to take them back into the main stream of economic, social and political activity, otherwise, that society, especially if it is a young society like ours, is bound to meet with this problem under more violent terms.

Sports development and nutrition are closely related to the youth education program. Our youth must be immersed in a program of competitive sports not only to develop a sound mind in a sound body but also to imbue them with a self-reliant and competitive spirit. I want to see greater emphasis on sports for the development of the youth. I have directed the Department of Education and other organizations to formulate a program of this nature.

But a physical fitness program must be supported by an appropriate nutrition program in order to be successful. Expending energy requires the right amount, of inputs of energy in terms of food nutrients. Thus, both in and out of school, we are encouraging and stressing the importance of proper nutrition.

In school, courses in basic nutrition are offered, and direct efforts involving the public schools’ feeding program are supported. In and out of school, we are encouraging food production projects, because, as you know, there is one basic answer to many of our problems. I was asked once during an interview what was the answer, in one single word, to all our problems. That was a difficult question but I immediately shot back—production. If every single man, woman and child in this country produced something, no matter how modest, then, many of our problems would be solved.

The major agencies of the government engaged in this kind of activities like the Department of Social Welfare, the Department of Health, the Food and Nutrition Research Council, the Department of Local Governments and Community Development—this is a new Department headed by Secretary Roño former Governor of Samar—and of course, the Department of Agrarian Reform—another new Department under Secretary Estrella—by the nature of their functions have built-in programs for the youth.

The Department of Social Welfare, aside from providing essential social services also conducts training programs, particularly for out-of-school youth. The Department of Health and the Food and Nutrition Research Council have youth programs in nutrition and health.

The Department of Agrarian Reform has prepared the Home Management and Rural Youth Development Program to train the youth in the rural areas to become responsible, productive, disciplined law-abiding citizens, capable of assuming leadership in the future.

The Department of Social Welfare has reoriented its policies away from mere dole-out programs and towards efforts at helping the needy secure means of living. As the saying goes, if you give a man a fish, you give him dinner for the evening; but if you teach him how to fish, you give him food for the rest of his life. Now, this saying is as old as the hills but there are occasions when we forget that this is a fundamental tenet of government and private welfare activities. We must continue with this.

The Department of Health has volunteer services inviting the participation of the young. Many of our young doctors or the young would-be doctors go to the provinces in summer or even during the holidays and participate in the health programs of the government quietly and without fanfare. This is the kind of quiet, dedicated service which we would like to encourage the students to nurture. We will try and get the students in engineering to participate in the titling program. We need many people to survey the boundaries of the agricultural lands because how can we redistribute lands to the tenants if we don’t even know the boundaries of the land owned by the landlords.

I have, by decree, directed that the landowners swear under oath the area and the boundaries of their land. But at the same time, we are also taking at photogrammetry by air of all the lands in the Philippines and we will try and divide these lands on the basis of such aerial photogrammetry. The surveyors on land need to confirm such divisions and we will need the young for this photogrammetry. The surveyors on land need to confirm such divisions and we will need the young for this.

I refer to some of the programs as examples where the young may be of assistance with their volunteer services. The 4-H Club has some of the most active young men and women in the Philippines. I am always heartened when go out to the barrios and I meet these young men and women teaching the old farmers the new farming methods and showing them the benefits to be reaped from irrigation, the use of fertilizers, the use of spacing, the use of pesticides and the like. Some of these boys and girls are 12 to 16 years old and they are teaching 60-year old farmers how to work their farms. That is something. Instead of the old teaching the young, the young teach the old. Perhaps this is as it should be. Have we not heard often enough the wistful thought that in a developing country if one could succeed in replacing the older generation completely and instantly with the young, perhaps, the problems of development would not be so difficult? And has it not also been said by the observers that one of the heaviest burdens of a President is undoing the inherited mistakes of the past. Our work is not only to build, but to rectify the errors of the past. We have committed many errors because we are human. Our own leaders for instance in the 1900’s, 1910, 1920, 1930. What did they think about? Did they think of economic development? Of course not. Why not? Because they were single-mindedly concerned with political emancipation. Complete, immediate and absolute independence was the rallying cry and even “a government run like hell by the Filipinos is better than a government run like heaven by the Americans.” They had a noble objective. So let us not blame them too much; but the mistakes were there.

Thus, we have an economy too dependent on the exportation of raw or primary commodities. Sugar for instance. Our sugar cannot stand competition in the international market, and if we did not have the American market it would collapse in no time at all. The reason for this is our people did not prepare for a situation which we have now. So we have to start rectifying this. We have to move into all of these problems as fast as we can and we are depending on the young to help out in this because they are the ones who are attuned to new ideas. It’s difficult to break a habit, especially the habit of a 50-year old. And this is one of our problems now. Many of our people expect us to create miracles in a period of a few months. This is going to be one of the most difficult things to accomplish: to convince our people to work at this steadfastly, continuously, dedicatedly, regularly. We should do away with our niñgas kugon mentality. We lack dedication. We forget our objectives too easily. We must stop this. We must now teach not only the young, but also the old. And this is where the difficulty lies; we must teach the old to cast aside the old habits. To do this, we need the help of the young.

And that is why I address this to the young. Let us do away with the niñgas kugon mentality. I am happy to see that among the participants in the conference are planners and educators, administrators who belong to the older generation—and whom I hope I have not offended with my references to the habits of the old. But actually they are participants in the effort to root out this habit, this old attitude. But of course I am even happier to note that there is a greater proportion of the youth among the participants.

There must always be occasions for the youth of the land to sit down with their elders to jointly ponder over the nation’s problems and needs and to formulate the necessary measures for its well-being. Both the old and the young must understand each other and appreciate each other’s efforts. The young should understand that while the old may have committed many mistakes, they have achieved something of value. But not by a man, no matter how powerful, nor by the leaders. The leaders may guide, they may setup the plans, they may put up the programs, but only the people can save themselves. Only the people can dictate a change of habits, a change of attitudes and a change of path. And this is why I address myself to 62 percent of our population: the children and the youth. More than at any other time in our history, even more than the time of Rizal, Bonifacio, Luna and Aguinaldo, the great propagandists and the revolutionaries, the youth will determine the fate of our people, whether they survive or they perish. May God will that you perform the role of saviors of our country.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].