Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the conferment exercises of the 16th Regular Course of the National Defense College of the Philippines

[Delivered on June 15, 1982]

It has been my distinct opportunity and privilege for a number of years now to address the graduating class of the National Defense upon the completion of their studies in this institution of learning in our country. And today I thank you all for granting me again this opportunity and privilege.

When I address this commencement, I am aware that I speak to a select group of men and women in our military and government service who have been specially chosen to undertake intensive studies in this college. And I know that from these portals of learning, you will all move on into active service to our people and country, in positions of leadership within the very heart of our government and military services.

For all of you, the saying is true that: to whom much is given, much is expected. At this moment of your graduation, the whole nation has the highest expectations that you will bear with dedication, professionalism and integrity the responsibilities and tasks that will be reposed in you, and that from your ranks leaders will emerge who will serve the nation with distinction.

The regular course offered by the National Defense College consists of special studies in many areas and many fields, but in essence it relates to the critical field of statecraft and national security administration. It aims to provide training in leadership, not in a general way but with specific and close alliance with the existing institution and structures of our government today. And it strives in that sense to fill a very real need in our country today.

All societies inelectably look to the training of future leaders as an essential task crucial to their survival. For in the leader, we usually associate the impetus for dynamism of society and its vision of the future.

In many ages and many places, men time and again have tried to plumb the mystique of leadership and to provide a way of training so that more in society will be able to lead. For while it is true that the greatest of leaders are born not made, there are innumerable tasks in social, economic and political life for which leadership can be developed and learned. And it is fact too that the leader who does not learn or grow sooner or later is toppled from his position of preeminence.

It was in this wise that Plato spoke of the philosopher king as the ideal ruler, who was steeped in virtue and in the art of dispensing wise laws.

Similarly, St. Thomas Aquinas in his Summa Theologica, wrote about the just and lawful ruler who is given charge of the community and always acts for the common good. John Locke, who has greatly influenced more than anyone all modern democratic governments, spoke of the ideal ruler who was bound by the “social contract” and who complied with the sovereign will of the people.

Leadership in the complex affairs of the twentieth century has not departed much from such basics of political management.

Our national experience in the decade of the seventies — when we faced grave political and economic crises — in many ways shows that our people are not wanting of these essentials of leadership.

Our Armed Forces gave their unwavering loyalty to the state and our people lived up to the greater ideals of the New Society that we have painstakingly built.

We have weathered the economic scourges of the devastating typhoon and flood in 1972, repaired the political fragmentation of our society under the old constitutional system, survived the staggering oil crises of 1973 and of 1979, and we have prospered. And whatever may be said of crisis and problems today and tomorrow, our people, will continue to be dynamic, resilient, and daring. I have no doubt that we have the will to survive all adversity, and that leadership will not fail us now.

Confucius once said that the crucial element of leadership is the trust and confidence of the people. For while a leader may not have the Armed Forces behind him, or enough bread to give the people, he still can lead effectively if he holds the trust and confidence of the people.

We have not forgotten this basic of leadership in our own circumstances. You will recall how frequently, even during Martial Law, we consulted with the people by referenda and by elections so that we might maintain their trust and confidence.

I have always held that it is the sovereign will of our people and the national interest that must reign in our national life. In late 1973, we held a referendum to ascertain public support and guidance for the Martial Law government. In 1976, we held a referendum on the question of whether our people would consent to the continuation of the crisis government. In 1979, we held the first elections for a representative National Assembly. And last year we held another referendum to strengthen our national Constitution and held the first Presidential Elections under the new Philippine constitution.

I must state once more my firm conviction about the Barangay Elections of 1982 as reflective of our people’s attainment of full political maturity. So the same is also shown by the precedent setting elections held last week in Regions Nine and Twelve.

In no other way is the capacity of a people for self-determination so decisively shown than in the smooth and orderly grassroots process of electing their local officials,

I have stressed ever so often in my speeches that genuine leadership is not possible, no government program can ever be successfully implemented, without the wholehearted trust and support of our people.

To that effect I have made it a policy to stamp out every element that tends to undermine the integrity of the government or the faith of the public in this institution. The trust and confidence of the public is that important and fundamental.

Just a couple of weeks ago I issued a directive for the Constitution of a body to study the means of eradicating graft and corruption in government. And you are all aware how we have continually weeded out the misfits and ineffeicient public officials. Right now it is the whole judicial system that is undergoing a top to bottom reorganization.

All these measures are taken to ensure that we should have a strong, stable, and responsive government that will run true to the expectations and trust of the public.

But as important as the trust of the people, leadership must also be powered by vision, courage and understanding. This is especially needed in the field of national security today.

A genuine training for leadership in the contemporary world calls for constant awareness of our national security, the preservation of our political and territorial integrity, the protection of our social and economic institutions, as well as our valued traditions, beliefs, and way of life.

I am deeply gratified that in response to my suggestion last year that the NDCP classes should make a systematic study of our national defense plans, you rose to the challenge. I understand that the basic concept of your defense plans is no longer limited to mere military strategy, but is based on the more conprehensive and realistic level of the overall defense of the state including its political, economic, and social dimensions. I ask the Defense College to continue along these lines and to engage in other similar researches.

These studies are a distinct contribution to the formulation and future course of our national policies. I assure you that they will be duly consulted and studied by our policy determining bodies.

I understand that these studies have taken into consideration my previously stated views that a realistic defense plan for the present should focus more on countering the internal threat of subversion, sedition, and insurrection.

The external threat is still there, but it does not come into immediate confrontation now or in the next five or ten years as that of subversion in the guise of strikes, student activism, political dissidence and acts that tend to paralyse industries and public services.

Our goals and our tasks remain. We seek and must have: national unity, political stability, economic progress, national security, and social justice.

These are goals that summon us all: you and me alike.

As graduates of the course in National Security Administration this is part of your primary task. And I fervently hope that your training in this college has truly prepared you well for this effort we must undertake together.

Partly because of this, I have provided in Presidential Decree No. 190 that graduates of the course in National Security Administration are to be given preferential consideration in matters of appointments or promotions in government positions.

In recognition of the value of the rigorous course on the attitudes and skills of a National Security Administrator; I have issued Executive Orders Nos. 696 and 771 granting to the civilian graduates of the National Defense College, CESO Rank V or higher.

In the case of the graduates who are in the military service, I consider the successful completion of the National Security Administration course as a vital input in the overall education and training of top ranking military officers.

In the appointments to the top ranks of the Armed Forces I do not take into consideration mere excellence in military skills. The qualities of effective leadership, broad understanding of national and international affairs, vision, and commitment to the goals of the Republic are important considerations.

Today, we are faced with difficult times, but I am certain we can prevail over these, for as long as we are united as a people, and dedicated to our respective tasks.

I therefore urge you, as graduates of the National Defense College of the Philippines to dedicate yourselves to the service of our country, to use the tools gained in your training here to assist in the achievement of national development and the promotion of our national security.

And I urge also the National Defense College to continue to build up its effectiveness as a place of training future leaders and officers of our government and military services.

In closing, I extend to all of you, graduates of the 16th Regular Course of NDCP, your parents and loved ones, my warmest congratulations and my best wishes for your continued success.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.