Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Armed Forces Day

[Delivered at Camp Aguinaldo, December 21, 1978]

A New Ethic for the Soldier

IT WILL REMAIN a very high and special honor for me to serve as Commander-in-Chief of this corps of gallant officers and men, especially at this time of renewal and self-strengthening in our country.

It is my privilege to be able to extend congratulations to the entire corps, and of course, especially to the awardees of today’s grants and citations for courage, daring, efficiency and service to our country. I did not realize that this year, 1978, 33 years after the occasion, I would have the distinction and the honor of awarding a medal to one of the officers of the Armed Forces who certainly risked his life to help me out of a tight situation in my escape from Manila in August 1944. Allow me, therefore, to personally extend my gratitude to a comrade in Bataan and the underground, the former Chief of Staff, General Alfredo Santos.

I think it speaks well of the Armed Forces that it should now act on a sworn statement that I submitted way-back in 1946. This is also found in some of the posthumous awards for those who died in the battles of 1973, 1974, 1975, especially the officers and men who fought in the South. To each and everyone of them go my gratitude as representative of the entire Filipino people.

The challenges of our time are great and demanding. It is even greater an honor because all of our soldiery today has fully distinguished themselves in service to people and country.

Six years have now passed since the clouds of crisis and rebellion forced the leadership of our country to call forth martial law in defense of our Republic. Six years have already passed since in the very eye of turmoil, I summoned our Armed Forces to secure the ramparts of our beleaguered Republic to enforce the peace and justice of our laws and to lay the foundations for a sweeping effort of national reform and transformation.

One remembers well the starting point of our New Society because in that hour of decision many of you in civilian life as well as in the military were called to give generously of themselves, and many responded with the best they had to give. Many of them are no longer with us. For them, too, our deep and sad thoughts today even as we celebrate.

Within our Armed Forces the crisis government immediately found a loyal and committed ally who shared with us the vision of a new society rising in our land, a vision that goes back all the way to the years of war, the years of the underground, the years of liberation, and even before that, to our patriots and heroes who fought throughout the centuries for our liberation. You matched us in the idealism of our goals, in the enthusiasm of our efforts, and in the purity of our vision for the future. A leader could not have asked for a better army to carry forward the flag of reform and change in our country.

True to the steadfast and dedicated efforts that we have exerted together, we have achieved much in the interval of six years.

A time of calm, security and confidence has arrived upon our people during these years, such that as we move today to receive the blessings of the Christmas season, we can all believe that they are indeed blessings for us to give and to receive.

No age of greatness has suddenly dawned upon us, but we can say in full confidence that our nation has not only survived; it has prospered. We can say that our present encourages us all to fresh strivings and expectations, and our thoughts are lifted by the vision of the kind of nation we can become.

In all this, I sense only one danger, one peril to our national community. It is the danger of complacency, of too much comfort and forgetfulness. It is the danger of relapse into obliviousness to the efforts demanded of us all. It is the danger of overconfidence.

Now, more than ever, we are called towards a renewal of the faith that powered our early programs of reform.

We should always return from time to time to the very beginnings and roots of our common crusade, in order that we can cast off the sometimes narcotic effects that come with the exercise of authority and power,, and the terrible complacency that all too often overtakes achievement. Today, therefore, on the occasion of your renewal of loyalty to the Constitution and to the Commander-in-Chief as symbolic of the nation, of our people and our Republic, I come to you with a new mission. You and I have a new mission and that mission is to refurbish afresh our crusade for change.

I would say that this renewal should come at least every half decade in any kind of government. Every five years, we must return to the initial purity and idealism and enthusiasm of our New Society. For only under its shade can we truly decipher the correctness of national directions, and the true measure of our contributions to it.

More than five years have already passed, and what we perceived during the past years as the signs of weariness and indolence are symptoms of the erosion of ideals. The time for renewal and reaffirmation is long overdue; and so I say to you now, it is time that we resharpen our tools, that we heed once more those bold words calling us “to strive for greatness.”

This is the essential spirit of the current movement astir within our country. This is the reason for our present efforts to reorient, to remotivate and to reeducate our entire body politic — the soldier, the civil servant, and the citizen.

Speaking mainly for the moment of the self-renewal demanded of our soldiery, I would say that the time is meet to turn our attention to the establishment of new and higher standards for the soldier, such that when he lives up to them, he may thereby contaminate others in society with the same zeal, the same idealism and fervor — things which usually pall or weaken with the passage of the years.

I will say again to you that being a soldier is standing vigil over many things. It is a vigil over the peace and stability of our Republic. It is a vigil over the program of development throughout our country. It is also finally a vigil over our honor and our ideals so that in our dynamic push forward as a people, we shall never forget what we most cherish and believe in.

Today, there is reason to say that more than anybody else, it is the soldier on whom we must depend. It is true and there is reason to say that the security situation in our country is good, though we must be wakeful to a number of residual cares.

The secessionist rebellion in the South has diminished, but it continues to pose a threat to national security. The combination of sustained police action and policy of attraction has resulted in the overall weakening and fragmentation of the rebellion and secessionism.

Similarly, the threat posed by the local communist movement is well under control. Our Armed Forces have sustained the drive against this insurgency, and today anti-government activities are limited to a few occasional disturbances in remote localities.

These achievements in the realm of peace and security owe much to the fortitude and dedication of our military and police forces which have worked in concert with government development workers. They are the outcome of a resolute policy that is at once compassionate and firm.

The external aspect to national security may appear at first to have been altered by certain developments within Asia and in the world.

Manifestly, our attention is drawn to such important developments as the forthcoming normalization of U.S.-China relations this coming year, to the treaty of friendship between China and Japan, to the intense jockeying for position among the powers in our part of the world, and to the disturbing conflicts that have regrettably arisen among Asian nations in the socialist bloc.

It is part of your vigil that we review from time to time our perspectives on international developments, so that never again will this nation pursue a course abroad contrary to what national pride and self-interest may demand. The assessment of these new developments, whatever may be the favorable results of such developments, the fact remains that we in the Philippines must continue to rely upon our own strength.

The same must also be said about the international economic climate as a whole and the climate for economic effort at home — for in this area rests also the chances for stability and security of our country. Again and again, we must remind ourselves that there is an umbilical relationship between national security and national development, and there is no security to be found where the policy is restive and deprived.

Under the impending shadow, therefore, of new increases in oil prices, and no doubt of new international economic pressures, we must renew our vigil over the economic development and reform effort.

For our armed forces as a whole, I would say that the present period requires us to undertake a reexamination in many areas, consonant with these developments.

It is first of all fitting that we undertake now a reexamination of the concepts, premises and assumptions of our defense planning and preparations.

A consensus will have to be crystallized in regard to the security situation, external and internal, under which our armed forces may be possibly involved in order to establish a firm direction for our defense preparation and to relate it realistically to the emerging security situation in this part of the world.

It was in line with the foregoing that I recently directed the Ministry of Defense and the AFP to undertake measures to place the country’s defense posture on a realistic footing, enhance its self-reliant posture and to improve its efficiency.

It is possible that these new developments will allow the country in the near future to concentrate security efforts on the immediate task of reducing the internal threat and liquidating the conflict in the South justly and honorably. It will also allow the AFP to participate with greater effectiveness in helping the process of normalization and development.

Above all, in (he review of the country’s defense planning and preparation, we must not lose sight of the truth that the most important and indispensable element of the country’s defense preparedness are its human resources. Unless the quality of this specific resources is insured, the quality of such resources, whether in the civilian sector or in the military, will be for naught.

And so I come back to the theme with which I began: The establishment of a new ethic for our soldiery to live by.

I have also endorsed the move of the AFP in this direction, as exemplified by the TANGLAW program for a moral renaissance in the AFP with every man in uniform imbued with this sense of the importance of moral values and renewed in his commitment to the ideals of the New Society, we can lay the basis for the humanistic development of our armed forces and of our country. At the same time, we shall be able to make the AFP truly the armed forces of the people — an armed forces which any commander-in-chief would be truly proud to lead.

Once again to all of you, my congratulations. Well done. Keep it up. To you a salute from your Commander-in-Chief and the people of the Republic of the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].