Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Career Executive Service Alumni Association

[Delivered on February 4, 1982]

It is a pleasure to meet with my colleagues and fellow workers in government, on this occasion marking the first anniversary of your association.

It was a bit confused at first when I was told that this is the first anniversary for the Career Executive Service Program, for I well remember the occasion when the program was launched. I was the guest of honor then, and that was nearly a decade ago. But Minister Dumlao assures me that there has been no mistake: your alumni association was just belatedly formed, and it is the association’s founding day which we observe today.

You remember the saying, “better late than never,” so that is what I will say of the formation of your association, and in that same spirit I eagerly join you for this anniversary observance.

You constitute a vital cog in the government service, to whom we look for efficiency and competence in the administration of government policies and programs.

It is not always realized that for the effective functioning of government you need basically two elements to work well together, politics on the one hand which organizes powers and shapes public policy; and you need on the other what is called “bureaucracy” or “administration” which is the process of executing public policies after legislators and politicians have hammered them out.

In our country, the shaping of public policy is a very visible thing; but the execution of policy, once it passes from the hands of ministers to the multitude of units in our government system, becomes a veritable blur.

And when I think of this, I think sometimes of an old complaint from one among your ranks, who shall go unnamed and who said: “our ministers have all the glamor, but we in the middle levels of the service get only the flak, especially when things don’t work out very well.”

It was mainly because of this that modern representative governments developed the concept of a career service to man the ramparts of the government bureaucracy, and to complement the decision-making role of the cabinet ministers which logically must be a reflection of the political beliefs and goals of the incumbent leadership. This is so in the United Kingdom and the Republic of France, where you have two of the most effective models of government bureaucracy working at its best, though the political situation itself has often been visited by whirlwinds. And when we speak of inefficiency and instability of government in the less developed countries, we are finally pointing to a very basic failing: the failure to mold a government bureaucracy that is effective, competent, and free of domination by politics.

These considerations led us to establish the Development Academy of the Philippines as a training ground for our government’s corps of officers and supervisors. And specifically, the academy developed the career executive service development program to retrain and tool our deputy ministers and bureau directors, who are so important to the execution of policy in practically every ministry and agency of government.

Now several years after the launching of the C.E.S. Program, we can not be in doubt that it has produced results. At the very least, it has graduated over a thousand of you who constitute this association. Hopefully, your graduation from the program has also meant some kind of new energy and greater capability in the administration of government policies and programs.

And it is in this latter light, that I would like now to focus my remarks at this commemorative occasion on a vital government policy and program, and the role that you have to play in it. I refer to our Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran movement.

I need not discuss here anymore the various policy considerations and objectives that led us to the formulation of this major national program. It will suffice to state here that the Kilusan is critical to the creation of employment opportunities and the promotion of productive economic activities at the level of our local communities. We see in the K.K.K. not merely a timely response to the problems and anxieties of the hour, but a long-term answer to the underdevelopment of our rural sector.

We have framed the policy. We have blueprinted the program. We have worked upon the organizational structure for this all-encompassing movement.

The test before us now is to make it work.

As a national movement, the K.K.K. involves practically every agency and ministry of government, as well as the chain of local governments throughout the country. There is a role for every unit to play; and there is an equally indispensable role for the private sector to perform.

But there is a basic danger to every big program which we must guard against. This is the tendency to presume that because all are involved, one can safely be oblivious or negligent about his part in the program. This is the danger that in the vision of the forest, we may not perceive the role of every tree in forming the greenery.

In all honesty, it must be said now that the starting thrusts of the K.K.K. have been mainly the efforts so far of a few sectors of the bureaucracy who have worked aggressively to get the program going. Support from the rest of the service has been more rhetorical than real.

Let us also say that there are a great number of people in the bureaucracy, including possibly the many who are now here gathered, who have not yet warmed up to the idea that the K.K.K. is the priority development program of the national government.

I do not know how to put this in more emphatic terms, but regardless of what agency you represent, no one among you can circumvent accountability in the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran. All of us, no matter how defined our official functions may be, will account for our participation, or lack of it, in this common effort to promote national productivity.

I am glad that at this point in time, there is no significant problem that has yet arisen out of the initial jolt of energy in the implementation of the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran. However, I view these initial efforts as nothing more than the planting of a good seed.

At this point, the test of your worth as career government executives begins.

We have reached the point when we must assess each other frankly, both as friends and as public servants. In this assessment, we need to measure our participation, individually, as a government official aggressively implementing the K.K.K. Program; and collectively, as a team working to galvanize the people and the bureaucracy in the sustained implementation of the national livelihood program.

I understand that your organization, the Career Executive Service Development Program Alumni Association, has a chapter in each of the 13 regions of the country.

I would like to see your association go into the one-team concept, eliminating that curse of civil service—the red tape—in the process of energizing our government offices in whatever integrated regional development approaches you may formulate to ensure the successful implementation of the K.K.K.

There are innumerable ways whereby government agencies and units can get involved. A cursory review alone of the various program prototypes for K.K.K. projects, and the many aspects of the program, shows how every agency of government can provide inputs and support to the program. Our ministries and agencies in the social development sector can be engaged in harnessing and enhancing the capabilities of communities and social sectors to participate productively. Our general government ministries—justice, defense, information, foreign affairs—can be involved in creating conditions for the proper understanding of the movement at home and the necessary support of it abroad, especially in the vital aspect of creating markets. And our economic ministries and agencies logically must be involved in this movement which forms an essential part of our national development strategy.

Clarifying how such involvement can be turned into productive endeavors is the role I think of our ministers and the middle levels of managers in our government bureaucracy. You have to frame the strategy for your specific involvement, and once that is crystallized, you must ensure the proper execution of your K.K.K. support projects.

The role of government in the Kilusan is essentially that of coordination, monitoring, and supervision, from national to local level. The role of the private sector is of turning the movement into entrepreneurial activities of production and gainful employment.

We look to the entrepreneurial spirit resident in every individual and community as the essential ingredient that will make the K.K.K. come alive. For if that spirit cannot be raised, the Kilusan would fail. If government itself must undertake the individual projects, there would be no sense in calling it a movement, and no need for the Kilusan at all. It would be a bureaucratic program altogether.

We know however that our people and our local communities do not lack desire or will to engage in activities that will promote their welfare. What they need is guidance and assistance, and this is what we in government are pledged to provide: assistance in financing, assistance in technical requirements, assistance in determining the feasibility of projects, assistance in selecting projects that will truly benefit the enterprise and the community.

When I say now that you in the career executive service are indispensable to the success of the Kilusan, I am specifically saying that you constitute the force of government support to K.K.K. participants—that only by your own active involvement, can we begin to redeem the pledges and promises we have made in this all-important movement.

So I appeal to you now to work not individually but together in answering this call to action.

And I appeal also to your association to lead in bringing this about.

Through your Association President, Deputy Minister Dumlao, we will monitor henceforth your program of activities.

All this really brings us to the fundamental principle that underpins the successful work of government. It is that every government must have both of leadership and management. James Macgregor burns put it very well when he wrote that leadership is essentially concerned with “goals rather than methods, change rather than stability, context rather than process, innovation rather than routine, on creativity rather than adaptation.” The government bureaucracy is concerned with the reverse: it looks to the efficient execution of policy already shaped and programs already formulated, and to keeping the machine of government running and in tune with the directions provided by the national leadership.

Our work is complementary, and essential to each other. Within the framework of the K.K.K., the tie is crucial. Within the framework of our whole government, the bond is a matter of success or failure.

Let us therefore make of this occasion an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to our respective roles in government, and let us view the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran as a national program in which all of us are being tested. And let us pray and work so that we will pass the test.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.