Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the FEU Law Alumni Association

[Delivered on May 27, 1981]

It is a welcome respite for me to take time out from the demands of a political campaign, and join this convocation of my fellow members of the bar, and pay homage to the College of Law of the Far Eastern University and its alumni.

It is not easy of course to dissociate the profession of law from the concerns of politics and government, for indeed it has been well said that “law is reason in the art of government.”

Still there is a view of the law that stands apart from the passing passions of a political campaign, that goes beneath the clash of personalities and parties in an electoral contest to discover the power and vitality of ideas relating to the organization and governance of human society. And it is to this that it should like to address myself this evening in paying homage to the traditions of the FEU College of Law.

My remarks will invite you to undertake a short review and analysis of the elusive ideal of “democracy”, which in the political and legal traditions of our Country are fundamental to the future of national life, and then to examine this ideal as it relates to reality and aspiration in our country.

A MANY-SIDED CONCEPT

There are few things in the world of politics so overlaid with many meanings and emotional connotations as the word “democracy” many schools and systems, as different we say as night and day, claim it as descriptive of their goals. Contradictory realities all too often pass for the word “democracy” in our world today.

To us lawyers, it is all too apparent that democracy in this contest of ideas is being used in many different senses. And it does not necessarily mean that the idea of democracy is simply being appropriated for political ends.

Our ideas and definitions of democracy can probably be grouped into two major concepts. On the one hand there is the school of thought which views democracy as simply meaning a particular form of government in which the people are the source of political power, in which they exercise that power through their duly elected representatives in government. On the other, there is the school of thought which views democracy as a philosophy of life in human society, motivating and guiding the members of that society in their political, economic, social and cultural affairs. The first would identify democracy as principally residing in the form of government and the character of political life. The other sees it as virtually a way of life describing the entire society and the relationships of men in that society.

The first thing that must be acknowledged is that these dominant concepts in modern-day thinking about “democracy” derive from a common fount of ideas in the Greek City states of the ancients.

“Democracy” is a word that is Greek in lineage, and to the Greeks it meant the “rule by the multitude.” At the heart of the concept is the belief that a truly democratic nation must constantly strive towards “the good life” for all the people, must aim at the maximum of individual liberty consistent with the general security, order, and welfare, must provide the widest possible opportunities for all, to the end that men may become nearly perfect in their human personality, and must provide for the active participation of the largest number of citizens in the processes of government.

The predicates, the assumptions, and the postulates of the central idea of democracy, are that the people are capable of governing themselves as reasonable, intelligent, and civilized human beings under a regime of liberty and equality.

THE BASIC ASSUMPTIONS

There are certain propositions which political scientists have spelled out as lying at the core of the democratic goals of life.

The first of these basic assumptions is that man is a rational being, capable of solving his problems and improving his lot by the application of reason. The essence of the democratic process is government by consent, resulting from free, temperate and enlightened discussion. Only reasonable men can participate in the kind of discussion from which emerges the truth they stand for. The decisions of democracy as distinguished from “monocracy,” are reasonable and responsible decisions made by right thinking and rational men.

A second closely connected assumption of the democratic theory is that man is a moral being, considerate of the rights of others, and able to balance the social good against his own personal interest. This postulate implies that man’s action must be based upon standards rising above the level of pure selfishness and of gross materialism.

The third proposition assumes human equality, which means political equality, but not the actual equality of human beings with respect to physical and intellectual endowments. Democracy does not aspire to an impossible and hardly attractive idea of equality wherein every man is equal in all respects to every other man. The emphasis is on equality in certain fields, equality before the law, equality in voting, equality in opportunity, and equality in dignity.

THE DEMOCRATIC THESIS

From these premises springs the singular democratic thesis that where men are rational, moral, and equal, man will find the means not only to self-improvement but also the means to create a vital and progressive society of human beings. It follows in the democratic thesis that social change does not have to be violent. It can be painless. As man becomes more rational, he is better able to control and guide the technological and ideological factors of social change which would produce the society and government he desires. The control and guidance of these factors are in accord with policies democratically formulated through free and rational discussion. The will of the majority embodies a considered and reasoned decision. By its reasonableness, the consent of all the citizens is won, and all will then cooperate in carrying out the decision.

In this perspective, democracy is not revolutionary but fundamentally evolutionary. Its philosophy abhors violence, and to advocate it is to confess that man is not rational. The true democrat believes that evolutionary gains are won by stages and by persuasion. Ancient and modern history has shown that the convulsive results of revolution are frequently negated by counter-revolution and reaction. Progress is lasting when it is peaceful rather than coercive.

RULES BY THE MAJORITY

It follows also from this basic thesis that the best way to decide major issues of public policy is to put forward such questions to the people for decision. Since men can never be expected to endorse one particular policy or program of action, democracy involves majority decision-making either by the voters themselves directly or by their elected representatives indirectly.

In the modern democratic state, instruments of self-government can be availed of which express the people’s will indirectly. Thus, legislators, executives and administrators can make decisions in the name of the voters to whom they are responsible for their public acts. The principle of self-government through majority decisions does not always require consultation of the electorate on every minor question. But in momentous issues which affect the destiny of a nation, modern democracies avail of the reasonable use of the referendum to establish basic fundamental questions of policy intended to guide not only the present but the future generations.

Self-government means government by consent. Obviously consent cannot always be absolutely unanimous, but the more popular the mandate then the more democratic is the society that results from that mandate.

The major task of democratic leaders is to establish a formula whereby the essence of popular government is preserved by reserving for the citizen’s direct determination matters both vital and basic, and delegating to their representatives matters either too trivial or too complex.

THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMAN PERSON

Thirdly, the democratic idea of rule by the many recognizes as basic to its fulfillment and practice the freedom of an individual or group from external restraint or restrictive conditions imposed by other individuals, groups, government, or society. Liberty, however, in a democratic society is relative and not absolute. Because human beings have to be organized to become a society, the individual in society is not absolutely free to do exactly as he wishes at all times and in all circumstances. Absolute liberty will produce anarchy which is the complete opposite of genuine freedom. Liberty implies restraint. In a democracy, this means social self-restraint exercised whenever necessary for the security, safety and welfare of the community. It is liberty in accordance with the will of the majority and based upon personal and group responsibility.

From this derives what must be considered the major problem of every democracy: the reconciliation of liberty with authority. The never-ending task of democracy is always to strike a balance between liberty and authority, and such a balance is ever new and ever changing, depending upon the problems and circumstances that confront us at any given time.

The ultimate purpose of democracy is the advancement of man, the vindication of human dignity. The state is not an end in itself but only a means towards the realization of the potentialities of man. Since man has mind, body and soul, individual fulfillment must be intellectual, material and spiritual. In pursuing its ends, democracy must always use democratic methods. In the pursuit of democratic ends, government must use democratic means. Methods, ends, and means are inseparable since the most basic concepts of democracy—liberty, equality and popular sovereignty—are means in themselves as well as ends.

We cannot save democracy by destroying it. There must be frequent re-examination of the fundamental articles of democratic faith. We cannot identify democracy only with institutions, we must always identify it with concepts. Democratic institutions alone and by themselves do not guarantee democracy. Nations must develop democratic traditions based upon their own experiences in self-government and in the creation of their own governmental machineries. And development is a process of evolution.

When slow outmoded procedures which may have been eminently satisfactory in the past are no longer adequate to answer the demands of the present, when they fall out of step with modern times, they must give way to effective and expeditious techniques without abandoning the essentials of the democratic processes.

The logic of democratic theory does not in here in the creation of a monolithic structure for all societies aspiring to be democratic. It does not destroy what is peculiar and singular to a people. It simply provides a pattern by which men may organize themselves, and a fund of concepts whereby they can fulfill themselves.

DEMOCRACY AND THE NEW SOCIETY

On the basis of the fundamental concepts I have compared, it is material to ask what the new society has accomplished in the realm of the theory and the reality of democracy as a form of government and as a philosophy of life.

Have we established a system of government where decisions are predicated upon reasonable discussion and popular consent?

Have we established an equitable balance between liberty and authority?

Have we established necessary and meaningful changes by peaceful evolution?

To all these questions we emphatically answer in the affirmative. And we say look at the record.

Our people have shown themselves intellectually, physically and spiritually capable of self-government, capable of participating in free, temperate, and enlightened discussion. Decisions on vital and fundamental issues have been made directly by the entire people in three plebiscites for the adoption of constitutional amendments. The referendum has been extensively used as means of discovering public thought and sentiment on basic public issues. The effectiveness of the interaction between the Batasang Pambansa, the president and the cabinet in the formulation and implementation of basic national policies has demonstrated the palpable reality of representative democracy in the Philippines. The local affairs of the people are decided by popular consent in the deliberative forums of the Barangay Councils, and the “Sanggunians” of our towns, cities and provinces.

The responsiveness of government to the voice of the people is effectively maintained in the latest charter amendments, which provide for change in government by a prime minister and a cabinet, and for the resolution of fundamental issues by the people through the dissolution of the Batasang Pambansa.

Freedom and equality have been preserved, recognized and vindicated not only as human rights but as social obligations. Liberty has flourished in this country, and was undimmned and undiminished even under martial law. Hence, while we welcome the recent U.S. Congressional resolution commending us for the lifting of martial law, we hasten to stress that the people never at any time lost the freedoms guaranteed by our constitution.

We did take steps to balance liberty with authority—and the balance was always the result of the problems that confronted our people.

By the judicious use of the Commander-in-Chief provisions of the 1935 as well as the 1973 Constitution, constitutional authoritarianism was conceived and developed as a valid and effective mode for a crisis government, consistent with the supremacy of civilian over military authority, in an atmosphere of peace rather than violence. Juridical concepts have been so developed in this political experiment that our experience has shown the efficacy of administering and dispensing justice by the concurrent action of military and civil courts to effectively overcome the threats to national security and public order.

Under the new society, meaningful thrusts have been made towards the democratization and humanization of justice. Mechanisms for free legal aid to the poor have been organized, systematized, and coordinated through the Citizens Legal Assistance Office of the Ministry of Justice, the legal agencies of the Ministry of Agrarian Reform and the Ministry of Labor, and the various chapters of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines. The grassroots level of dispensing justice through the conciliation system in the Barangay Courts has considerably eased the dockets of our trial courts. The probation system has kept out of penitentiaries some 8,000 convicted law violators who would have otherwise suffered the consequences of incarceration and who have instead continued to live in our communities under the care and guidance of highly trained probation officers and social workers.

And I will say finally that in this effort to preserve the reality of democratic processes during the period of Martial Law, and to advance and promote them in our present transition to full Parliamentary Democracy, the legal profession in our country has been an indispensable partner of orderly change and growth.

We make no claims of perfection in our democratic institutions and in what we have we won in the political sphere. But we do say that if our society today is to be judged by the tests and measurements of the democratic ideal, we have not only kept faith with the basic faith of democracy, we have succeeded in giving it life and roots in our lives.

The dawning presidential elections form a crucial part of the National Movement towards full Parliamentary Democracy. It crowns the period of our struggle to finally give reality and substance to the forms of democratic government that have for so long held up illusions to our people and failed them. It will open for us a new stage for democracy in our country.

DEMOCRACY AS A DYNAMIC IDEAL

One final note before I close. Democracy as form of government and as a political philosophy is a dynamic idea. It is not to be imagined that its reality is to be found merely in the character of political institutions, though institutions are fundamental. It is not to be purely equated with concepts, though concepts are essential.

It must find its life in the realities and circumstances of a society claiming to be democratic, find itself in the currents of life in a society, and be realized as in the Christian Ethic, “by its fruits.” in this way do we truly separate societies that only invoke its name, and those that truly live its truths.

It is in the very dynamism of life, in the flux of events, that we must ever be ready to affirm and sustain the vitality and creativity of our democratic institutions. Inert, befuddled, democratic ideals wither faster than we know. Only in active exercise and maintenance of democratic process as a means to the fulfillment of social goals, can we really say that democracy is not only a form of government in our country, but in fact a philosophy and way of life.

On this point, I will emphasize the importance of the profession of law in creating and strengthening the democratic culture in our country. Just as it has been a fact that the legal profession—the bench and the bar—have been a vital factor in the observance of democratic practices and processes during the period of martial law as well as in the building of stability in our government, so must it serve us now as a creative agent for strengthening and widening the horizons of democracy in our land.

The function of the law is not agitation but the establishment of reason and order. It has been well said that we should never be too hasty in despairing about “the slowness of the law, its massive impersonality, its insistence upon proceeding according to settled rules.” for in these inhere its service as an institution in human society.

But once the times change, once needs and realities adjust in society, and men at last decipher the directions in which they must move, the law also changes. And in changing, it then given permanence and majesty to the new in human life. This is the time-honored way whereby law enable men in community to process the sense of the unity of their past, their present, and their future.

By training and tradition, our men of the law have always known this. They have channeled the minds of our people into ideological orientations peculiar to Philippine custom tradition, philosophy, theory, system and culture. They have successfully fostered the climate conducive to the rule of law in the forums of advocacy and adjudication. And it is well known that in this twin process of conserving and innovating the alumni of the FEU College of Law have contributed much, both in service within government and outside it.

Tonight I am truly please to be able pay tribute to your community for your help and counsel during all these years of my presidency. But in expressing my gratitude, allow me also to ask once more for your support—to join your hands with mine in establishing a democracy worthy of our dreams as a people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.