Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the launching of Shari’ah Training

[Released on March 12, 1982]

We cannot overemphasize the high importance that must be ascribed to the tasks that you enter into today. Almost five years have passed since we promulgated the Code of Muslim Personal Laws under P.D. 1083 as an earnest of our immutable commitment to the enhancement of the way of life of our Muslim countrymen in the south. This day, despite the expected as well as unforeseen problems in the implementation and administration of the code, we have arrived at a substantial step closer to its operationalization.

We are fully cognizant of the difficulties that lie in the path of this historical undertaking, but it is an effort that we cannot shirk if we are to be true to the objectives of national unity and if we are to pay more than lip service to the Constitutional principles of religious freedom and respect for cultural diversity. It may well be that much time will pass before we succeed in perfecting the institution of the Code but this we shall gladly undertake in order that our Muslim brothers may partake more fully of the mainstream of our national life. For this is a responsibility we cannot turn back from and to its successful establishment we are committed to provide the fullest extent of government support.

To the lawyer in me with my background in traditional Roman Law this enterprise which seeks no less than the integration of Islamic legal precepts into the structure and tradition of our national jurisprudence is certainly fascinating study both for the new possibilities that are occasioned by it as well as for the forseeably problemmatical aspects of actual implementation. However, I am confident that our pool of brilliant legal minds both Muslim and Christian, will be able to develop a new and mutually satisfactory system which provides for the cultural pluralism that is the essence of this endeavour and which at the same time holds true to the wisdom of the experience of our national law. There is a distinction to this historic undertaking, which you may take either as a challenge or a consolation, and this is that the Philippines may probably be the first country in the world with a Catholic or Christian majority that has chosen freely to take such a step. Certainly to me this endeavour represents a major effort towards substantiating our desire to rectify the errors of our history and the imbalances of the past in our relations with our Muslim brothers.

In a manner of speaking I envy you your principal role in this exciting new enterprise. It is given to few servants of the law to be involved in such a radical legal development in their lifetimes. It is my hope, however, that you will prove equal to the momentous tasks that lie before you. For certainly the training that you are now to undergo will determine to a great extent the vibrancy and the responsiveness of the code to the realities that it will have to face in the future.

But this training program is only the beginning. If the Code is to have lasting meaning in the lives of the communities it is ordained to serve, you must bring to it much more than what it presently contains. The Code encompasses what the experts believe to be the essential and the most important articles that govern Muslim personal and family life but such is the nature of Islamic Law that its proper interpretation requires more intimate knowledge of the two principal sources of Islamic Law — the Qur’an and the prophet’s Hadith . This too must be augmented by a wide acquaintance with contemporary legislation in other Muslim countries, a close study of the most important texts from the various Madhahib or schools of Islamic Law the ‘Ada or customary law, and the techniques of local and foreign Muslim jurists. Only with these preparations can you expect to do full justice to the honorable tasks that you are to undertake in the near future. I urge you therefore to look to these matters during this training experience and beyond.

It is on each of you that we have to rely to bring to our Muslim countrymen the sense of our deep and abiding concern for their welfare. Through the formal institution of the Shari’ah courts we commit ourselves to the preservation of their way of life even as with all our other development projects we wish to share with them the benefits of our unitary nationhood.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.