Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 6th anniversary of the New Society

[Delivered on September 21, 1978]

Report to the Nation

I HAVE JUST come from Rizal Park where hundreds of thousands of young men and women are participating in a ceremony that celebrates the completion of the sixth year of the New Society and the entry of our Republic into its seventh year of crisis government.

I am deeply moved by this demonstration of fealty as well as their affirmation of trust in the New Society.

And as we watch the glow of happiness on the faces of the men and women who have reason to celebrate today, I can’t help but remember the dire circumstances under which martial law was proclaimed six years ago.

If the last six years had been a test, it will be said that every peril had been thrown upon us, not only to measure our capabilities, our character as a people and our will as a nation, but also to frustrate our efforts. We have not succumbed; rather, we have prevailed. And today, we reach the end of the most critical six years of the existence of our Republic.

Words cannot explain the nature of the course we have had to travel, and the proof of the achievements of the New Society are not in words. The proof lies in the Filipino common man and what he feels — the man in the street, in the fields, in the factories. What is he today? What does he have not only in material possessions, and not only in the primate city of the Republic? What are his values? What does he believe in? What is his faith? What are his convictions? Does he feel he is an important part of our national effort? Does he not have a little more pride, a little more confidence in himself? Does he not have a stronger faith in the future of his country and, for that matter, in the future of his own family? This then is the proof, the final proof that we have changed, or that we are changing — and changing for something better, reaching for the bright and brave new world that we dream of.

On this sixth anniversary of martial law, it will again be asked: Has this not yet sapped our energy? Are we about to give up our struggle in midstream, to let the ship of state drift in the currents, having already gone this far and seeing that the course before us will not probably be as perilous as what we have just passed?

Today, therefore, I have come to speak to the millions of Filipinos who have a stake in the New Society. Let me assure our people and everyone that just as we did not shirk our duty to meet the challenge in 1972, when the nation tottered on the brink of total collapse, so shall we not now hesitate to carry on the task ordained by the success of our efforts and the tasks that remain to be finished. We shall carry on and we shall carry on without fear, hesitation or doubt. The necessity of martial law will fade away; it must fade away in the ordinary run of things. If we are true to ourselves, we must ultimately do away with martial law. But the imperative to continue to build the New Society must and will remain.

In the six years since the proclamation of martial law in 1972 and the establishment of the New Society, we have achieved much for the Republic.

We have prevented our territory from being dismembered, our Republic from being subverted, and the public order from being overturned. We have maintained the sovereignty of the Republic of the Philippines over its territory; but more than anything else, we have continued to strengthen that Republic for present and future generations.

We have rescued the government from the political warlords and from oligarchy. We have set it free at last to attend effectively to the immemorial problems of poverty and social inequality.

We have organized the people, especially the poor, in their communities and in their sectors; and we have provided them with the organizational means to assert control over their public affairs and, more than this, to participate in the moulding of national affairs.

We have increased the public resources and massively redirected them to the poor in the rural areas and the underprivileged in the urban areas, so that economic opportunities and the means to fulfill basic needs may become more available to them.

We have opened up the councils of government to the demands of our people. Never before in the entire history of our country has government been as sensitive to the lowest of the low among the population of the Philippines.

We have generated and institutionalized a national capability for managing the rate and direction of our national development, and for carrying out development programs as planned to envisioned results.

We have achieved a realignment of the structure of our foreign relations in consonance with our domestic goals and needs, and by this means we have enhanced our capability in securing our national security and for acquiring new resources for national development.

High in the list of achievements, and deserving special mention, is the interim Batasang Pambansa. This year is the year of the IBP and the establishment of the legislative branch of our government. This transitional representative assembly is a signal measure of how much we have achieved in improving the national condition and ameliorating the severity of the present crisis. It also demonstrates how much confidence has been restored in the workings of the normal political process.

But the Batasang Pambansa is more than a milestone in our climb from the valley of crisis. It is the path itself, the way by which we intend to reach the final summit.

In this way lies not only the end to martial law but the continuous process of national reform and national development which the New Society represents.

What we have done in the last six years, we have done by exercising the emergency powers and command concentrated in the hands of the President. What we must begin to do from now on is to continue the great strife for the New Society in the normal workings of our political institutions, especially of the legislative branch of our government.

I say again that the necessity for martial law will fade away in time, but the imperative to build the New Society must and will remain.

By constitutional mandate, it is the task of the Batasang Pambansa to pave the way for the establishment of a full parliamentary system in our country, unless the Constitution should be amended. By historic circumstance, it is also the IBP’s mission to establish a national political tradition that will make the reform and development began six years ago today permanent and a continuing one.

It is, therefore, primarily to the members of the interim Batasang Pambansa that I address this words about the tasks before the nation today.

Foremost in the national agenda is the question of our political normalization, and how we can effectively negotiate this period of transition in our national life.

I have spoken of the Batasang Pambansa as the way towards the future, and yet it can only serve as a guide even if it fully draws and inspires the confidence and participation of all our people in the task of legislation. In line with fostering popular confidence and participation, it is, therefore, important that we now fill the need for more regional participation in legislation, or more precisely, more popular participation in legislation through the creation perhaps of regional legislative committees composed of members of the Batasang Pambansa belonging to a region. We must open the very process of legislation to the advice and consent of our people. We must do away with the old ways of a Congress that was of an elite, insensitive and impervious to the desires and wishes of the Filipino people.

While our present system admits of public participation in lawmaking through the device of committee hearings, I believe there is so much more to be gained by opening the legislative process to the counsel of these regional committees. For there is no greater need today than that legislation effectively respond to the needs of regions and communities, and that it acknowledge the specific concerns of the regions, even while national public policy is dominant and paramount.

Our goal, let us be clear, is the harmonious and balanced development of the country, elevating the weak to the status of the strong, the attainment by the poor of self-reliance and dignity, and the development of our long-neglected rural communities. To this, legislation must ever be sensitive.

Also related to the matter of inspiring popular confidence, we in the Batasang Pambansa must strengthen our rules governing morality in public office. In particular, I commend to your attention the principle of self-restraint governing conflict of interests and the matter of the disclosure of assets and liabilities by every member of the Batasang Pambansa.

Our Cabinet ministers have already been asked to get rid of their membership in various boards, except those which have a direct relation to their ministerial responsibilities. In the same self-sacrificing spirit, every member of the Batasang Pambansa should now ask himself whether in the performance of his duties as a member of the Batasang Pambansa he does not violate the principle of conflict of interest. At their own instance, they should be able to ensure the integrity of the entire assembly.

Vital, too, is the matter of formalizing the existence of a single majority party, as required by sound parliamentary practice. It is my intention, as the leader of the dominant group and party, to bring this to a head and to seek a decision at a party caucus before the end of the year. This is a matter of high priority and it needs the urgent consideration of the leadership and membership of the Kapisanan ng Bagong Lipunan as well as the Nacionalista Party. For this purpose, the KBL and the Nacionalista Party will meet in caucus and resolve this issue soon.

All the issues have to do with the activities of the Batasang Pambansa and its members, and they are of crucial importance to the establishment of a tradition for parliamentary government which we seek to achieve. They are critical issues in the political transition in which we are engaged, and indicative, depending on how we respond to them, of the kind of success we shall have in the political normalization effort.

For the most part, our political agenda would seem to lie in these questions of process, but for certain parts of the country we must go beyond this. I refer specifically to the status of the two regions referred to as Muslim-inhabited in Southwestern Mindanao, particularly Sulu, Tawi-Tawi and Basilan, which have been promised autonomy, and where a plebiscite has granted the organization of a semi-autonomous regional government.

I believe now, in the light of developments within these regions and in the rest of the country in the past year or two, that the time is right to accelerate the efforts to formalize such a semi-autonomous or autonomous charter for the two regions in the South, and to prepare the way for the election of their officials.

I, therefore, call upon the Batasang Pambansa to immediately act on this very urgent problem.

May I again say that it is well to remember that two years ago, in 1977 actually, we submitted the issue of autonomy and related matters to the residents of these regions in a formal plebiscite. And their overwhelming verdict, as it rejected the leadership of the Moro National Liberation Front, affirmed their desire for limited autonomy within the sovereignty and territorial jurisdiction of the national government.

For very clear reasons obtaining from the resurgence of hostilities in the area, we have not been able to fully implement the verdict of the plebiscite. But now it is my conviction that the time is opportune to fulfill the mandate of the people in these regions in Mindanao, Basilan, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi; and that the Batasang Pambansa, as the seat of government, must now pave the way for the fulfillment of the wishes of the people in those two regions.

I take this opportunity to assure this assembly and our people that we need not fear the present situation in Mindanao and Sulu. We should not fear that such a situation will not allow the orderly implementation of the plebiscite results. And I shall forthwith describe the national situation in the sphere of peace and security.

In Mindanao today, the situation is under control. It can only get worse if additional support should come from outside the country to the secessionist rebels. The government is confident in meeting the challenge to our security. What we do face now is a seeming deterioration of the peace and order climate that we all know is a result of the conversion of operations by those who claim to be operating under the Moro National Liberation Front, to mounting terrorist tactics perpetrated by rebels, especially on civilians and law enforcement forces engaged in police action.

Our response to this of course is multi-pronged. It is an effort designed first to strengthen peace and order efforts in the area by police action; second, to organize civilian action against terrorists, and civilian participation in the protection of the villages; third, to strengthen the local government, which I have referred to in the matter of the organization of autonomous regional governments, and ultimately, the calling of elections so that the people in these regions may choose their own leaders; and fourth, to accelerate social and economic development throughout the troubled regions.

We have every faith that this initiative will succeed in fully stemming the terrorist activities in the South. It appears to me that a major effort now to organize the regional government in the area will contribute to the rapid stabilization of the two regions. Thereby, we should be able to strengthen the machinery of government throughout the troubled South, which for much of the history of the conflict has been a factor contributing to tension because of its ineffectiveness.

At the same time, we must slowly transfer to the residents in this region the responsibility for their peace, stability and progress.

If we can build effective and strong local governmental power in Southwestern Mindanao, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi, we can then say that we will be able to mount an initiative that will go beyond achieving peace and move towards fulfilling the promise of progress and development for the region.

Now about the rest of the country — here the peace and security situation is significantly better. I must say that our security goals have been enhanced by the visit here of Premier Pham Van Dong of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.

You are now aware of the agreements that have been entered into and the reiteration of the mutual pledges made by the two governments that fully reinforce our desire to live in peace with our neighbors in Southeast Asia, and to erect a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in the region. You are well aware that any disagreements between the two countries — any disagreements about boundaries or about territory would immediately be settled by peaceful negotiation in a spirit of friendship and cooperation.

It was also agreed and reiterated by our respective governments that neither Vietnam nor the Philippines will allow our territories to be utilized as starting points or launching pads for attacks or aggression against the other.

The other important point is that neither of the two governments, Vietnam and the Philippines, will support, encourage or initiate subversion in the other country.

You are well aware of the apprehension and the anxieties which have prevailed throughout Southeast Asia since the withdrawal of the American troops from Vietnam. You are well aware of the history of intransigence that marked the governments on what was formally referred to as the Indo-Chinese peninsula — the three governments of Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. You are well aware of the speculations as to the intentions of the Vietnamese. This was the reason for the effort we exerted to bring about some kind of an exchange of visits between the two heads of government or heads of state. You are well aware of the military capabilities of Vietnam, that today the Vietnamese infantry soldier is considered one of the world’s best. You are well aware of their capture of monumental amounts of weapons from the Americans in 1975, also of the differences in social ideology and political orientation between Vietnam and the other countries of Southeast Asia.

It was, therefore, my desire to bring about a definite arrangement in order that the two countries may be able to live in peace. And the visit here of Prime Minister Pham Van Dong certainly has broken the barrier of distrust and anxiety that has existed for so long in Southeast Asia.

I believe that with the agreements we have entered into, we can now anticipate a prolonged period of peace in Southeast Asia, during which the countries in this region may engage in internal economic and social development.

While regional developments will continue to exercise our national vigilance, the real problems, therefore, of national security lie immediately within, rather than outside our country. Insurgency will always be the challenge, and we will continue to deal with it, effectively and resolutely, in accordance with our long experience in this regard.

On the economy, I take this opportunity now to call your attention to various important projects which require the continuing and able support of the Batasang Pambansa and the entire machinery of government, as well as the support of our patriotic citizenry.

The first of our priority projects is our nationwide power expansion program, which must accelerate even faster than before. We are warned that possibly in five years there will be a limitation in the use of oil for energy. Right now, much of our sources of electric energy runs on oil. There is no denying the fact that if there were to be a limitation in the supply of oil, this would immediately paralyze not only industry but also agriculture and transport in the Philippines. This would not only be a situation that is unmanageable; it may be critical and fatal. Therefore, it is the national policy to upgrade the development of other sources of energy as the number one infrastructure priority of our country. This is the most important, for in its success lies our deliverance from this threat of energy crisis and the full acceleration of the national development effort.

So what does our energy program consist of? It consists of nothing less than the harnessing of nuclear, hydroelectric, geothermal, coal, solar and petroleum resources for national self-reliance in energy. Our accomplishments in the area overwhelmingly encourage greater exertions on our part, and in the coming year will see our power program enter new crucial phases of development.

Let us talk of the geothermal units. Many of us are unaware that by the end of this year, there will be sufficient energy produced by the geothermal plant in Tiwi, Albay, and that perhaps we can say we are beyond the experimental period in the utilization of volcanic steam for energy purposes. We intend to develop the geothermal sources in Bae in Laguna and the geothermal sources in Leyte, Negros, Mindanao, and all other areas where there may be usable volcanic steam.

At the same time, we are harnessing rivers and establishing multi-purpose dams, which while specifically hydroelectric in purpose will also help control floods and give us other sources of potable and irrigation water.

By February of next year or perhaps even at Christmastime this year, I am supposed to receive the first barrel of oil that will start to flow from the wells in Palawan.

It is our hope that there will be further efforts at exploration. We have now accelerated the program of exploration and drilling. Contracts for seismic tests have been entered into not only in the Palawan region but south of Palawan, east of Palawan and even in Manila Bay. It is the intention of government to now spend as much talent, energy and funds in the exploration for oil.

But in addition to oil, we must also locate and identify all gas deposits, identify and exploit our coal resources and move towards the conversion of various generators to the use of either bunker fuel or coal. The nuclear project is well under way. So, on power then is the new special emphasis in infrastructure development.

In agriculture, we have reached the point where we are now exporting rice. I have just authorized the exportation of some of our rice because our problem now is no longer producing rice; it is producing the warehouses in which to store the rice. At this time, the National Grains Authority has indicated that it has just about exhausted their cash that is available for their operations.

We have also asked the private sector to participate in the exportation of rice.

We are confident that national productivity will continue to increase, for our food production efforts are helped by the success of agricultural research and development being undertaken in our country. Also helping us is the internationally recognized and prestigious International Rice and Research Institute, which is engaged in rice experimentation.

Several years ago, I organized the Institute of Plant Breeding, which is now operational and working on various products, including corn, mongo, sorghum, sweet potato, cassava.

Incidentally, when Prime Minister Pham Van Dong was here, we discovered that the best peanut variety in Southeast Asia, which we are utilizing, comes from Vietnam. And instead of our helping him out, he started to help us out. So, we in turn have offered available facilities and resources to Vietnam.

We now have produced, for instance, mongo which grows in the shade of sugarcane and corn and, therefore, can be inter-cropped. We can produce 40 tons per hectare of cassava instead of the annual average of 10 tons per hectare. The mongo beans can produce two to three times the original harvest.

I also wish to announce the establishment of regional research centers attached to various regional or state universities. I have, before the session of the Batasang Pambansa, authorized the establishment of various universities. The plan is to establish a university in every region of the country. In addition to this, attached to these universities will be specialized research centers that will engage in scientific and applied research on the products of the region.

Take the example of Region 1. Attached to the state university there, which is named after my late father — since he was a graduate of that school — is the center for tobacco research, the center for cotton research, a center for garlic research and the center for onion research. In cotton, what have we found? They have just produced a variety that is much better than the best American variety known as the *’Delta Pine,” which produces 1,500 kilos per hectare of cotton over a period of 150 days. The new variety, that is not yet named because it is very new, produces not 1,500 kilos but 2,800 kilos per hectare! And over a period of 120 days, not 150 days!

These are examples of the kind of research that we must now go into in order that technology and science may help the economic and social development of our country.

These researches in rice, may I say, have two important aspects right now. On a suggestion that I made about a year ago, the International Rice and Research Institute is now trying to produce some kind of a variety of rice which would have the capability of legumes, that of nitrogen-fixing. What this means is that, as you know, the legumes produce or get nitrogen from the air and fix it within the plant so that the plant utilizes it and does not need any fertilizer. If we could transfer this quality to rice so that rice would not need any fertilizer, then we certainly would achieve a breakthrough for all the world. They are working on this, and I understand they have some kind of a variety that can fix nitrogen under favorable conditions amounting to about 20 kilograms of fertilizer per hectare. They are working on it, and we hope they will succeed.

The other objective is to infuse or to increase the percentage of protein in rice. You are well aware that our people have a deficiency in protein intake. Many of the varieties do have some kind of protein, 3 to 5 percent. Now, the IRRI has succeeded in increasing the protein content of some rice varieties up to 10 and 11 percent. But these varieties are rather non-prolific and, I understand, vulnerable to disease. So they still have to work on these projects. These are the projects which the Philippine government is supporting with funds from the budget as well as foreign borrowings.

We will continue to increase the available resources placed at the disposal of our scientists and researchers. There will be a continuing effort to improve production, to improve thereby our position in the world market. The sugar industry comes to mind in this regard. And remedial measures are being applied such as the diversification program and the use of the new variety, 6607, or what is often referred to as the Marcos variety only because I kept insisting that they continue with these researches, which produces two or three times more than the usual varieties. The United States, we hope, will ratify soon the International Sugar Agreement, which we pushed through in Geneva, which would somehow increase the price of sugar in the world market. Incidentally, the price of sugar is inching up. It reached a low of 5.8 cents per pound. It is now up to about 8.5 cents per pound, in anticipation of the ratification of the International Sugar Agreement.

To sustain this momentum, we need the able ministration of government and the readiness of our policies to provide what is needed either for continued growth or for meeting crises.

We look around us and see some deficiencies in the transportation communications sector. We must upgrade, expand and modernize our facilities. We must place special emphasis, for instance, on inter-island shipping and on a mass transit system in Metropolitan Manila. I have authorized the calling of bids for a mass transit system in Metropolitan Manila. I understand that the best system would be not subterranean but above the ground and on rails.

At the same time, it will be necessary to adopt a new approach to the traffic problems in the primate cities of the Philippines.

On the matter of communications, we are scheduled to inaugurate the use of the domestic satellite system. In fact, I think, we are now being covered by the domestic satellite system. By agreement with Indonesia, we are using the Indonesian Domestic Satellite for national TV broadcast. Right now, I understand I am being heard in Zamboanga, Cagayan de Oro, and, possibly, in all the other provinces of the country. This is the harbinger of a comprehensive and modern communications system in the country.

We must also look at the local water system. I say local, although the Metropolitan Water System, the Manila water system, is also facing new and more imponderable problems. This is the reason for the signing of the various loan agreements by the First Lady and Minister of Human Settlements with the World Bank as well as the Asian Development Bank. More and more, it will be necessary for the national government to exercise supervision over the local water districts.

In the industry sector, our attention must now turn towards the development of new industries and full implementation of the integrated area development scheme for various zones of the country. Incidentally, I wish to announce that while the crisis government and the New Society after martial law sought to take over some of the moribund industries in the Philippines, it is now the policy of the national government to return to the private sector most, if not all, of these industries that were taken over by the military and the defense establishment.

The policy of the national government is that the national government or the government of the Republic of the Philippines will not intervene in industry, especially in manufacturing, unless the area of investment is so unattractive that no one private entrepreneur will dare to come in without government participation. In a case of such participation, as soon as the industry is stabilized or as soon as there are available private entrepreneurs for such an industry, the government must immediately divest itself of any interest in the private venture. I reiterate this policy of the national government.

At the same time, we move into integrated regional planning and programming. Before, we allocated resources for specific projects, like water system, roads, and schoolhouses without any regional planning whatsoever. Today, we have regional development schemes in Bicol, Mindoro, Samar and Cagayan. We are going to move into Mindanao. This merely means that every region should now have a coordinated and integrated plan for all the projects in such a manner that there is one listing of such programs and priorities are established in the event of a deficiency in resources. But we must know the right timing for each and every project in order that the various elements in our society may know how to plan. For instance, how can we invite industries to put up, say, factories in Cagayan Valley if there is no indication whatsoever as to when the power source will be developed, or when the roads will be finished? And thus we have moved into the implementation of the integrated area development scheme.

We must also attend to the human settlements program, particularly housing. This year also marks a new orientation in the efforts of the national government. There have been indications to the effect that while the national government has shifted from urban to rural expenditures, in many instances, expenditures in the rural areas have been diffused and not coordinated. The Human Settlements Ministry was established with the purpose of coordinating these expenditures with the help of all the ministries and other agencies of government so that the benefits of modernization will not be limited to only a few capital cities and towns but shall be spread throughout the length and breadth of the Philippines.

We have many reforms and the programs to implement such reforms. But the primary-reform is still land reform. It is the most important, more so now because it has been extended to include urban land.

Our land reform program, however, has never been without its critics ever since we launched it back in 1972. Many of these critics of land reform, knowing that it is one of our most important reforms, have attempted to downgrade it as not complying with the usual requisites. What is the general attitude of, say, the Western experts on land reform? They insist that even the small landowners be dispossessed of their land. They ask, for instance, why the government allows the retention by landowners of seven hectares of land? And the answer to that is simple. Their experience is with countries that have no virgin lands where the population can expand. Their expertise applies to societies that are completely different from ours.

In our society, the small civil servant, the military man, the teacher, even the janitor saves money in order to buy a little piece of land in the barangay where he comes from. Under the present land reform program, a tenant is given five hectares if not irrigated, three if irrigated. We have deliberately stayed away from what the critics call the “no retention scheme” precisely because after studying the entire program, we discovered that this scheme would have dislocated many of the small citizens of our country. We, therefore, emphatically reject the assertions that the land reform program does not seem to be achieving its purpose.

First of all, we have succeeded in transferring land to the landless in six years on a scale six times more than what previous administrations had accomplished in the preceding 30 years. We have embodied in our land reform program a scheme for more effective land consolidation and production and, as support to it, launched an effective cooperative development program. As I say this, I am aware of the deficiencies of the implementing machinery. We would like to see this program move faster than ever. But as I have said, we are moving in accordance with our schedule. And since we do not want any zero retention, we will, therefore, proceed in the same manner as before.

The government, however, must now move in another direction. More emphasis should now be placed on government public lands being distributed to the dispossessed of our country. The mere fact that many of our countrymen have objected to the establishment of cattle ranches and grazing lands indicates that these farmers have been given less priority than cattle. This is not the policy of the national government. From now on, it shall be the policy of the national government to identify, locate and immediately set aside public or virgin public land for those who have no land whatsoever in our country. This will be the new orientation of the land reform program in the rural areas.

We want to enlarge the middle class in our country and we will not dispossess the middle class of the little land they have.

Again, some of our critics say: Why are we limiting land reform to rice and corn? And the answer is: We are not limiting land reform to rice and corn. In the first place, let us go back to the history of our land reform efforts. Land reform is, first and foremost, our answer to a social problem. The problem of feudalism and tenancy was found mostly in rice and corn lands. Thus, we concentrated on reforming land tenure and ownership in this area. We have succeeded in doing so. With a few exceptions of course, we can say that the land reform program is nationwide.

I must point out that in several decrees and letters of instructions, we have endeavored to secure the farmer’s land tenure in areas devoted to crops other than rice and corn.

Whatever may be said of the land reform program, we are committed to the fulfillment of its objectives — equity for the farmers in the agricultural effort and greater productivity in our farms. Yes, we must do more. And I say today, we will do more. We will extend to the farmer, especially the farmer without any land, all the support that can come from the national government.

There is no way anyone can undermine the land reform program. I am determined, and I am certain that I speak for the other leaders of our government, that the land reform program should continue.

When I called the elections for the Batasang Pambansa, I heard the alarm and cry from the tenants. Will not the Batasang Pambansa rescind and completely negate the land reform program of the President? The answer today is: No, it will not. I am certain that the Batasang Pambansa supports the land reform program of the President.

You are well aware, you, the members of the Batasang Pambansa, are well aware of the charges which you face when you went before the people. They raised certain doubts and they had misgivings about your ideologies, your loyalty to the New Society. I can say now after several months of operation that the Batasang Pambansa has turned out to be a militant participant in the ideology of the New Society.

On plantation crops, I have already issued a decree on the matter. And we shall continue with the studies in accordance with the recommendations of the various experts organized for this purpose.

I need not call attention to the fact that we have just included urban lands in the land reform program. Urban land reform presents another problem of course, in the sense that there seems to be some anxiety about it. Let me emphasize that our objective here is not to confiscate land or to expropriate properties but to develop urban land. However, let it now be known to everybody that our government will not countenance unreasonably high or monopolistic profits.

When the land developers buy land at, say, 50 centavos per square meter, in an area through which government roads will pass, and after a few years sell this at P50 a square meter, there is something wrong in the society that tolerates such monopolistic and unreasonable high profit. I appeal to the affluent real estate developers of our country to ask themselves and refer to their conscience whether the profits that they will obtain from these manipulations and speculations will give them a better appetite to eat the better food that they can afford.

I call upon them to look at the New Society as a vehicle for the reform not only of our entire community but also of man and of the individual. For that is the ultimate basis of the New Society. We reform not only the soldiery or the bureaucrat or the working man. We reform, too, the affluent. And this is as good a time as any for the well placed, the comfortable in our society to come and join us in the general effort to raise the standard of living of the poor of our country.

In the last six years, we have succeeded in recasting our entire foreign policy. I do not need to talk about our establishing normal diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, the People’s Republic of China, the Eastern European countries as well as our neighbors on the Indochinese peninsula.

Now as we sit with other nations in he councils of the world and maintain close relations with almost all of them, we can rightfully say that we anticipated the end of the Cold War. We anticipated detente. Long before anybody spoke of detente, or the end of the Cold War, or co-existence, the Philippines had adopted these policies in order that we may live with our neighbors, with those who desire to live in peace with us. It is important that our position in global issues and in our relations with all countries keep abreast with national and international realities and affirm fundamental principles of mutual respect and sovereignty. It is important, too, that our foreign policy be the product of interaction between our government and our people, and I say the Batasang Pambansa shall the forum where we shall study the foreign policy as it is now being implemented by the executive department.

So, as we look at our entire agenda, there is a feeling that our burden is as heavy and our course as difficult as the ones we carried and followed at the start of our program to build the New Society. But there is the happy circumstance that we enter this new phase of the journey with quite a lot of the road already behind us and the course before us clear in our eyes, and a resolve strengthened by the achievements in the past. We have found a new confidence. I can feel this not only within me; I can feel it with the men and women that I talk to I can feel it in the buildings that are being constructed. I can feel it in the farms that operate in such wholesome and prosperous circumstances. In the problems that we face, there is none of the gravity that imperils our survival, for survive we have already done so. There is only the greater weight of challenge worthy of a nation that aspires to reach its destination.

We have work to do; of course, we will continue to do that work in all areas of national life. And for the members of the Batasang Pambansa, and for that matter, the members of the entire machinery of government, and the peasants, the laborers and the ordinary citizen—it is our duty, our responsibility to lead our people to the summit of our goals.

As we enter the seventh year of our New Society, let it be our common resolve, therefore, to hold fast to our achievements and gird ourselves once more for the task of national transformation and development.

If there are two words that can convey the feeling of the nation and the leadership today, it is hope and confidence. And I close this address with those words—hope and confidence for the people of the Republic of the Philippines.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].