Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Centenary of the Compania de Tabacos de Filipinas

[Delivered on December 3, 1981]

In a world kept taut by constant crisis and ferment and at a time when all around us we seem to see mainly the flux of institutions and societies, it must always seem very gratifying and reassuring to find evidences of endurance and longevity in the things that human beings create.

Tonight, I deeply feel this sense of reassurance, in addition to the pleasure of being here, as I join you all in paying tribute to this centenary of the Compania General de Tabacos de Filipinas.

In the life of any man-made institution, one hundred years will always be an impressive testament to its vitality and its life. And it is especially so for a business enterprise, more than for any other kind, for it is in the nature of business to live with change and to husband it for its growth.

By any reckoning, a company like the Tabacalera — when seen against the whole perspective of our nation’s history since 1881 — is a magnificent survivor of turbulent times.

To whatever decade we may point in its history, we will find this institution in the middle of massive ferment — in the ferment of revolution as was the case in its early life, in the ferment of great transition as was the case in its second decade when Spain was overthrown in the Philippine islands by the United States, in the ferment of a new colonial order bent on asserting new values and ideas as was the case of the American colonial period, in the ferment of war as was the case when Japan invaded and occupied the Philippines, and in the many ferments that have visited our country since national independence was recovered on July 4, 1940 up to this day.

What this might say of the entrepreneurial vision of the men who have guided and led this institution, and of the ability to command the fealty of those who worked and labored for its growth, we can only guess at. But there can be no doubt that there have lived and thrived within this institution vision, enterprise, imagination, and a feeling for people — things which every company covets, but only few in fact achieve.

Yet with all due respect to this impressive business achievement, it is as much the relation of this achievement to the life of the whole country and to the intangibles of culture and history that compels attention and constitutes the larger significance of Tabacalera in this country.

We will associate it with the memory of Spain in our land.

There was, it is true, a time when for most of us that memory was held in great suspicion and with much regret, a time when we could only fulminate against the misfortune of being colonized by another nation for more than three and a half centuries.

But as time passed and we could at last enjoy our sense of being independent without self-consciousness and phobia, we commenced the necessary process of coming to terms with our Spanish heritage, and to recognize at last what has been priceless and enduring in that inheritance.

Some sort of this journey backwards I have myself attempted in trying to write a history of our people: which you all know as the Tadhana series. And I have been much illuminated in the course of this investigation by the historical record as well as by the kernels of insight of many who have tried to write and keep history alive.

Spain was not indeed the collossal innovator that we take America to be, for her interest was invariably entwined with the concerns of religion and many things besides. But however we view the record, Spain brought us in contact with the world, and it was this contact in fact which in the end would break the bonds of colonization.

One interesting area for study — that has lain fallow for the most part because of our singular obsession to find the mainsprings of our political — is what Fr. de la Costa describes as the “decisive development of our economic and social history” during the period under Spain.

This is not the place nor the time to present an exposition on the subject, but there is time for us here to cite the landmarks in that phase of our history. If we may summarize this imperfectly, they consist of three major stages: the initial stage of advance from the shifting agriculture of pre-Spanish times to the more settled agriculture; the second stage which was characterized by the advance from subsistence agriculture to commercial farming and foreign trade; and the third stage which corresponds to the demise of agricultural specialization and the rise of the enterpreneurial classes and the emergence of various crafts and industries.

It is with the latter phase that the name “Tabacalera” is associated. When incorporated in Barcelona in 1881, it was specifically for the purpose of taking over the operation of the tobacco factories owned by the Spanish government in the Philippines, shortly after the abolition of the tobacco monopoly. But it also had another purpose, much as Governor Basco had recognized earlier when he founded the Sociedad Economica de Amigos de Pais: to develop the riches of the islands and to foster agriculture, industry and trade.

In the emergence of this entrepreneurial class we find perhaps the natural outcome of the earlier galleon trade and monopolies: the Spanish trying at last to find roots and to stake himself to a future in the colony. Whatever may be said of the objectives of Spanish Catholicism and Spanish colonial government, the entrepreneurial spirit sought to make lasting ties with the islands.

And it is not surprising that along with our Hispanic heritage in culture, in law, in customs and traditions, there is also that part of the heritage that consists of contributions to our economic life.

To the thick layer of Spanish cultural influences which we have come to claim as our own and to cherish, there is this other layer, equally enduring though not always well recognized — Spain’s effort in the economic sphere.

And if we try to interpret for ourselves the significance of Tabacalera’s specific ventures in our national economy, we can perhaps say that it epitomizes the best of Spanish enterprise in our country: its visions, its daring, its belief that our part of the world has a future.

Many things have greatly changed in this country since Tabacalera first ventured here, and we can surely say that written in its history is the impact of those changes. What has not changed is Tabacalera’s interest in the Philippines.

Today, as we toast the centenary of the Compania General de Tabacos de Filipinas, we can look I think to another century of this company’s operations in our country, because it has a century to look back to of productive enterprise and fruitful contributions to our country and our people.

Thank you all and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.