Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the PC-INP Anniversary

[Delivered on August 8, 1984]

In both pride and admiration, I receive your salute to your Commander in Chief, and I extend to you all the profound appreciation of our people for your steadfast support and loyalty to the Republic and to the Constitution.

Today, the Philippine Constabulary marks its 83rd anniversary, and the Integrated National Police its ninth. We mark these anniversaries together to underscore once more the linkage of your tasks and aspirations, and to emphasize the abiding unity of this command.

In the terms by which men in uniform have always measured success, the outstanding and vivid achievement of this command is fully reflected in the level of civility and order prevailing today in our country. We find its vindication in the fact that the rule of law truly abides and reigns in our country today, and that in spite of recent major challenges to our internal security and to public order, the ship of democratic and constitutional government moves proudly onward.

But if success is conferred in these terms, we must not also fail to take account of how such success is won, of what sacrifices are necessary for it. In the history of this command, the price for the civility and order of our national life has always been great. We see this in the fact that no year passes in which some members of this command lose their lives in the line of duty. And we see it vividly in the quite significant fact that of the 77 Medals of Valor awarded to officers and men of our armed forces since 1902, 66 of those have gone to Constables.

This seemingly random statistic reminds us of this simple but enduring message: that in times of peace, the task of keeping it is constant and demanding. That in preserving order in our national life, we face challenges as formidable as those imposed by war. And this because the dangers and perils for the nation lurk always just around the corner or beneath the surface, and the vigil we keep is never over.

As we look at our national life today, we can be in no doubt about the stability of the Republic and the supremacy of law in our society. Yet it is also clearer than ever that we face a relentless struggle in many parts of our country against insurgency and subversion. To the sense of security and order we feel in major parts of the country, there is on the other hand the constant sense of danger felt by many local communities from terrorism and intimidation. Behind the climate of civility and order that prevail in national life, continued effort goes on to subvert the peace, to destabilize conditions, and to undermine the authority of Government.

And these have increased of late, because of the economic difficulties which the nation is facing today.

With the climate of economic adversity as its principal shield, insurgency, subversion, infiltration and a host of other tactics have steadily grown in our midst, harassing the smaller and more vulnerable areas of the country and fanning anxiety and unrest in the more developed and urbanized ones. At one side of this spectrum of danger, insurgents and rebel bands engage in armed struggle with our law enforcement and military forces. At the other end, they exploit the anxieties and fears of our people today, infiltrating the ranks of student groups and labor unions, and transforming otherwise peaceful public demonstrations into open confrontations with the police.

And the difficulties of confronting this menace are made twice more difficult by the fact that our people, except those who live under the immediate and prevailing threat of terrorism and insurgency, are largely unaware of the extent of the danger and the peril. The challenge is made still more complex by the fact that some seem to be under the illusion that this wave of terrorism and insurgency can be conveniently exploited and ridden for their own ambitions for political power.

But the grave dimensions of the problem facing us now are real. And no amount of explaining it away, of banishing it from our thoughts, will remove the blight from our midst. We can only remove the menace by truly recognizing the realities that must be confronted, and in understanding what we face, strive with will and determination to expel the blight.

You who are at the forefront of this struggle and we who are at the helm of government know only too well the gravity of the threats we must confront. But that realization cannot be fully shared by the general public, in the absence of clear perspectives on the insurgency problem.

Today therefore, I see it fit to declassify certain information that I believe will provide the public clearer perspectives on the insurgency problem and hopefully will galvanize a union of effort between the people and the Government in pacing up to the challenge.

From 1981 to the present — a span of only three and a half years — there has been a pervasive increase and intensification.

*In civilian and military casualties as a result of the insurgency.

*In sabotage operations by insurgents against public and private property.

*In encounters between the insurgents and rebel forces.

*In the number of front organizations for the communist insurgency.

*In the extent of infiltration of otherwise legitimate organizations.

*In fueling the drug menace by radical elements.

*And in the flow of funds and arms into insurgent and subversive activities.

During this period alone, already 2,320 military personnel and 2,602 civilians have lost their lives as a result of the insurgency, many of them victims of terrorist attacks and ambuscades.

In this same span of time, subversives and rebel bands have carried out a total of 33 major sabotage activities against public and private installations in various parts of the country, resulting in property damage valued at P291.07 million, broken down to P258.67 million for the private sector and P32.4 million for the public sector.

Significantly, there has been a significant increase in the number of front organizations for the insurgency, and the flow of funds and arms into the insurgency challenge has again begun to pick up because of assistance being extended by both local and foreign organizations.

Finally, there is abundant evidence now of exploitation of the drug menace by insurgents and subversives, to the extent that they grow, manufacture, procure, and distribute these prohibited and harmful drugs in our society today.

The problem in popular perspectives on the insurgency challenge has of course been the fact that since the beginning of the Post-War Era, the country has always been fighting this dagger aimed at its heart. And because of our comparative success in facing up to the problem, we have been inured to the idea that the insurgency will never win although it will also never go away.

The evident complacency of this attitude, however, breeds problems for the counter-insurgency effort that significantly sap resolve and direction from our efforts. It weakens at one and the vital support that the people must provide in this struggle it undermines at the other end the capabilities of our police and military forces in the counter-insurgency campaign. And it takes away from the total sense of public vigilance that must accompany our fundamental solution to the insurgency problem — economic and social development.

It has become abundantly clear therefore that we must renew our call for a comprehensive and united response to the insurgency challenge. We can only fail to grasp the insidious nature of this struggle at the risk and hazard of the nation as a whole. We know that the task requires new concepts, new tools, new resolve and urgency on the part of Government, the military and the people. And we know finally that the time we fritter away in false complacency and disregard of the problem multiplies the danger to the nation.

What is missing, I think, from our present efforts today is full recognition of the fact that a comprehensive solution to the insurgency problem requires the harmonious working out of every element of our response: that the efficacy of military and peace-keeping action must be steadfastly matched by purposive socio-economic action; that every ground we win must be diligently consolidated and held; that we must improve our capabilities as the enemy improves its own; and that at every stage of this campaign the vigil of both our people and peace-keeping forces cannot be relaxed.

I have already discussed on a number of occasions the specific measures and actions we propose to undertake in terms of legislative reform to put more teeth into our laws; of economic projects to spur productivity efforts in rebel-infested areas; and of action to rally the people behind the government during these times of adversity.

On this occasion, I shall lay stress on the specific program of reorientation and retraining which we have paid for the PC-INP in line with our counter-insurgency campaign.

To begin with, it has always been a fact that the PC-INP stands at the forefront of this campaign. Within the structure of our Armed Forces, the Constabulary constitutes our garrison and territorial force charged with maintaining internal security and peace in our provinces, towns and cities; and in areas pacified by our peace-keeping forces, it is the force that must hold and maintain the ground for the orderly operations of Government. Complementing this, our police and firefighting units protect public safety, enforce the rule of law, and preserve order in our day-to-day affairs.

It follows from this that in the struggle against insurgents and rebel bands, the greater part of our counter-insurgency force has and will always come from the PC-INP. We employ, yes, the services of the other commands in this effort, including our Marines, our Rangers and even occasionally our Air Force. But the soul of the campaign is our law enforcement forces, because the threat is internal and the challenge is to peace and order in our many communities.

In the event, this has been the case in our counter-insurgency operations. But it has also been a fact that in some of our operations, particularly in Central Luzon, the truth has been painfully borne to us that our Constabulary troops could not readily be employed in operations because of their lack of training and orientation in fighting insurgency. It has been observed by some of our commanders in the field that our PC-INP troops were not committed or oriented to the resolution of the battle against the enemy.

And one of the reasons cited for this is the fact that “the garrison-troop mentality” prevails in our PC-INP forces, and they are consequently ill prepared to carry the battle to insurgents and rebels when it is so required.

The dangers of such a mentality are real, and they are particularly grave for the very safety of our law enforcement forces themselves. For in a situation where our counter-insurgency measures are reduced to simply awaiting when and how insurgents and guerrilla bands will strike, our forces become prey to surprise attacks and ambuscades. And they will be caught more often than not with their guards down.

It is this which we supremely strive to correct in our current retraining and reorientation program for the PC-INP.

In the kind of struggle we are facing today, we must fall back on and renew those basic qualities of soldiery, which in Clausewitz are so essential to success — energy, firmness, staunchness, strength of mind and character. These are the qualities we need in moving within the orb of present challenges and threats, and all that they connote of danger, uncertainty and chance. We are tempted sometimes to think that we can subdue our adversaries solely with the use of arms, to take massive military action as prescribed by the experiences of conventional warfare. Yet, this strategy, as we have discovered in past campaigns, is to say the least incorrect, wasteful and ineffective.

The objectives of conventional warfare are the enemy’s territory, his armed elements and his material means of making war. But in the kind of guerrilla warfare that we confront today, the enemy actually holds no territory; his armed forces, part civilian and part uniformed, are either too-well concealed or too small and mobile for immediate destruction, while his material requirements are infinitesimally small compared with those of conventional forces.

Only if we have the means to saturate the country with our armed forces and maintain widespread operations from months on end will conventional military warfare eliminate this form of armed struggle. History provides no single example of a counter-revolutionary regime’s ability to maintain such operations. On our part, we can ill-afford it and we have dreamed of engaging in such a wasteful and unproductive enterprise.

What, then, is our strategic program?

It can be described in four words — clear, hold, consolidate and develop.

Clearing operations may or may not involve conventional warfare, but they will most often be a combination of conventional and counter-guerrilla methods, as we are doing at present. These operations will be conducted only in selected areas, where the terrorist hold on the populace is strong and intransigent. We will deploy into such areas sufficient military and police forces as well as civic action teams.

When the area is cleared, we must hold it while we destroy the political cells of the enemy and reestablish the presence of our own civil authorities.

Next, we must consolidate our security and political efforts with social and economic projects with the people themselves as the primary beneficiaries and participants in these efforts. Vital to this effort is a viable process of mass education.

In time, it will then be possible for our forces to move out to another area, but only under three (3) conditions — if our local political leadership is strong enough, if the socio-economic reforms are on stream and if the people are more enlightened, organized and prepared to defend themselves as local defense units.

These are the main lines of our systematic counter-insurgency campaign, and it will be immediately evident to all that its success will greatly depend not so much on numbers and resources, but on well-trained forces and on high qualities of leadership and command. It must supremely rely on economy of force, sustained initiative, simplicity, cost effectiveness and close command control. If is noteworthy that this last feature is now exemplified by your own concept today of “command presence in the field.”

In emphasizing this strategic and tactical approach to the counter-insurgency effort, we are not by any means saying that we can resolve the insurgency problem by military action alone. Both past and contemporary history overwhelmingly remind us of the limitations of such an approach. What we win piece by piece from the enemy, we must consolidate also piece by piece by active efforts towards stabilization and development. And even more important, we must never forget that the soil of insurgency is always the restiveness and discontent of people, and the solutions to that in the last analysis is the well-being and welfare of people and communities.

We have no illusions whatever that a counter-insurgency effort can succeed in expelling insurgency and rebellion in our land, without the healing hand of social and economic development. This has always been central in, our approach to the insurgency challenge. And this will always remain.

But let us be under illusion either that social and economic development can take place in a climate of disorder and tension in our national life, that our political institutions can operate effectively without civility and peace reigning in our midst.

The two factors — peace and order on the one hand and social and economic development on the other — and reinforce each other in the life of the state and the nation. Without each other, they cannot grow and thrive. Bereft of both, a nation can only wither and die.

If in this country, we have weathered all these many years the grave challenges of insurgency and rebellion, in times of the greatest peril to the nation, it is because we have kept faith with this idea of order and progress. We have had shortcomings here and there; we have failed some times to take fullest advantage of our successful actions against the communist insurgents, as in the fifties; we have been at times complacent and self-indulgent about our successes in the counter-insurgency effort. Yet time and again, we have faced up to the peril and we have survived the test.

The present challenge will be faced and won. But more than just survival, I believe that through our comprehensive efforts today, we shall come to know a degree of stability and security in our land impervious to crisis because they are founded on the development of our people and our nation.

For that cause, we work together, you and I, joined by the millions of our countrymen.

And in that cause we will succeed, for as long as there abides in this country that faith which Oliver Wendell Holmes once spoke of as being exemplified by the soldier:

“In the midst of doubt, he wrote, “in the collapse of creeds, there is one thing I do not doubt . . . . And that is the faith that is true and adorable which leads a soldier to throw away his life in obedience to duty, in a cause he little understands, in a plan of campaign of which he has no notion.”

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.