Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 32nd World Assembly of the World Medical Association

[Delivered at the PICC, November 14, 1978]

Medicine and Development

ALLOW ME FIRST of all to greet the newly-elected president of this World Medical Assembly, Dr. Romualdez, and congratulate him on his fine speech.

Allow me also to extend the congratulations of our people and our government and of myself personally to Dr. Farally, the outgoing president of this distinguished Assembly.

I greet the distinguished delegates to this world assembly of eminent men of medicine as well as their guests and the members of their delegation.

I greet the staff, administrative and otherwise, of this Assembly, as well as those who are participating in this gathering.

After the speeches by two Romualdezes, I hope you will not hold it against me if I am related to one of them. I am only the husband of the governor of Metropolitan Manila. But certainly you do us the honor by coming a second time to the Philippines.

You came for the first time on my first year as President of the Republic of the Philippines in 1966. We are twice beholden to you, therefore, but it has been further enriched by the election of Dr. Alberto Romualdez as the new president of your Association. I am sure if I were a wiser man, I would not dare to deliver another speech after all those distinguished and certainly lively speeches delivered by the speakers before me. But since I am not a wise man, I will now dare to speak on the same platform. You know, in the Orient, when the lady has spoken, that is the end of the matter. This is one of the burdens of the presidency, I presume.

But allow me to express the profound appreciation of our people and of our government.

Certainly, if I were to speak to our people in the villages now and say that hundreds of the world’s most eminent physicians have come from all parts of the globe to speak of rural health, which concerns the man in the village — deprived, lonely, diseased and perhaps desperate—the common man of the Philippines may not believe that indeed such distinguished company has come to dedicate valuable time, and whether in government or in the private sector but altogether in the practice of their profession — adding to the wisdom and the knowledge of man for the alleviation of the miseries of man. This certainly is something which inspires, and thus I take courage in moving into this subject which is very far from the area of the government administrator — science, medicine — although it is a part of development.

While we would like to think that the choice of our country as the site of your present meeting reflects some satisfaction over the proceedings of the earlier Assembly, we are certain that it has been made for a much more important and significant reason, namely the deep concern of the Association over the state of health care in the developing countries today.

And you could not have chosen perhaps a more fitting setting in which to express this concern than here in this part of Southeast Asia, where you will find juxtaposed the formidable health problems in the Third World today, and the exciting and encouraging efforts being undertaken to solve them.

You come to a country that is in transition in every way — political, economic, social, material and spiritual — for we have just started what we would like to call the New Society. In confronting a rebellion which sought to over whelm our Republic, we are now in the process of radically transforming our society. It is a transformation for and on behalf of the greater number of our people. Some observers call it the “revolution of the poor.” It is indeed an infusion of rationality into the efforts of those who aspire to social engineering.

The Philippines is a small and developing country. It has about 47 million people. It has a birth rate that is beyond average. It used to be 3.01 percent when I first became President; now it’s 2.6,2.8, give or take . 102. We are seeking to reduce our birth rate.

One of the problems that face a developing country, one of the most cruel problems of a developing country, is health.

We cannot but believe that this Assembly, in meeting so close to the very throb of global health issues, will all the more be discerning in its deliberations, and all the more be forceful in its actions for relief.

I think that if we look back over the interval of 12 years that have lapsed between the last time you convened in Manila and the present Assembly, there can be no doubt that there has been substantial progress in the field of medicine and some appreciation in the quality of health care in much of the developing world.

Yet in other respects, during this interval and despite the unprecedented progress in medical research and technology, health conditions have not entirely improved. Indeed, one suspects that in certain areas there has been much retrogression, as major problems connected with health — such as those of mass poverty, overpopulation, malnutrition, shortage of resources, and urban decay — have exceeded the capabilities of nations.

We cannot now presume that simply because the science of medicine continues to astound us with new discoveries and new knowledge, it follows that more and more of earth’s children are being reached and saved by medicine for fruitful and rich lives.

We dare not assume that because the position of the developing countries today with respect to their development efforts appears to be improving, despite untold pressures and crisis, it necessarily follows that national and global health policies and programs are on target.

In this the second assembly of the World Medical Association to be held in our country, we in the Third World would anxiously hope that its deliberations will not just produce more of what we have heard before, but more that is better; that it will produce new initiatives to the relief of blighted communities; that it will bring forth new programs in the developing nations; and that it will seed an irreversible momentum for medical progress in the developing societies.

Nothing is more fundamental to all that we in the developing countries seek today than the provision of better health services to our long-deprived populations, for ill-health is the cruellest enemy in the pursuit of development by our societies; and it is all the more cruel because medical progress has so advanced in our century as to make intolerable the fact that illness and disease continue to blight so many lives all over the planet.

I think that in its choice of a theme, this Assembly has not failed to grasp this problem in the developing nations. For in pinpointing the subject of health manpower in the rural areas, we touch one very vital core of the problems we face today in the field of health care: the tremendous shortage of health man power in the Third World, and indeed the world over.

This is a problem that also bedevils the developed nations, but in the developing countries, it is twice as debilitating because life and death is virtually the issue.

Among the developing nations, the Philippines is perhaps a little advanced in the field of medicine, in having a fairly creditable and well-developed medical education program. We have reason to be proud of the quality of our health manpower, but the fact is that we continue to be troubled by inadequate medical manpower to undertake delivery of basic health services in our rural areas.

Nothing is more ironic than the fact that developing countries like the Philippines, India, Pakistan and the West Indies should supply so much medical manpower to highly advanced countries like the United States and Europe. The yearly exodus of health manpower becomes even more a matter of anguish because of the costs incurred in training such personnel.

In 1976, it was revealed that about 140,000 doctors were working outside their native countries, and that about 700 million pounds a year was being spent on training medical students who would eventually emigrate.

It is a problem that surely must excite the attention of the governments as well as the medical community, if we are truly to grapple in specific terms with the problem of health manpower in the rural areas.

In one estimate made about two years ago, Asia would need almost three times its health manpower today in order to place on stream an effective health care delivery system. There are differences in the respective situations of many countries, but the severity of manpower shortage is incontrovertible.

Each nation must work out the incentives to retain its own medical man power. But basic to this is a more economically progressive rural development program.

Yet, arresting the medical brain drain alone would not suffice to relieve the problem we face. As our own studies of the problem have shown us, we need today a restructured medical training program fitted to the immediacy of our needs. This matter has been referred to by the governor of Metropolitan Manila in her speech. This has meant in the Philippines adopting a new policy for the development of new skills and new types of health workers. This has meant adopting shorter-term training programs for medical aides and technologists. This has meant speeding up training in the various health professions.

The nagging question of course is whether we can truly speed up the education of doctors and other health personnel without sacrificing the quality of training; and whether we can further improve the utilization of available health manpower.

It is my belief that here in this assembly, exchanges of experiences and insights among the delegates will greatly enlighten us on the real options available.

To speak of health manpower, however, is also to tackle in the end a vastly larger area of problems which are our daily staple in the developing communities. And I would be surprised if in the course of your deliberations, you did not discuss these other matters. For they appear to me germane to what we seek to solve in the manpower sphere.

The high cost of health care is certainly one such area which is critically related to the manpower challenge. The implication of this is that in the developing countries, much of the challenge must be borne by a committed government health service that is ably supported by the private sector.

Increasingly, there is no question that we must make progress towards the adoption of a system that will take away the prohibitive costs of medical care and temper the monetary aspect of the medical profession. I know that this is not an easy issue before the medical profession. And I myself have always advocated for freedom in the exercise of the medical profession, but medicare programs and socialized medicine are surely one option that must ever be considered by the governments of the developing countries.

Then also, we cannot ignore anymore the singular conclusion gained from years of effort: the knowledge that prevention of illness is far more economical and desirable than health cure. This must at the very least lead to a full study and reexamination of the manner we deploy our resources.

In the developing countries, where resources are all too finite and limited, the matter of addressing the issue of prevention and care is a virtual imperative. And it is indeed one note of encouragement and hope today that in many developing countries, we are at last learning to cope with the basic causes of diseases, and to pay attention to social and environmental factors necessary to healthful living.

This in sum is the promise of the new attention to food and nutrition programs, to family planning, to agricultural development, ecology, and the challenge of development itself.

It has been said that a people that recovers its dignity and self-respect, nobility, if you will, is a people that will learn to prevent and cure diseases by itself. For health or the environmental factors that affect health are deeply ingrained in the racial or national psyche. Health requires peace, stability. It requires a people that has become hopeful of the future. It presumes a government that can govern. Without all these, health becomes a marginal concern whether in the urban or the rural areas, a marginal concern for both the governor and the governed.

Finally, we must cite as an indispensable part of change in health conditions in the rural areas the work of international organizations, both official and private, which for many years now have served to link up efforts on a global scale. I think specially of the work done by the World Health Organization which has done much to sharpen our understanding and methods of coping with our problems in the area of health care.

I think also of private communities such as the World Health Medical Association, which over its long and eventful history has ably carried on the high traditions of the medical profession and is perhaps second to none in altruism and compassion.

So long as the deprived men can see the distinguished men of science and medicine gathering on their own time to meet the problems from which they seem to be but are not personally removed, so long as we see them show their concern, then man will continue to retain his faith in his fellowmen.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].