Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Testimonial Review of the Armed Forces of the Philippines

[Delivered on September 10, 1970]

The Tasks Ahead for the Armed Forces

ON BEHALF OF the Filipino people, I accept with gratitude this pledge of loyalty of the Armed Forces of the Philippines to its Commander-in-Chief. Yes, I have invoked the name of our people because in truth and in fact it is they who are the real and ultimate object of this loyalty.

This occasion, therefore, is more than a mere ritual. Its deeper significance springs from our democratic way of life and our firm determination to preserve it. For this pledge reiterates the basic democratic principle that civilian authority supersedes military authority. In reaffirming their loyalty to their Constitutional chief, our men and women in uniform manifest again their commitment to this tenet and their resolve to serve our people.

Commitment and service are necessary at this stage in our nation-building. At the start of my administration, I saw it clearly, and I stated it forcefully, that the task of nation-building called for the total mobilization of national resources and the integration of all efforts.

The individual Filipino remains the most precious and the most indispensable of our resources. The object of all our labors, he is at the same time the principal factor in achieving our goals. Our effort will reach far, or fall short, depending on the intensity of his commitment and on the quality of his service to our nation.

I always derive much pride and satisfaction in holding up the AFP as a model of commitment and service, in war or in peace. To its men and women, commitment is their solemn oath, service is their way of life.

My affection for those in the Armed Forces of the Philippines springs not only from my experience of once having been one of them, as indeed one of the most memorable, if not the most memorable, periods in my life has been that of a soldier; but my affection springs also from my close observation of their discipline, their organizational cohesiveness and unity, and their unstinted devotion to duty.

For this reason, I decided at the start of my administration, to utilize the Armed Forces for national development. My trust and conviction have been; amply vindicated.

The participation and accomplishments of our Armed Forces in the socio-economic development of the nation are a matter of common knowledge. I need not speak of the thousands of kilometers of roads constructed by them, the equally numerous schoolhouses and buildings and other infrastructures constructed and being constructed by the AFP. All this speaks of the magnitude and sincerity of their commitment. There has hardly been any region in the country, nor any significant national undertaking in which the Armed Forces have not been called upon to render assistance. This I have done advisedly in order that the Armed Forces may be involved in everything relating to nation-building.

And because they have demonstrated their worth and dependability, the Armed Forces are continuously being called upon to assist even civilian endeavors.

But more than the tangible benefits, impressive as they are, what should give us deeper satisfaction is the fact that in participating intimately in building the sinews of the nation, our Armed Forces have developed a social conscience.

No longer are they strictly bound in thought as well as in application by austere military tradition. No longer is their concept of service confined to killing and the training to kill in the preparation for war; but increasingly it has embraced the work of strengthening the fabric of peace.

More and more, they are being asked to participate, even to take the initiative in some instances, in community development projects, in maintaining and improving peace and order, in expediting the administration of justice, and other tasks which before were considered exclusively civilian responsibilities.

We in the Armed Forces should welcome this emergent role, and so should our people as indeed they do. Far from being the omen of incipient militarism, they should on the contrary be viewed as indications of the people’s growing confidence in their Armed Forces.

The Armed Forces on their part must prepare for this role as thoroughly as they prepare for their role in war. By and large, the preparation of the soldier for this new role has been sometimes an on-the-spot adaptation to actual situations. Schooled in military traditions, he finds his military attitudes and habits inadequate responses to complicated social problems, and he is left to improvise and to adjust. I would like to make the following observation. It is a tribute to the adaptability and flexibility of the military man that he has succeeded in his non-military activities, sometimes even without any guidelines from civilian authority. His success would surely be greater if his preparation were more sufficient.

In the many troubled and depressed parts of the country today, particularly in Central Luzon, the AFP’s social conscience is at work. I am pleased to say that the results have been very satisfactory, in ameliorating the living conditions of the masses, in reawakening their initiative, and in regaining their confidence in the Armed Forces and the government.

But even as the Armed Forces have been heavily involved in the immediate and more urgent problems of enhancing peace, their primary duty is still to maintain the national security.

Modernization has been the accent in the development of the Armed Forces. The surface and air mobility of their various components have been significantly improved with the arrival of new equipment from our staunch and strong ally, the United States of America. Their weapons inventory is likewise being rapidly modernized with the recent acquisition, and the anticipated delivery, of modern arms, some of which we have bought with badly needed funds. We expect shortly a tremendous improvement in communications facilities with the operation early next year of a modern communications network that will link together practically all tactical elements in the field. Hand in hand with these improvements, the AFP recently effected a reorganization in order to achieve greater efficiency.

Along with modernization, we are making our armed forces more self-reliant, more self-sufficient. Research and development programs are being geared towards the utilization of local talents and resources for defense needs.

The internal Communist menace of subversion and insurgency, which a few months ago threatened to escalate into serious proportions, has been effect-lively stemmed. We can now say with confidence that the dissident tide in Central Luzon, where this threat is focused, has been turned.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines have done much, and have also suffered much, in containing this threat. Not only have scores of soldiers been maimed and killed, their wives widowed and their children orphaned, but often fin the pursuit of the goal of peace and security, the pursuit of the goal set by civilian authority, the Armed Forces of the Philippines have often been maligned and their achievements denigrated. Such unfortunately is the price of liberty and freedom. And we in the Armed Forces of the Philippines must always be willing to pay this price. Not only must we be willing to lay down life land treasure, but, we must also be willing to bear assaults on our honor if that too is part of the price for defending our country’s freedom and sovereignty.

Of course, the credit does not belong exclusively to the Armed Forces. For the people of Central Luzon should also be credited for their support of and participation in this move. The people of the region, who have finally decided to stand their ground against dissident imposition and depredations, and they must share in the credit. Questions have often been asked. What was the beginning of the Barrio Self-Defense Units or the Self-Defense Force? I know and I would like to reveal that the Barrio Self-Defense Force was started upon the request of the people of Central Luzon themselves. And that is why I smile to myself when I hear some alleged representatives of the people of Central Luzon questioning the Barrio Self-Defense Forces. The Barrio Self-Defense Units, the people of Central Luzon, in cooperation with the government troops, have contributed to the success of many military operations against the dissidents and have severely reduced the mass support of the dissidents. They have denied to them the barrio as a source of information, as a source of recruitment, as a source of supply and a source of moral support. And, today, I must reiterate what have said in the past. The Barrio Self-Defense Forces shall be maintained for as long as the barrio people want them. When we all have reached the stage when the barrio people themselves directly or indirectly ask for the dismantling of the Barrio Self-Defense Forces, then I will order such dismantling but not before the people who have initiated it demand its removal.

In the task of maintaining general peace and order, which normally is a police function, the Armed Forces by sheer necessity have been made to assume the leading role. This is true in many parts of the country, where the local police force is either inadequate or incompetent to maintain peace and order.

Now as in any democracy there are forces at work that are deliberately trying and will continue to try to deliberately discredit not only the Armed Forces of the Philippines but democracy itself, to undermine the people’s confidence in that system of government. Pointing to isolated unfortunate incidents and excesses allegedly committed by the men in uniform, they seek to foist upon the people a fear of their Armed Forces as a tool of oppression. But in the debris of recent crisis as in the civil disturbances and, more recently, in the last natural devastation, the flood, they exposed their own falsehoods and they exposed their own evil designs. They are not interested in reforms, are not interested in improvement, they are not interested in progress, they are interested in grabbing political power.

The Armed Forces exist for one purpose, to protect the state and the people from all enemies, whether from within or without. Upholding the people’s liberties, as much as preserving the integrity of the state, is inherent in that purpose and central to the oath of office of every member of the Armed Forces. It is being reaffirmed on this occasion by the men and women who are the defenders of our democratic institutions.

In these difficult times we are going through, the Armed Forces have been the mainstay in insuring internal stability. In the event that established order and authority will be seriously threatened from within, and this I do not now foresee, the Armed Forces shall be the bulwark of our society.

Men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the responsibility that you bear in these times is tremendous. The prosperity and tranquility that we seek for our people demand the utmost from you.

I know that you will not fail. Just as you have proven your mettle in the field of battle, I am sure you will acquit yourselves with honor in the field of peace. And therefore, it is my honor and pleasure to announce once again that I have directed our Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Budget Commissioner to immediately implement the increase in pay for all enlisted personnel in the Armed Forces of the Philippines. I gather that they are in the process of implementing this order. I understand that this will mean an increase in pay for the lowest ranking enlisted personnel, the buck private, of from P130 to P180, and so on up the line.

It is my hope that we shall be able to immediately attend to all other needs relating to further increases in basic pay, including those of the civilian personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

I also wish to announce the promotion to the rank of General of some of four officers.

In the Philippine Constabulary, I have promoted the commanding officer of the 2nd PC Zone, Col. Paredes; I have also promoted to the rank of Brigadier General the commanding officer of the 3rd PC Zone, Col. Dumlao; I have today also signed the papers promoting to the rank of Brigadier General the commanding officer of Task Force Lawin, Col. Jazmen; in the Philippine Army, I have promoted to the rank of Brigadier General the commanding officer of the 3rd Brigade, Col. Cauton; and I have promoted to the rank of Brigadier General the present superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy, Col. Ugalde, and the commanding officer of the General Staff College, Col. Perez.

To each and every one of them my congratulations. I am continuing to reassess all the recommendations made by the Secretary of National Defense, Chief of Staff and the Board of Generals on the promotions to General.

I have accepted the pledge of loyalty of our men in uniform, in the name of the people, and I repeat, we regard our people as our anchor in these difficult times.

I am your President and Commander-in-Chief, but only temporarily. So, you actually pledge loyalty not to a person but to a symbol, the symbol of the sovereignty of our people. May it always be so — that you remain loyal to that symbol whoever he may be, and to the Constitution, and to the Republic of the Philippines.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].