Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the commemoration of the Leyte landing

[Delivered on October 20, 1984]

It is with a deep sense of pride and pleasure that I join you here today for this annual commemoration of the historic landing of allied forces in Leyte on October 20, 1944.

Pride because together with the veterans of that heroic chapter of the way and the distinguished representatives of governments and peoples who fought it, we perpetuate here the memory of valor and heroism in battle, and the meaning they confer on the aspirations of men and nations.

And pleasure too, because by coming here today, I am also able to renew my kinship with the people of Leyte and I can extend to you personally my thanks and appreciation for your continued and unwavering support for me and for our government. Damo nga salamat ha iyo nga tanan .

Forty years have now passed since this beach and this island rang with the din of battle. But for this impressive memorial, there is little here to remind us now of the many forces that were once decisively locked in battle here. In place of the old devastated battleground, we see again this land green with new life and growth, and the waters once more silvery and clear.

All of us who haw truly known war and its furies could not cherish more this sight of life and peace reigning now upon grounds where conflict once transpired. But if we are thrilled and gladdened by such a sight, we do not value the less and we do not forget the price that had to be paid for all this.

In the history of war, there are certain events that stand forever in the memory of men and nations because of their decisive importance to the outcome of conflicts, and their contribution to the cause of peace and freedom. Such is the Leyte-landing.

Considered solely in the context of warfare and conflict, the battles that raged in Leyte in 1944 – the battles in the sea, in the air and on land – already stand as an imperishable part of the annals of war. For truly, as military historians tell us, here was staged the largest naval battle in history. Here was demonstrated by men and armies in battle courage, heroism and daring unrivalled in the pacific theater of the last war. And here began the irrevocable march of the allied cause to victory in the pacific.

But we also know that the Leyte landing was more than just an episode of battle. In an even more important way, for our country and our people, this was the signal for our long-awaited liberation. That moment when General Douglas Macarthur and his forces landed on the beaches of Leyte marked the irreversible turning of the tide of the war in our country. At that moment were vindicated all the many sacrifices we had made in Bataan -and Corregidor, and all the burdens we had borne during the long night of occupation by enemy forces. And at that moment too was redeemed the pledge of General Macarthur to return to the Philippines.

By the hindsight of history, we know now that the Leyte landing could very well have not taken place at all had the initial allied plans been followed. A decision in fact had already been taken by the American Military Command to bypass the Philippines in favor of a thrust towards Formosa and later Mindanao at the worst and Japan itself. And it was only through the insistence and remonstrations of General MacArthur – that in fact America had a commitment could only be ignored at the price of American Dishonor – only then did President Roosevelt finally give the go-signal for the Leyte Landing.

All this of course was unknown to our people then. From the very day General Macarthur left us in Corregidor with the famous pledge, “I shall return,” and through the entire three years of enemy occupation, our people never wavered in the faith that America would be true to her word, and that General Macarthur would indeed return. It was that faith which sustained us in the guerrilla struggle that we relentlessly waged. It was this which prevented the enemy forces from ever feeling at home and at peace in the land they were supposed to have conquered.

And because that faith was vindicated, because the pledge was kept, and the deed was done, the Leyte landing also stands for us as a symbol of the meaning and strength of Philippine-American friendship.

When we reckon the history of our relationship since 1944, we can see in fact how our sense of solidarity during the war decisively shaped the course and the substance of our trans-pacific relations.

On July 4, 1946, not long after the liberation of the Philippines, the United States fulfilled her commitment to grant the Philippines full independence. It will be recalled that earlier in March 1934, the U.S. Congress passed the Tydings-McDuffie Law which provided for a transition period transition period of 10 years during which the Philippines would enjoy self-rule before full independence in 1946. This is significant because the experience of commonwealth government and the certitude that independence would be ours by 1946 shaped our attitudes in the ensuing war of the forties. Unlike other colonized nations of Asia, we Filipinos stood alone in staking our future on the side of the colonial power. And this was because while others were still fighting for their political independence, we believed ours was already won, and we were in the process already of shaping our political future.

To the lasting credit of America, it kept its end of the bargain. Unlike other colonial powers who sought to recover control of their former territories in the aftermath of the war, America immediately moved to restore Philippine independence.

And this historic event had meaning not only for us Filipinos and our relation, but for the world as a whole. For the recovery of our national independence in 1946 served also a beacon for the liquidation of colonial empires all over the world. In quick succession during the post-war era, other Asian peoples would gain their independence from their European rulers; and in those countries where countries where colonial resistance was strong, the independence movements would never again relent until the goal was won.

Alone perhaps among the victorious powers during the war, the United States found itself at war-end with less territorial possessions that it had at its beginning. Its possession of the atomic bomb notwithstanding, it did not use its power to acquire or gain territory. Indeed it set the example for others in the dismantling of the colonial order.

This memory of American leadership and resolution during the war and in its immediate aftermath set the seal, you might say, on the expectations of the developing world of America. This is why it has always looked to the United States for leadership in preventing the balkanization of the continents, and the conquest of small nations by the strong.

It was in this spirit and with these concerns that we shaped our relations with each other, and entered with others into arrangements for the security and stability of Asia.

Shortly after the recovery of Philippine independence in 1946, we subsequently wrote the various treaties and agreements that have for thirty-eight years since, various amendments and revisions, defined our relations with each other.

In March, 1947, we signed our military bases agreement with the United States, under which the United States was granted use of military bases and facilities of 23 base sites in our country.

A week after, we signed a military assistance pact under which the united states committed to furnish arms, ammunitions and supplies to the Philippines, and train Philippine military personnel.

In August, 1951, in the midst of new dangers posed by communist movements, our two countries signed a mutual defense treaty which declared that an armed attack in the pacific area against either the Philippines or the United States would be considered as endangering the peace and safety of both countries.

With the same overwhelming concern for security and peace, the Southeast Asia collective defense treaty was signed in manila in September 1954, with the United States and the Philippines among the signatories.

On the economic side, our relations in the independence era were initially shaped in 1946 by the Philippine Rehabilitation Act which provided for $620 million for reconstruction and war damage claims, and the bell trade act which sought to continue free trade between the two countries during independence, and to extend parity rights to Americans in the Philippines. Subsequently in 1955, the Bell Trade Act would be superseded by the Laurel-Langley agreement which finally removed all U.S. controls over the Philippine economy and the management of its currency, but retained the parity clause.

During this initial decade of Philippine independence, it will be seen that so much of our relationship was being defined by concerns and considerations prevailing at that time, and which at a later day would become the object of revision and even dispute. Questions of fairness and soundness have since been raised about these ties that bound us to each other, yet whatever the infirmities of certain agreements, it can never be said that our two countries have been unwilling or unable to conciliate differences. It is of record that our countries always sought to negotiate these differences amicably; and by and large we have been able to make the adjustments necessary for a new time.

Thus in more recent years there has been considerable progress in our relations toward a relationship of greater equality and respect, without diluting the sense of friendship and goodwill on both sides and without reducing relations to simple calculations and self-interest. Our sense of regard and friendship for each other has endured the many transformations of international relations after Vietnam, primarily because since the very beginning and up to now our relationship has been founded on firmer ground than mere advantage. It has always rested if I may so on friendship sealed in such places as Bataan, Corregidor and Leyte, and in such things as the beliefs and ideals we live by.

The horizons of our relations may be clouded from time to time by distemper and doubt, by occasional disagreements and misunderstandings, and by the excesses of some polemicists and reformers. But always we have recognized beneath all these the instinctive and abiding affinity between our peoples and our countries. And it has been suggested, and I believe correctly, that such irritants as we have known, are reflections of an authentic relationship, which grows stronger from the trials that it must weather.

We may be assured that historic events in our common history, such as this which we commemorate today will not banish from our memories even as time passes on, but will abide as living symbols of our regard for each other.

For our relationship, our friendship, if you will, is not based merely on the interests of independent states, but more important on the experience of living and sharing with each other, amidst all trials, in the spirit of two peoples whom history fatefully brought together.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.