Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the presentation of awards by the Cultural Heritage Awards Commitee

A Revolution of the Essence

I am honored to participate in the awarding ceremony recognizing the outstanding contributions of various fields and the cultural heritage we have inherited.

I greet each and every one of the awardees. I am indeed very happy to be here with you.

My mission here, as I see it, today is primarily the pleasurable one of handling out the awards to those among our creative people who have by their work distinguished themselves and, I would like to think, enriched much more the contemporary cultural scene. Whatever message I have to impart, by virtue of this speech I have been called upon to deliver, is secondary. But only because I have taken it for granted that my audience tonight is composed in the main by artists, the creative people from whom we expect to get the message rather than the other way around.

Being a person who has long ago been touched by the creative urge, and who has long presumed to have a kinship with artists and who, moreover, has always had a high respect for the creative life, I have nurtured a few ideas relative to your position in society which I want to share with you.

In recent years, the world has been witness to a growing upheaval in the human community. Old values and old shibboleths are being questioned, if not being shattered. One feels that the world today is on the verge of a total transformation, perhaps a change far more dramatic and over-reaching than the French, the American and the Russian revolutions which each in its own way changed the patterns of the social order.

If this is true, if we are on the eve of a total transformation of all that we have known and believed in, then perhaps we should now give deeper thought towhat lies ahead, and what we as individuals and as national communities can do to help shape and control this transformation. In the past, from Robespierre to Jefferson to Lenin, the revolutions which took place were primarily political, with much of the force these upheavals generated focusing on the shift of power and wealth, from one sector of society to another. But the essence of the human condition remained more or less the same.

Today, there is a far more exciting sense of meaningful change, all the more compelling because unlike past revolutions, the change we feel is readily perceptible and may move very much faster. This view is plausible measured by the present day technology, which has shrunk the world, sent reverberations from one part of the globe to the other, and in the truest sense, gathered the world into one human family.

If this were not true, we in the Philippines would not feel the impact of change going on in America, in Europe, and even in the African heartland. We would still be merely engrossed with the development of only those sinews as would provide us with no more than our most immediate and essential needs like food and shelter. But we are already looking beyond food and shelter, we are looking to a change in spirit and values as well.

This change, once it gains momentum, will cause severe dislocations. Even development and growth occasion a certain measure of disorder. To those who have led complacent lives, these ripples of disorder cause anxieties, if not fear. Even worse, they cause despair. How many among us were ready to flee land when our problems mounted, and were compounded by the emerged protest movements? How many of you in Forbes Park left your homes to refuge in hotels when the demonstrations came? But progress has ever been thus, and each watershed in history produced aberrations. The world survived because of human resiliency and because of the presence of strong leaders.

The coming change in our world would again require leadership of a high order, a leadership which will have to contend with moral choices as well.

Against the backdrop of a quarter century of rapid change, the change-over from the industrial to the technotronic age — that is, the age of technology electronics—it would seem that the years ahead, even the next decade, will even more precipitate in altering our world. There are understandable apprehensions from highly respectable quarters, including those in the cultural artistic community. We have such debates as those between the scientist and artist going on now, each questioning the other’s place in the world of tomorrow, each fearful of the other’s ideas and actions.

We are aware, of course, of the oft-repeated responsibility of the scientist for his inventions, some of which have created the specter of a doomed world mainly because of atomic fission, and others creating the present dilemma environmental pollution as against greater technological advance.

Even in our small country, struggling to attain industrial capability when the more developed world is already striding towards new and strange frontiers, we are already confronted by the same problems and paradoxes. We, too, we the Filipinos, must make choices and not tomorrow but now.

In all of this, therefore, the crucial element remains the human being, eachand every individual in a country.

If the scientist, the politician, the plain citizen has a responsibility to fulfill, what of the artist? What is his responsibility to change and the future? How about those engaged in research? How about the historians, the writers, the painters, the sculptors, the musicians? Working mainly in the realm of imagination and sensibility, or even let us say, mere intuition, is the artist compelled to come to grips with the problems of the machine representing technology, the problems of reshaping society, of reordering the political process to conform more closely to the envisioned change in human affairs, or should he pursue as I before, in solitude and aloofness, his compulsive obsessions?

I think that the artist, like the scientist and the builder, is a key figure in I deciding the wealth or poverty of his society in the world of tomorrow, and I do mean by wealth or poverty the measure of a people’s material bounty, the level of their moral and spiritual standing, and the extent of their freedom and dignity as individuals.

The artist’s responsibility, by virtue of his special gifts, is to act perhaps as guide or prime mover in making certain that the revolution which will transform the world or his national milieu will be more than just a surface revolution, not just another shift in the distribution of power and property, from one group of people to another group of people; rather it is his responsibility to make certain that the revolution will go deeply to the fundamentals of the human condition. More than any other productive member of a society, the artist and others to whom these awards belong can best point the way to a revolution of the essence, the essence of life as lived everyday by people.

Much as we may depend on the technical and managerial intelligentsia, these specialists can at best serve only within a limited area; we need more support to supplement their efforts and cause whatever change we choose to have , seep down through the various levels of society; and this additional power pat we need could conceivably come from the force and influence of those who provide the new increments to our culture and in a real way shape the ideas and spirit which move people forward.

I believe that you, the awardees, and those like you, the creative people of our society, are in a strong position to enter wholeheartedly the development process as well as play leading roles in the movement forward, toward fruitful change

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].