Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Memorial Day Services for America’s War Dead

[Delivered on May 24, 1981]

In a world kept tense by the persistent thump of conflict and turmoil, the moments when we gather in this way to honor the dead of war are precious and fleeting. Yet brief though these moments are, they tell as much not only of what we must remember, but also of what we must look to in the future.

All humanity, it is said, come as mourners before the graves of the dead in battle. Men and nations may for a time stand at opposite sides in the theater of conflict; yet when they come in homage before the crosses of the dead, they are all the same in the veneration of what is noble and heroic.

Even more so do they stand together, when they have known, as we Filipinos and Americans have known what it means to fight a war together and to struggle for a cause which they both believed in.

In the monuments that we raise in honor of our war dead, in the crosses that we plant upon the graves of the nameless and the fallen, in the memory we keep alive of all who fought and died in battle—are enshrined our gratitude for their selflessness and their heroism. We say often that we shall never forget their noble sacrifice: the sacrifice that makes it possible for us, the living, to enjoy the fruits of freedom, of independence, of life itself. They continue to fortify our faith in remembering them, we acknowledge how those values and institutions for which they laid down their lives. In commemorations such as this, we affirm and proclaim a precious facet of our humanity.

The veneration of heroes is a universal practice of every kind of society, whether civilized or otherwise. In the earliest communities, the sacrifices of individuals to the cause of communal life have sustained social cohesiveness and formed one of the most important factors for the perpetuation of a particular society. Again and again personal heroism rises on the human stage, larger than life as we say, to preserve and conserve the life of a community. Without demeaning the nobility of the sacrifices of heroes, it may even be said that the laying down of one’s life for the survival of the many is present also in the animal world. It is an instinctual reaction to any danger that threatens all societies whether human or animal.

But as men we see in these sacrifices a far more sublime meaning and purpose. With us it is a conscious act; an act that an individual undertakes only after having calculated the personal loss against the collective gain. It is also a conscious choice, and only with courage and fortitude are we able to brave the tides of battle, to hazard life and comfort for a. cause greater than ourselves.

In war as in all other forms of human conflict, momentous decisions must be made; decisions that spell the difference between survival and disintegration not only for individuals but also for entire nations. Be it in the heat of combat or in the sober respites between battles, those to whom we now pay homage came upon the crucial choice that one man’s life is far less important than the continuation of a cause, of a people. It is this decision that determined their heroism.

History shows us that the impulse to lay down one’s life for the benefit of the community, whether global or national, is strongest among the more conscious developers of human values. In wars and other struggles it has always been the cream of our societies who have been the most willing to pay the price for the survival of the race, or the advancement of a cause.

One of the greatest of America’s generals, Gen. Douglas MacArthur once said, “The soldier, above all other people, prays for peace, for he must suffer and bear the deepest wounds and the scars of war.”

There is a profound and disturbing paradox in this, because despite the sacrifices, the labors, that men have committed to the field of battle, peace continues to elude the dreams of mankind.

Even as we pause to pay this yearly tribute, we are conscious at this moment of the churning waters of contemporary times, we are aware of the perils and the dangers that evoke new presentiments of conflict, and especially presentiments of a global war that may bring humanity to the portals of another dark age.

And because of this, individual courage and collective resolve must be invoked once more.

Humanity’s survival in the face of this threatening cloud cannot be attained where fears are larger than aims, where efforts falter before the forces that threaten, those fundamental values that keep our world together, where initiatives are wanting in keeping peoples and nations free to pursue their destinies. Peace as we knew before, and must realize once again, cannot be attained or maintained in capitulation and surrender to the forces of discord and division.

Again and again we have seen in the pages of history that if the world has not broken apart in the face of the forces of war and aggression, this has been because many nations have stood their ground in the name not only of nationality and flag, but in the name of human civilization itself.

Such I think has been the meaning in America’s historic role in global affairs. Such is what we see when we sift through the occasional vacillations and misteps, and consider America’s efforts to lead and point the way to stability and peace in the world.

Standing upon the hallowed ground, no one can forget how often America has sacrificed hundreds of thousands of her people in far-flung battlefields throughout the world in defense of fundamental values. Many a time, she has come under criticism in her global role—alienated sometimes from the peoples who otherwise should follow her lead—but fundamentally I think there is much in this vision that enjoys the support of many peoples and nations.

We Filipinos—though we may disagree at times with our allies—are basically aware of the historic consequences of America’s own sacrifices. We share the basic beliefs and fundamental philosophies about the development of man and his society. We value the same freedoms and have time and again been just as willing to take on part of the burden for safeguarding them. So it is in this spirit that we participate today in these memorial services in honor of America’s heroic dead. We honor your dead, as you honor them. And we stand one with you and with them in the hope for peace and stability in our world.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.