Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the PAF Anniversary

[Delivered on May 2, 1982]

It is a pleasure for me to join you once again at this anniversary celebration of the Philippine Air Force, the 47th of your continuing history of service to the nation. Tradition has allowed me as President of the Republic and as your Commander-in-Chief to be present at quite a few of these occasions during the last 15 years or so. In all this time I have been privileged to observe at close hand, and to contribute in some measure towards, the steady development of the PAF into the proud service that it is today, an institution with a rightful claim to a tradition that rivals that of any other branch of our armed forces. On this happy day of commemoration, I, on behalf of our grateful nation, extend to every officer, airman, and civilian personnel of the Philippine Air Force all over the land our heartful thanks and our warmest congratulations. The PAF is what it is today because of you and the character and dedication you have brought to your duties.

By traditional reckoning, forty seven years would signify the final approaches to middle age in a man’s life. It is ordinarily a period when a distinct slackening in the tempo of living is imposed by biological imperatives. However, while this may hold true for common man, this is not necessarily the fate of human institutions which are, after all, larger than any single human entity in its composition. This is the truth for the Philippine Air Force which, on its 47th year today, has once again established a record of service and accomplishment that is evidence more of robust youth and a youthful spirit than anything else.

New heights have been reached and new records have been established by the PAF this year in its continuing commitment to the service and security of our people and our country. Nowhere perhaps is the vital importance of the Air Force in times of peace more deeply appreciated than when disaster strikes substantial areas of our farflung communities. You will recall that during the last six months of 1981 three typhoons of unusually great intensities—Elang, Anding, and Dinang—battered the provinces of Mindoro, Marinduque, the Bicol provides, and Samar. The Philippine Air Force was among the first to reach these areas with much needed relief goods to alleviate the plight of thousands of our countrymen. Of the total 7.5 million pounds of cargo transported by usual airlift operations, fully 20 per cent were in the form of relief goods delivered to afflicted and often unreachable areas all over the country. When killer floods rampaged through the provinces of Butuan, Misamis, and Agusan early this year, the Air Force was promptly there with relief material and the more critical assurance of our abiding concern and commiseration in their darkest hour. Some 5,400 patients both military and civilian were also evacuated by PAF aircraft during this period.

Because some areas of our country cannot be serviced by regular commercial flights, the Air Force has, for many years, been a vital means of transporting cargo and personnel to and from these areas. This year a new high in the number of passengers transported has been chalked up by the PAF, a total of some 167,853 passengers, which again is a significant increase from what was accomplished the year before.

This traditional record of constructive service to national and local development projects is equally evident in the areas of aerial photogrammetry where this year an additional 102,555 hectares were covered in the provinces of Palawan, Zambales, Sacobia resettlement, Cavite, Batanes, and Masbate. These missions were done in conjunction with projects being undertaken by the K-K-K Secretariat, the Ministry of Social Services and Development, the Ministry of Human Settlements and several sectors of our Armed Forces.

At the request of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Philippine Sugar Commission, several weather modification flights were made by PAF aircraft. Artificial rain stimulation flights in a total of 151 sorties were conducted over 250,000 hectares of reforestation areas and 795,000 hectares of rice, corn, coconut, and sugar plantations in the provinces of Panay, Negros, Cotabato, Isabela, Palawan, and Batangas.

Search and rescue missions for distressed or missing fishing and other ocean-going vessels accounted for a total of 98 sorties in a total of over 150 flight hours.

Not unlike the other branches of our Armed Forces, the Philippine Air Force has responded with heartwarming vigor and enthusiasm to our call for support to the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran. It has been reported that already 21 sites in all AFP bases and air stations all over the country have been transformed into agro-forestry nursery areas and that at present more than 15,999 fruit-bearing trees are being cultivated. With the fishponds, the livestock and poultry project already ongoing, it is not an impossibility to envision a time when all our air bases can probably be self-sufficient in their basic food requirements. This certainly is an objective worth aiming for in the years ahead. We hope to see more extensive participation of all those residing inside PAF bases in K-K-K projects next year. Meantime, what you have achieved in the few short months since we instituted the K-K-K program deserves our warmest commendation. I urge you all to hold true to this course in the future.

The achievement of our airmen on land has received further burnish with their track record during the 11th Southeast Asian Games. I can understand very well the great pride you have in the 18 PAF athletes who participated in the games. They have indeed added a further glow to the air force tradition with their rich harvest of 6 gold medals, 4 silver and 9 bronze in the fields of weightlifting, swimming, cycling, volleyball. As you know, sports development is one of our important concerns and I would like to see greater measures taken by the air force towards developing and fostering the athletes in their midst. They are truly great assets to the air force and to the national prestige as well. I congratulate you all for the honor you have brought to our country.

I have spoken at great length on the tasks of peace that our Philippine Air Force has accomplished in the past year. I am happy and thankful that it is of these that we can continue to be concerned with. It is our fervent hope that only peace and the complexities of national development shall exercise our fullest faculties for always and that occasions such as this anniversary celebration shall only seek to measure the progress we have achieved in our quest for a better life for all of our people. But we have learned only too well from the hard lessons of the past that the other side of the coin of peace is eternal vigilance and preparedness. So while in these times of peace we must be about with the priorities of nation building, we must also renew our resolve to be ever vigilant lest by subversion from within or aggression from without we shall once again lose all that we treasure. It is deeply heartening to know that in the Philippine Air Force we have not only an effective partner in the tasks of peace but also a certain and capable defender in the tasks of war. It is a happy indication of the peace of our times that combat air operations accounted for only .07 per cent of total flying hours logged this year by PAF aircraft. Meanwhile, pilot training and proficiency flights, test flights, functional and engineering flights and such other exercises with the objective of improving the readiness of our aircrew for the task of air defense continued apace.

The PAF has indeed come a long way from its modest beginnings 47 years ago. Much has changed since those early times from its equipment to the mode of training for its air crew. Yet one thing remains constant and unchanging and this is the spirit of dedication to the welfare and security of the Filipino nation. It is this spirit that has caused to be enshrined in your hall of fame the names of countless men and women who have placed this duty over and above life itself. Today, your country salutes you and wishes you clear skies for always.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.