Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Inauguration of the Magat Dam

[Delivered on October 27, 1982]

In the story of every ambitious undertaking, many chapters can be written of the many difficulties and trials encountered along the way, but there always comes a point, for so long as we persist, when at long last we find fulfillment and vindication for all the labors borne and expended.

We have come at such a point in this ambitious and impressive Magat River Multi-purpose Project. And this is truly a day of pride for all those who have worked on the project, and for all our people and our country.

For today we bear witness to the fulfillment of a vision that has taken all of twenty years to realize, and a tremendous expenditure of time and resources. We look to the month of October 1962 as the beginning of the project for it was then that the Magat River Multi-purpose Project was first conceived. That year marked the signing of an agreement between the Philippine Government, represented by the National Economic Council (NEC), and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), calling for the establishment of a comprehensive program of water resource investigation and development in seven major river basins of the country, of which the Magat River was one.

Fully two-thirds of these 20 years were spent in undertaking a series of in-depth surveys and economic and engineering feasibility studies, which employed the services of Filipino, American, Japanese and German engineers. The surveys were completed in 1971, and subsequently the Magat River feasibility study was completed, and this reported the engineering feasibility and economic viability of a multi-purpose project within the Magat River basin area.

Based on the study, I subsequently promulgated P.D. No. 693 on May 7, 1975, authorizing the construction of the Magat River Multi-purpose Project, with full provisions for its financing and for other purposes. And for the next seven years, implementation was undertaken without let-up.

What we witness here today is the completion of the dam component of the project, which is all the more remarkable because it has been completed two months ahead of schedule. Sometime next year, the power component of the project is expected to be completed.

By itself, the M.R.M.P. is the biggest single infrastructure project ever undertaken by our government, and it is also believed to be the largest single on-going water resource development project in Asia today. Such is its complexity and scope that the project has required the full-time involvement of two major government agencies, the National Power Corporation and the National Irrigation Administration, as well as the invaluable support of the Ministry of Public Works and Highways.

To all of them, we now express our warmest congratulations and thanks at this inauguration. When fully completed, the Magat River Multi-purpose Project is expected to cost about $750 million. Its 45 square kilometer reservoir has a storage capacity of some 1.25 billion cubic meters at full supply levels. The completed Magat High Dam is said to stand some 114 meters from its present streambed and has a crest-length stretch of 4,160 meters. Its massive spillways have a discharge capacity of 30,600 cubic meters of water per second which is seven times greater than the Pantabangan Flood Spillway capacity.

But quite apart from the technical dimensions of this facility lies the greater significance of its beneficial effects on the farmers who will be its foremost beneficiaries. Together with the irrigation infrastructure that is concurrently being built, the Magat Dam will extend irrigation water supply to a total of 102,000 hectares of farmlands in some 22 towns in the provinces of Isabela, Quirino, and Ifugao. As a product of this vital input, it is projected that average palay yields will at least double from the present 2 tons and 2.1 tons per hectare during wet and dry seasons respectively, to 4 and 4.2 tons per hectare. Combined with an increase of almost 100 percent capacity in intensive cropping, this will result in an annual rice production of 16.34 million cavans, almost four times the present annual harvest of 4.78 million cavans.

This irrigation aspect of the Magat River Multi-purpose Project will be further complemented with the power delivery phase sometime next year. At an estimated maximum installed capacity of 540 megawatts, the electricity to be generated by the Magat turbines will be sufficient to supply the energy requirements of Northern Luzon and parts of Central Luzon. It might bear pointing out that this hydroelectric power capacity is more than twice the combined output of the Ambuklao, Binga and Pantabangan power plants and will represent an annual saving of 2.06 million barrels of oil.

The importance of this facility therefore is incalculable when measured in terms of its impact on the development prospects of Northern Luzon. It is altogether forseeable that in a future much nearer than once thought possible the three provinces directly affected by the M.R.M.P. Project will be transformed into the food basket of the north. When fully operational, the M.R.M.P. will make possible through the delivery of a wider network of cheap electric power the envisioned industrialization of the Cagayan Valley and its neighbors. For such are the two major ends for which we have entered into the implementation of the Magat River Multi-purpose Project, namely, that with its irrigation phase, we shall provide our northern farmers with the critical input of water in order to increase their food production capabilities, and with the power generation phase, the electricity required to enhance existing industries and invite the entry of newer ones.

When viewed in the total scope of our development efforts for the entire country, this project will stand out for its sheer size and scale; yet it is also important to remember that it is but one of many facilities that through the years we have incessantly constructed throughout our land as an essential foundation for national development. Its meaning therefore does not stand apart from other facilities; it complements others like it. And it represents one more manifestation of our ambitious vision of the future.

We sometimes hear it said that we are a nation with many dreams. That is true. But we are also a nation that fully matches its dreams with deeds and accomplishments. And this Magat River multi-purpose project is proof of this.

As we look towards the future, we think not merely of a few among our people, or a few communities, participating and sharing in the fruits of progress. We think of all our millions and all our communities sharing in the achievement of a new life.

And there is I believe no better demonstration of our government’s commitment to our countrymen than the completion of this magnificent facility—whose singular purpose is to lift up the lives of millions whom it will touch, and the national economy which it will irrevocably help to develop. For them and the nation, therefore, this project is fittingly inaugurated today.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.