Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Tour Di Horizon for Singapore Ministers

[Delivered on February 28, 1980]

ASEAN in the Eighties and Beyond

FIRST OF ALL, Mr. Prime Minister and distinguished members of the Cabinet of Singapore and other officials, allow me once again to formally say, welcome to the Philippines. We certainly are pleased and happy to be given this opportunity to exchange impressions and assessments.

We start out with our security and economic assessments in relation to the present international climate as well as the expected developments in this decade up to the year 2000. This was the format which was suggested, and I think we will all adopt it.

May I start by saying that most of our positions and assessments in ASEAN have been already articulated. But there are certain conclusions and projections which can be drawn from the various assessments and assumptions that have been made by the individual leaders of ASEAN and by the positions taken by ASEAN in relation to various developments and crises as well as issues that have arisen.

We can probably say that the end of this last decade witnessed some dramatic and unexpected twists of fortune that can very well mold the shape not only of this decade, the ’80s, but the decade after that up to the year 2000. And I refer, of course, to the quiet and creeping growth in strength of Communism, and the underrating by the Western powers of the effects of subversion and insurgency on small developing countries. Incorporated into this is the bias and prejudice of the Western nations against any open and announced opposition to insurgency and subversion. It is their feeling that every man has the right to rebel and revolt against his government, adopting the old Calvinist theory of the right to rebellion and giving it legal form by denominating it as a part of political opposition.

This is one of the serious misconceptions which makes difficult the efforts of small developing countries like Singapore and the Philippines and, for that matter, all the states of ASEAN to utilize central govern. mental authority with the effectiveness and forcefulness necessary to meet insurgency. And this gets further confused by their injecting into this already prejudicial misconception the idea of human rights, meaning the right of every individual to take up arms against his government, if necessary. Western legalities never say so, but this is the trend and inclination of their bias and prejudices.

Nevertheless, the small developing countries have carried on with their work even at the risk of antagonizing some of the Western powers, including the United States of America, and the liberals, especially the Eastern establishment liberals. The last several decades of the 1950s to the end of the 1970s saw small developing countries meeting insurgency on their own terms, regardless of the effects on the Western media as well as the Western liberals. Thus did they develop centralist forms of government. Whether they be called martial-law governments, emergency-rule governments, parliamentary governments, or controlled democracies, the fact remains that they were all centralist in the sense that they were an effort on the part of small developing countries to utilize governmental power in order to protect the body politic, the established governments and the republic.

While this was going on, however, the bias of the Western countries against the use of governmental power against insurgency or subversion or even the mere mention of subversion or insurgency as problems created an opportunity for Communism to make substantial gains not only through exported wars or infiltration but also through the development of the military capability of the Soviet Union. Quietly, the Soviet Union built up its military power, and slowly continued to employ the strategy of Balkanization to establish security alliances among satellite states. We need only mention here the examples of South Africa, Yemen, Somalia, Ethiopia, and possibly now, Afghanistan.

The fact remains that the prevailing mood in the United States is biased and prejudiced against the attempts of small nations to deal with subversion or insurgency, possibly because of the traumatic experience the American people and the American political leadership had in Vietnam. Later on, this was further exacerbated by Watergate which had the effect of making Americans lose some confidence in themselves. While America and other Western countries remained inmobilized, the Soviet Union apparently succeeded in the 1970s to develop its military capability to such an extent that in the view of American political and military leaders, the Soviet Union is now equal in both strategic and conventional strength to the United States.

I have read the report of Secretary Brown to the United States Congress, wherein he states that without reducing the large forces stationed in Eastern Europe, the Soviets have tripled the size of their forces in the Far East, and they are developing naval and other capabilities that will permit them to operate beyond the periphery of the USSR. We no longer preclude their being able to operate simultaneously in general parts of the world.

At the same time, the three principal personalities who have greatly influenced the evolution of American policy towards the Soviet Union, Keenan, Kissinger and Brzezinski, say the following. Brzezinski has said that the Soviet Union has finally arrived at a historic juncture, and I quote, “Having escaped the continental limits of its military power, it is only beginning the truly imperial phase of its development.” The American leaders, as I said, have stated that the Soviet Union is now at par with the United States in terms of strategic weapons. The American defense intelligence agency has described the Soviet army as being ”the most powerful land army in the world today.”

It is therefore obvious, according to American experts, that the most critical objective of the Soviet Union is to alter the global balance of power in its favor. And here I quote the statements of some of the American leaders; “Russian moves toward the East and the South should then be considered as a part of a long-range strategy to upset the balance of power both in the Northeast Pacific, in the Persian Gulf and the Arab region. Since Soviet eastern expansion has so far been blocked off by both Japan and China, there is one area which they consider fair game—the arc of instability which extends from Kabul to Ankara and even down to Addis Ababa.”

I can go on quoting all of these statements which indicate that indeed the Soviet Union has been quietly utilizing the period when the United States, its principal rival, and American allies had hypnotized themselves into believing that detente meant inaction and non-preparation to improve Russian military capability. It is against this background that we ask the question: What then is the role of ASEAN as well as the individual members of ASEAN?

In all candor, although we have always claimed for ASEAN some measure of importance, that importance apparently is most relevant only to our respective countries. We actually cannot change the strategic situation, the global military situation or the respective strengths of the two superpowers.

The small countries of the Third World as well as ASEAN, therefore, perhaps have only one role, and that is to encourage or to bring about a change in the policy of the American government, the other super power in order that it may neutralize the expansionist and predatory policies of the Soviet Union. And it is here where, as the Prime Minister has very well said last night, “Fortuitous events occurred to bring about this change in American Policy.”

Perhaps we shall be remembered by history as having been saved by religious fanaticism and Russian narrow-mindedness. Religious fanaticism, following Iran’s capture of the U.S. embassy and taking of host ages, is a dramatic manifestation of what the Iranians have called as plain and simple nationalism. And after that, according to our information, the Ustinov-masterminded entry of Russian troops into Afghanistan. So, two fortuitous events have occurred one after the other and these apparently have turned around the thinking of the entire American population, from the President to the members of Congress and to the ordinary citizens.

As I said, Southeast Asia, Southwest Asia, and Asia in general, have suffered from European weakness and American vacillation, particularly during the beginning of the last decade. In the latter part of the decade came all these fortuitous events, these fortunate occurrences which, from the viewpoint of social scientists, were bound to take place owing to the international atmosphere. But just the same, from my perspective and from the point of view of the Prime Minister, they were indeed most fortuitous because they changed completely the attitude and the mood of the American people.

If it be true, as some of the experts claim, that these rivalries and conflicts will tend to cancel power and balance power so that we will end up with messy guerrilla wars, although not any big war in the continent of Asia, and if it be true, as they conclude, that ultimately what we will have is an economic war, then ASEAN is on the right track in thinking in terms of economic development instead of military alliances or arrangements.

ASEAN should therefore strive to encourage the resolution and determination of the United States to contest—and I use the term that has been adopted by Brzezinski, who refuses to use the Keenan term “containment”—the Soviet Union.

In an effort to convince the United States that subversion is not just a figment of the imagination but that it constitutes a serious threat to us, and that the Communist expansionist policy is for real and therefore American presence in the Pacific is necessary, the Philippines entered into various military agreements with the United States.

I will now proceed to explain the various military agreements that we have with the United States.

If you will remember, the first military agreements between the United States and the Philippines was the Military Assistance Pact which was signed immediately after the war. It pertains to American aid in the training of our troops as well as in the acquisition of military equipment and supplies.

On August 30, 1951, while we were still fighting the Korean war, the Philippines entered into the Mutual Defense Pact with the United States. How does the Mutual Defense Pact with the United States read? It commits both the United States and the Philippines to act, and I quote now, “to meet the common dangers in accordance with our constitutional processes in the event of an armed attack in the Pacific area or the Republic of the Philippines.” This was reaffirmed on January 6, 1979 through an exchange of letters between Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and Foreign Minister Romulo. Furthermore, the United States reaffirmed its obligation to consult with the Philippines whenever the territorial integrity and political independence or security of either party are threatened by events in the Pacific. We were then re negotiating the Military Bases Agreement, and we wanted to know the parameters of the Mutual Agreement, and we wanted to know the parameters of the Mutual Defense Pact before we amended the Military Bases Agreement. Finally, the United States reaffirmed its commitment to act in cases, and I quote, “of an attack on the Philippine Armed Forces, public vessels, or aircraft in the Pacific even if it would not occur within the metropolitan territory of the Philippines.” The metropolitan territory of the Philippines is described in the Treaty of Paris. Again at the instance of the Philippines, we recently obtained from President Carter a letter which further confirms this obligation and expresses the belief that the new bilateral agreement will strengthen the security not only of the Philippines and the United States but also of the entire Western Pacific region. From this we can gather that the United States has specific obligations to the Philippines.

On January 7, 1979, the Philippines formally entered into the RP-US Military Facilities Agreement which replaced the US-Philippine Military Bases Agreement. These facilities agreement was the subject of study and negotiations for several years and was finalized a month before in my home in the North by Ambassador Murphy and the military officials. Under this agreement, the American bases were returned to the Philippines and considered as part of our territory, finally and ultimately.

Earlier, U.S. Attorney General Brown raised the issue as to whether the military bases were under the sovereignty of the Philippines or not.

Finally, the United States agreed to settle this once and for all, and the lands were restored to the Philippines.

At the same time, we agreed that the United States would have unhampered use and operation of their military facilities in the Philippine Naval Base in Subic Bay and in the Philippine Air Base at Clark. Thus, Clark Air Force Base, which is the homebase of the 13th Air Force and other tactical units such as the Third Tactical Fighter Wing, the 374 Tactical Airlift Wing, the Third Combat Support Group, the 1961st Communication Group, the First Medical Service Wing, and the 22nd Security Squadron, was reduced from 53,700 hectares to 4,517 hectares, while the Subic Naval Base, which is the homebase of the 7th US Fleet, now covers an area of 6,300 hectares, down from 24,000 hectares.

However, the lands that were returned to the Philippines will be made available as training ground for both American and Philippine forces. In Clark Air Force Base, for instance, the Crow Valley target range, which covers a wide area was given back to the Philippines. But it is being used, anyway, for training purposes. I understand that the best training area in the entire Pacific is the Subic Naval Base which has facilities like the naval station, air station, depots, hospitals, public works center, marine barracks, and ship repair facilities. We have also reserved some areas for communications and other requirements.

Today, we do not know the number of personnel stationed in these bases. But in 1975, there were 15,000 Filipinos and 9,000 Americans, excluding dependents, working in the Clark Air Force Base, while in the Subic Naval Base, there were 26,000 Filipinos and 6,000 Americans, excluding dependents.

So we have these military agreements—the Military Assistance Pact, the Mutual Defense Agreement, and now the U.S.-Philippine Military Facilities Agreement. With these agreements, it is our hope that America will maintain its military presence in the area. We have, however, come to an understanding that every five years either party can move to either rescind or amend the Military Facilities Agreement.

The other matter that has cropped up for discussions is the effectivity of the Manila Pact. It has been asked why the United States keeps referring to the Manila Pact when there may be no need to do so, and any reference to the Manila Pact seems to offend the Chinese whom they are trying to win over or have already won to their side.

The truth of the matter is that the Philippines has been trying to stop any reference to the Manila Pact inasmuch as existing agreements can be made workable. There is a Mutual Defense Agreement between the Philippines and the United States, a Mutual Defense Agreement which binds the Philippines to act as soon as any of the armed vessels of the United States gets involved in any fighting even in the Asian mainland. What we are trying to clarify now is the extent of one involvement. Would it not be better to clarify this whole thing without just depending on the Manila Pact? Up to a point, as you yourselves have said, it is all right to speak of non-alignment. But when security is involved all other principles have to be subordinated to the security of the state—to Singapore security and to Philippine security. This pragmatic position we have already adopted.

From our viewpoint, therefore, it should be the purpose of ASEAN to encourage the United States and the Western powers to continue the policy of contestation, to meet the Soviet threat and to get as many of its allies involved in such a policy.

The question also has been raised as to whether the Philippines would favor arming the ASEAN nations. Our answer has always been this: Even if the entire ASEAN group were to be armed, it would not be sufficient to meet the threat of the Vietnamese Armed Forces. Besides, this could prove provocative and counterproductive. Thus, I understand, is also the position of Singapore.

Now comes the question as to how we see things develop within this decade and up to the year 2000. It is our belief that there will be uneasy peace. We do not foresee Vietnam attacking Thailand, but it will continue to threaten Thailand. By the very presence of its troops in Kampuchea and by its efforts to consolidate its position in Kampuchea, Vietnam will threaten Thailand. From this, accordingly, tension will prevail.

We believe that the Chinese will continue to support some kind of guerrilla force that will oppose the Vietnamese in Kampuchea. However, we also believe that effective control over Kampuchea has passed into the hands of the Vietamese—and this means a messy type of guerrilla warfare.

For this reason, it will be necessary for the members of ASEAN to keep on encouraging and boosting the morale of Thailand. Perhaps ASEAN should impress upon the United States the need to increase American aid to Thailand, especially since our friend, Prime Minister Kriangsak, seems to be under pressure again. Yet, I think he is in control. I do not believe that there is any serious threat to his continuance in office, but just the same, this kind of harassment in the face of such grave danger to Thailand’s security is unfortunate.

Some social scientists and the students of political science now say that the battles in the next two decades will not be fought in the military battlefields but on the economic front, and so developing countries should concern themselves more and more with economic development, which after all seems to be the answer to subversion in some cases. Perhaps these two fortuitous events we have already discussed have given the small developing countries the time and the opportunity to consolidate their position and thereby to more extensively exploit their natural resources*

The question maybe asked: Can we develop faster than Vietnam even if that country is being supported by another foreign power? My answer is yes; I am optimistic about it.

Another complication arises from the understanding entered into by Japan and China to develop China’s natural resources. Our view on this is that they will try and use each other for their own purposes.

In this decade and perhaps in the next, China may not be a threat. But our younger leaders who will be running our countries in the year 2000, should be warned that China will constitute a possible threat to our security through contamination or subversion.

Japan cannot be completely ruled out as a threat because it could become desperate if adverse developments causes it to lose some of its markets or sources of raw materials. As some Japanese economic experts say, the raw materials coming from Southeast Asia can be converted by the Southeast Asian nations themselves into finished and processed products, so that in the decade of the ’80s Southeast Asia will be competing with Japan. Perhaps ASEAN should now study how the raw materials can be reallocated and their markets determined. What I am saying is that Japan should not be pushed so hard against the wall to the extent that it will once again turn inward and then in self-pity or desperation start a war.

China, of course, is expected to flood the market with cheap goods. ASEAN, then, should now study what goods we can develop so we will not directly compete with China. Singapore is well-placed by virtue of its high technology, but the other ASEAN nations will be just at a disadvantage in a situation where we have to compete with China’s mass production capabilities.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1985). Presidential speeches (Vol. 10). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].