Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the Philippine Army Day

[Released on April 22, 1982]

I have always regarded my coming here for this annual anniversary observance of the Philippine Army as a kind of personal homecoming to the major service that I belong to as a reservist.

Just like every officer and member of the corps, I feel fully the elation and pride that you all feel as you commemorate this historic day in the annals of the Philippine Army. And as President of our Republic, I accord this service the highest of our commendation and regard, for its invaluable service through the years to flag, people and country.

From the revolution of 1896 which gave birth to the Philippine Army, through the difficult years of World War II and the occupation of our country by a foreign power, through the internal crisis that nearly tore our country apart in the 60’s and the 70’s, and to the present effort to secure national stability and security, this service and its many officers and men have always been at the forefront of struggle. And through all these challenges, the army trooper and officer have never wavered in their devotion to our country’s cause.

We call to mind today the memory of those members of the corps who lost their lives in the service of that cause. We pay tribute once more to the many who after their time of service have since gone into retirement. And lastly we salute the officers and men of the Philippine Army today, who in their own exemplary way, carry on the high traditions of the service.

In the many crises and struggles that time and again have confronted our people and our country, there have always been a few within this corps who have distinguished themselves in combat. Yet even more than the personal heroism and patriotism of individual soldiers and officers, there has always been the strength of the Philippine Army as an institution, which in gathering together the best of our soldiery finally spelled the difference between success or failure in the confrontation of national crisis and challenge.

For truly, as Edith Cavell once said back in 1917, “patriotism is not enough” to secure the safety of men and nations. And neither is technology enough to do the job.

At the heart of every successful defense of a country’s right to self-determination, behind every defense system that successfully thwarts or discourage the ambitions of others — there is above all the discipline, cohesiveness and strength of a nation’s arms. A truly vigilant and dedicated army is more than the sum of its parts. It has a vital and larger life of its own — vital because it gathers together the loyalty and dedication of all its officers and men, and larger because it counts upon the support of the people as its essential strength.

Here if I may say so is to be found the authentic meaning and significance of what we sometimes refer to as “Our Citizen’s Army.” Its strength lies not alone in the service of a professional soldiery, but also in the citizen’s participation in the army’s mission. Such a concept of a civilian military in which is closely associated with the idea of democrary itself: in which a nation’s arms flow fundamentally from the power of the people. As one historian has reminded us this was the great principle of the French Revolution, wherein the nation in arms, and not just a professional standing army, was the safeguard of the Republic, and the guarantor against tyranny.

What has distinguished I think the history of the Philippine Army as a service in our Armed Forces is the way in which this idea has been zealously maintained enhanced and developed through the years. We have never had to face the problem of a military corps that saw itself as separate from the mandate of the government and the citizenry. And we have done much in recent years to even more fully realize this ideal in practice, by prudent measures to encourage and promote citizen’s participation in the Armed Forces.

To the traditional idea of the soldier as warrior, our soldiery have added the spirit and image of a man of peace, a catalyst of change and reform, and a partner in development. Thus, did we develop a new ethos of conduct for the soldier that best reflects the development and unification that characterizes so much of our society tore.

The Philippine Army has borne this ethos as it kept in step with the nation’s march to stability and greater democracy, and it has served us well in helping to solidify national unity and cooperation under our New Republic.

In giving battle to the dissidents and other subversive elements our soldiery has sought the accomplishment of his mission not merely by force of arms but equally by force of example and moral persuasion; by going to the hinterlands to teach and communicate the goals of the New Republic; by building communities in the vast fields of the countryside; by healing not only the physical wounds of discord but also the wounds of the spirit created by the contest of ideologies for the hearts and minds of men.

On the whole, the impact of the Army’s involvement in the socio-economic development efforts may be measured firstly by the accelerated pace with which government programs and policies have been pursued, and secondly, by the wave of goodwill and mass support that the army has gained by its undertakings which contributed immensely to the neutralization of the threats to our national security.

These intangible accomplishments were expressly acknowledged by the AFP Headquarters when it bestowed a majority of its awards, includuing the most coveted Presidential Streamer, to the Philippine Army during AFP Day last December.

It has never been sufficient or prudent for us to simply focus our total attention on the ability to contain internal insurgency in our country, for the fluidity and dynamics of crisis and conflict always require of us a much wider kind of vigilance and a deeper understanding of the forces that lead to the rise and fall of governments.

I find it gratifying to note that within the Philippine Army there is such a broader vision of the challenges before us. It has evolved adequate organizational structure and capabilities to meet the needs of military actualities. Training of both the regular and reserve forces along the methods of conventional and guerrilla warfare has considerably enhanced the effectiveness and flexibility of troops in any emergent situation. The attainment of a self reliant defense posture has provided the motivating influence for the army to innovate and and devise home grown defense systems that will suitably meet the requirements of its mission. And more than this, the training of the soldier has attained significance not only by his thorough indoctrination in the ethnics of warfare but by his orientation to the ideals of citizenship.

From the recent crisis that we went through as we surmounted the threats to national security we can in sum glean some lessons from which we can cull basic precepts, especially now when we are turning the conditions of peace and order into a time for growth and change.

The first of these is that eternal vigilance is the price we have to pay for the freedom that we enjoy. This means that the army must be developed and organized into an ever prepared force that can cope with both external and internal threats. While we maintain a small regular force, that force must be able to expand overnight to overcome external aggression. Bataan must never happen again.

Second – the army must be development oriented. This becomes essential as we in the government service endeavor to improve the development capacities of our many communities.

Third – the army must be people oriented. The use of military power springs basically from the consent of the people. Thus, the supremacy of civilian authority over the military must always be upheld.

Fourth – we recognize the need for the highest kind of discipline within our Armed Forces: not only the discipline of the service that has marked its capability as a defense force but also the kind of discipline that bears the imprints of compassion, justice, humanism and integrity – thus making it truly the Army of the People. This is the discipline that has carried us through the test of martial law and which we must now sustain in meeting present and future challenges.

I emphasize these points precisely because we are entering a new phase in our efforts at maintaining internal stability and at enhancing our national security.

I can positively say that my three-day state visit to Saudi Arabia, together with the First Lady and various members of the Cabinet, has significantly advanced our hopes for peace and development in the south. We could not have asked for a more fruitful and rewarding outcome than that which emanated from our negotiations with the Saudi government, particularly with King Khaled and Crown Prince Fahd. It is now a clear fact that they gave them assurance of their support to the Philippine government in the peaceful resolution of the Mindanao problem. They extended to me, in clear and precise terms, their support and approval of the administration of the Autonomous Region under the principle of sovereignty and territorial integrity of our Republic, and thus clearly rejected whatever implications of influence the leadership of the MNLF may still hold in its attempt to pursue the cause of separatism in Mindanao.

This in itself is a major victory for us in the diplomatic, security and economic spheres. For even now we have agreed in principle on matters pertaining to economic and technical cooperation between the Philippines and Saudi Arabia.

We are now in a more favorable position to pursue more aggresively the development of the various communities in Mindanao. We can now pursue with greater effectiveness the unification of our people, while giving due regard to the enhancement of minority cultures and traditions and the promotion of the rights of minorities. One nation and one people.

In line with this therefore, I have announced that the elections of members of the legislative councils of Region IX and Region XII will be held in _______. We see this as a means for strengthening the political foundations and structure of the Autonomous Regions of Mindanao and the Muslim people in general.

It is within this framework of goals that the army should now realign its policies and operations in Mindanao, as well as reassess its overall defense posture vis-a-vis the requirements of national security.

The shift towards a more psychologically supportive role in the maintainance of internal stability, rather than military measures or the accomplishment of military objectives alone, should now prevail. What I mean by this is that there is no more urgency or necessity to gain through force or bullets, what can be won through persuasion, through good example, through discipline and through cooperation and understanding. We are more than ever engaged in the battle for the hearts and minds of our citizenry. Insurgency will lose its force and appeal without the support of the people. And the continued support and confidence of our people has always been and should be our strongest weapon infighting insurgency.

To this end, the army must lead by example in ultimately breaking down the remaining ramparts of dissidence and rebellion by building in its place the intangible treasures of peace, confidence, faith and unity among our people, as well as the structures of development and progress that would truly mark their partnership with our people in times of peace.

It was this vision of total involvement of the army and the people in community affairs that we had in mind when we launched the KKK as the centerpiece program of the New Republic.

To this effort, I am pleased to note that the army has taken up the challenge by establishing in all military garrisons and in other military reservations, demonstration farms which were eventually replicated in the enlisted men’s barangays that are established in such reservations. In such a manner did the army put to good use these erstwhile idle pieces of national territories and at the same time improved the economic conditions of its enlisted men.

Perhaps, we can draw some inspiration from the experience of the army in approaching the objectives of the program. For we note that basically the approach is through the political leadership of the enlisted men’s barangay, which, although appointed in accordance with AFP regulations, is responsible to the commander of the garrison for everything that happens in the community. On this grassroot approach, the army works through its KKK organizational hierarchy which is built-in within the army organization.

Not surprisingly perhaps, the army has won the KKK Pilot Project Award last AFP Day.

The continuing process of social, economic and political development provides varied and dynamic areas of opportunities in which the soldier can contribute his share, directly or indirectly, whenever and whereever duty bids him to render service and in whatever capacity he is called upon to serve.

The quintessence of the army’s role – as protector and defender, as teacher and communicator of the ideology of our New Republic, as builder and partner in national development, as proponent of social welfare and uplift, and as disciplined and trusted public servant — inheres in its unwavering commitment to serve our country and our people as an autehntic Army of the People.

Let us, on the occasion of this anniversary, once again pledge ourselves to this vision of our work and purposes.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.