Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 75th anniversary of the Philippine Medical Association

[Delivered on May 21, 1982]

In keeping with our time-honored tradition of hospitality, allow me first of all to extend a very warm welcome to our special guests who are here with us today for the First Medical Association of Southeast Asian Nations Conference. I believe I speak for the entire membership of the Philippine Medical Association, which is also holding its 75th Annual Convention, when I say we are truly honored to host the initial meeting of this new association which brings together not only brothers in ASEAN but also brothers in the exalted profession of medicine. This should make the 75th anniversary of the PMA doubly significant and meaningful; and I think the PMA under the leadership of its incumbent President, Dr. Perla Santos Ocampo, deserves to be congratulated twice over for this achievement.

I am somewhat surprised, however, that it took so long for the leaders of the medical profession of Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines to come together for a conference such as this. As a layman, I have always been impressed by the close ties among doctors the world over. And I have always regarded medicine as the most open of professions. There is hardly a secret formula or technique that a doctor or group of doctors keep close to their chests. Indeed, the unselfish sharing of knowledge and know-how is perhaps the most distinctive characteristic that sets medicine apart from other professions and welds doctors together as one solid universal fraternity regardless of race, color, ideology or nationality. This I believe is how things should really be in a profession that is dedicated to the alleviation of pain and the preservation of human life, a profession that has preserved the noble tradition of service to humanity. Perhaps because of the very close ties you maintain in the medical fraternity, I suppose that our doctors in ASEAN have felt no great urgency until now in following the footsteps of politicians, economists or businessmen who have long since forged close alliances with their own colleagues in the region.

But your conference now indicates a recognition and an acknowledgement of the pressing need to institute a forum for the discussion not only of the most recent developments in the various areas of medical specialization but also of the many common problems affecting the health and physical well-being of the peoples in ASEAN. These are problems that concern both the medical profession and the governments of ASEAN which our peoples expect to provide essential medical services aside from other competing demands for scarce governmental resources. This is why I attach great significance to your conference. And it is my hope that this will mark only the beginning of wider and greater future cooperation among the medical practitioners in the region in providing solutions to the most critical problems afflicting your profession and our peoples.

Many of our problems in the area of health and medicine are common to the member countries of ASEAN by reason of our geography and the similar levels of our respective countries’ economic development, to cite perhaps two of the most critical factors. In the Philippines, pneumonia, cardiovascular diseases, tuberculosis, gastro-enteritis, vitamins and other nutritional deficiencies top the list of killer diseases. I suppose I need not tell you that many of these diseases are directly related to our geography — about which we can do little — and to the level of our economic development where we can and we actually are doing much. In truth it must be said that poverty in our own country. In ASEAN and the rest of the third world, is the leading killer disease. This is why all our plans are focused and most of our resources are being committed to the accelerated economic development of our countries. For poverty spawns malnutrition, poor sanitation, inadequate shelter, inadequate medical services and a host of other problems affecting the health of our peoples. I am, therefore, firmly convinced that the battle against diseases, like many of the problems facing the developing nations of the world, can only be won on the economic front.

This is not to say that in our efforts to develop we can afford to neglect the medical needs of our people. The provision of medical services is a key component of any development program for it cannot be questioned that human productivity depends greatly on the state of every individual’s health. To ensure adequate and competent medical services for our peoples constitutes the unfinished task and the continuing challenge to the medical profession and the governments of Southeast Asia. And I am very happy to note that members of the profession have taken the first step towards facing this challenge through cooperative endeavors.

It is most heartening to know that among the major topics you are set to discuss during your conference are “the role of organized medicine in primary health care delivery” and “containing health care costs”. These are topics that are addressed to the very heart of our problems in health and medical services.

In the Philippines, we have begun to pursue in earnest our primary health care program which is designed to extend medical services to the remotest rural communities. The ultimate objective is to make available to every Filipino the wonders of modern medicine through the provision of community-based health services that are within the reach of every Filipino, both physically and materially. This involves not merely the assignment of competent medical practitioners to rural areas but also the development of indigenous herbal medicines and medicinal plants as well as efforts to encourage the participation of the members of the community in the control, prevention and cure of diseases.

I am positive that through the free exchange of ideas and experiences which you will have occasion to do in the next few days much can be achieved towards making primary health care a reality for the people in every community.

The second issue that you are posed to tackle is equally relevant. For today, many of our people are denied access to medical help not because of distance but because medical care has become rather prohibitive. I am sure that many factors can be held to account for this: the cost of living, the high cost of medical education and training — these and many other reasons combine to raise the cost of health care. I know that the Hippocratic oath does not include the vow of poverty and practical realities dictate that those who have invested so much of their money, time and effort to reach a certain level of competence to be fully compensated. On the other hand, I would like to believe that in a profession as noble as medicine, money and material possessions are but one of the many rewards you derive from the practice of your craft. The persistent clamor of many of our people for some measure of moderation is all too real to ignore. So let me once more appeal particularly to the members of the Philippine Medical Association to temper our natural impulse and desire for material advancement. Let us restore to its lofty position the ideal of service. Which has made medicine a cherished profession so that no one can say that he has been refused your healing hands because of poverty.

I hope that the members of the PMA will again rally together in meeting this call for restraint.

The PMA and the government has moved as one to make substantial inroads against disease. With your unqualified support, we have added 8 months to the Filipino’s average life expectancy during the last two years alone. This year the life expectancy of the average Filipino is projected to be 62.67 where in 1980 it stood at 61.99 years. During the last ten years, the number of hospital beds have been doubled from 21,000 in 1972to 42,461 this year.

On its own, the government has been progressively expanding its medical services. Today, for example, we have 10,500 barangay health stations against only 2,657 in 1975. Our rural health units have grown from 1,502 in 1975 to 1,991 this year.

The government is prepared to do more not only by way of expanding the scope of medical services but also to ensure the welfare of your own colleagues who have joined the government medical corps. Last year we raised the salaries of physicians in partial implementation of the 1979 salary survey conducted by the government so that the lowest paid government doctor now receives P1, 152. Many of you are probably shocked by the figure: it can barely finance the education of a freshman medical student today. Had we authorized the full implementation of the 1979 salary survey, the lowest paid government physician would now be receiving P1,405 a month. I am still shocked by the figure. So today, I have signed an order authorizing another increase in salaries of government doctors. Government physicians will now receive a minimum monthly salary of P1,894, starting January 1, 1982. Corresponding adjustments will be made in the salaries of higher ranking government doctors. This should bring the rates in government at par with those being paid by private hospitals and clinics.

This is our gift, a token of gratitude from the Filipino people to the doctors who care for their health.

Let me thank the Philippine Medical Association for inviting me again to address your convention. I hope that it will be as fruitful as other conventions you have held in the past.

Thank you and good day.

# # #

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.