Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Graduation Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy

[Delivered in Baguio City, March 22, 1970]

The Military as Guardian of Society

THIS IS THE fifth commencement exercises of the Philippine Military Academy that I have attended as guest of honor, a privilege which I value very much, and God willing, I shall be at the graduation ceremonies of the Philippine Military Academy in the next three years.

Now, that is quite clear, let me not be misquoted by anyone. I said three years.

The reason I have accepted each of your invitations with great delight is that there is a special atmosphere on this campus which invigorates me and all those who come to participate in your ceremonies, and which revives the enthusiasm for such old-fashioned creeds as honor, loyalty, patriotism, integrity and human dignity.

It has been a long time since anyone has spoken of these old virtues. They have been forgotten by an impatient generation.

As it happens, these qualities have been drawn into new focus since I have been here last. Last year, on this same occasion, I spoke of the need for a gradual and peaceful development in our society. I emphasized then that the military was increasingly called upon, owing to its peculiar skills and resources, to contribute to this national development. But recent events have shown beyond doubts that there are certain elements in our society who do not share our passion for gradual and peaceful growth. They are determined instead to participate in an unnecessary and ruinous crisis, in which the transformation we all seek shall be accomplished with one swift and final blow, no matter what the cost, no matter what the price.

In a word, the democratic ideal of peaceful and self-actualizing growth is today actively challenged, as the alternative of violent change is pushed upon our people by elements which have no use for traditional values. The military, which I had asked during my first administration to perform an important role, is today called upon to give to the nation not only more, but all, of the skills and resources peculiar to it.

The military is in a situation today where it must demonstrate the superiority of the democratic ideals and processes of change by its ability to fight and readiness to sacrifice for this, for the democratic process in a free society, in time of peace and in time of hostilities.

I am convinced that the overwhelming majority of our people have the desire as well as the competence to transform themselves peacefully into a progressive society. We have over the past four years put this desire and this competence to work, and today we see the change that has evolved as a consequence.

Indeed, the desire and the competence for rapid but not wrenching nor destructive, self-defeating, change have intensified and escalated with every successful act of reformation simply by declaring our awareness of the social and economic ills we must confront, as when I said in 1966 that the country was sitting on top of a social volcano when I spoke before the clerics of the Catholic church and the hierarchy of the Catholic church. We put the nation on a new course of disciplined and steady growth. The revolutionary activity that followed that declaration of restlessness and impatience has been unprecedented, not only in its initiatives, but also in the manner and scope of social and economic measures that have been carried out.

I need not go into them, I need not go into agricultural development, into infrastructure, into economic development, into the increase in manufacturing as well as the increase by leaps and bounds of those services and requirements we directly need in our country. Nor will I go into the change of heart and mind, and of the soul and spirit of our people. But let me point out that of necessity, initiatives and innovations in the process of developing our society have had necessarily to operate within the democratic framework.

Many people sometimes forget what this means. This means the tedious, painful, patient, loving work not only on the part of the leader, but on the part of the people themselves. Unfortunately, the impatience that we declared and put to work over the past four years provided a bandwagon into which communist revolutionary strategy has leaped and has since appropriated as its own.

But this is the flexibility of communism. If you study the history of any country where communism has obtained power, you will discover that it has never ridden on popular support, but rather it has ridden on popular movements, irrespective of what they were and whether or not they were in accord with the basic principles of communism. There have been instances of this, as for instance, where communism has ridden on the popular support of religion, or popular support for capitalism, which as you know is a direct contradiction to what communism stands for.

I am sure you in the military are with me in my persistence to gain change peacefully and gradually, although swiftly whenever possible — in short, to pursue the course of development that I have chartered in accordance with the plans made by the National Development Council. Even more vigorously than before, our government will put the nation through the process of change in every field and by every lawful means — in agriculture, in industry, in the public services, in the government administrative machinery.

I have no desire to be coerced or tantalized out of this resolution and this course. I have long comprehended the need for reform; I have always been intimate with the longings of the poor and the deprived for a greater share in the wealth of the nation. Accordingly, I have launched every possible measure that would fulfill those longings in due course.

On the other hand, communism would, if it could, lay everything we have already gained to waste by attempting to seize the powers of government by force and violence. In this bid to unseat and demolish public authority as constituted by the democratic process, communism will utilize, and indeed is even now utilizing military power.

Your role, as members of the Armed Forces, is therefore very crucial.

You and I seek primarily two things right now and they are, first, stability in our economy that begins with monetary or currency stability; next, social reforms that would remove all the inequities in our society. These are the immediate goals of the government and the next four years will be devoted to attaining these ends, from which all other government reforms must begin. No matter how numerous our reforms may be, no matter how vigorously we may pursue them, we will remain forever in crisis if we do not first attain this objective of monetary stability. Towards this objective we seek to accomplish only one thing, namely, the immediate solution of our balance of payments problems, which will establish a reserve of foreign exchange and thereby create a strong currency that will no longer be subject to erratic alterations in value as caused by foreign influences. Next, we must attain social equity, or social justice. A more vigorous land reform program is necessary, declaring as many areas as possible as land reform areas. We shall seek to banish from our land all traces of feudalism against which we hear today so loud an outcry, although many of those who do so are without understanding of the meaning of feudalism.

An integrated social program has been formulated. The program implementing body is headed by the First Lady. We will include socialized housing, transfer or build new factories in depressed areas, create new jobs, new opportunities. We will establish agro-industrial areas. We will establish free trade zones; there is one now in Bataan. It is my plan to put up free trade zones in Visayas and in Mindanao. We will provide low-cost housing for the masses. We know how urgent the need is for low-cost housing, but over and above all of these, we will root out corruption in government to a degree we have never witnessed before.

We have already dismissed more people in high places for corruption and graft than were ever dismissed by all previous administrations put together. We will continue with this relentless drive at all level. We will continue with what has been called the “green revolution”, utilizing techniques and resources we employed in the successful propagation of the miracle rice variety which has marked us as one of the great rice producing countries in the world.

It is only here in our country that we do not appreciate this achievement. When you go to other countries, the first thing that they will ask you is about our rice, because the Philippines has made its mark in rice production. One lesson that we have learned in our successful rice program is this, that no problem is insurmountable to a people determined to help themselves.

Let me repeat that to you because I want you to remember this wherever you are and whenever you face any problem. There is no problem that is insurmountable to a people determined to help themselves. There is no doubt that we will attain our objectives if given the time and support of the people. It is certain that in time our people will thank themselves for their patience and foresight. But it is a truism that we cannot satisfy all the people, especially those who call themselves radicals. And this is also true of the Communists. Whether we reform government or society or not, ultimately and at last there will come a time when there will be a military confrontation with the communists.

And I want you to remember this, too, to remember that about 4:40 in the afternoon of March 22nd, here at your graduation ceremonies, I warned you, that under my administration or under other administrations, ultimately there would be a military confrontation here in the Philippines between democracy and communism.

Right now, there is no group that can successfully win a revolution, that can overthrow the government. But communism does not think in terms of months or even years; it can even plan in terms of decades if necessary. Even if they were to try to mount a revolt now, either in desperation or in the expectancy of taking over the government, and we should overwhelm them as we have overwhelmed them in the past and as I am certain that we can overwhelm them again, just remember this, you who are graduating today, you will meet them again in the battlefield. You will meet them for they will try and try again, whether I am President or not, for this is the basic strength and weakness of communism.

Once a body politic has been contaminated, you cannot root out the germs of communism. This is my message to you this afternoon. Someday you will be facing Communist troops. You will be facing the armed elements of the communist conspiracy, and when you do, remember that your Commander-in-Chief warned you this afternoon to be prepared always for such an eventuality.

Yes, this is true of the Communists in the mountains and the Communists in the cities. This is true of insurgents and of subversives; this is true of the armed elements and the sophisticates and the intellectuals. So long as the government remains in the hands of those believing and living in democracy, the Communist elements in our midst will continue to seek to destroy us, for that is the only way they can survive.

Ultimately, therefore, they will seek, as I have said, a military confrontation and failing in that, seek again another military confrontation, when they feel strong once more. Do not be lulled into thinking that we can count on this, just because the radicals have said that they will no longer demonstrate. Either in the belief that they have sufficient strength to overthrow the government or despairing over their failure to gain popular support, they will seek to use force to attain power. And like it or not, these elements will have to surface in a last ditch effort to seize control of the government. But we shall not hand the government to them on a silver platter. While I am President communism cannot thrive in the Philippines.

However, when that time comes, when this confrontation comes, you in the military must not be caught off-guard. For you are the first line of defense of our people. You are the ultimate guardian of the democratic process.

Yes, we will generate reform. We will spread over the length and breadth of our land all the blessings that come from a progressive and liberal government such as ours. We will root out corruption, we will give land to the landless, we will give jobs to our people. And there shall be prosperity, for I can foresee this, but even if we do succeed in attaining these objectives, communism will still drive on and it will still seek to overthrow the government by military force. Remember that dictum of Mao Tse-tung — power comes out of the barrel of a gun. So what they cannot attain, as they have never attained anything, by popular support, they will do so through the barrel of a gun.

You are steeped in the tradition of a democracy. In this country, the military is not divided between the right and the left. It is united; let it continue to be so. If the time came for the Armed Forces to utilize all the resources at its command to frustrate the aims of our misguided countrymen seeking to take arms against the government, it would afterward be its duty to withdraw once more into the background to give way to the restoration of civilian authority. Then, it shall assume its accustomed role in a peaceful and just society.

Now, what do I mean by this? I mean that let us assume a situation in which, owing to the seriousness of the Communist challenge, either by means of subversion or by direct armed confrontation, it becomes necessary for me as President of the Republic of the Philippines to exercise extraordinary powers. Even right now, of course, government has sufficient ordinary powers to contain the Communist menace. The nation can therefore assure itself that the government will need no recourse to any unusual measures as long as the same menace is not enlarged.

In the event the Communist threat becomes a positive danger which would imperil the safety of the state, the President of the Philippines will have no other choice but to assume those larger powers within the Constitution which our forefathers have seen fit to grant to the President as a means of self-protection for the state. For instance, the Constitution says that the President may call upon the Armed Forces to quell disorder, riot, rebellion. This is not an extraordinary power. We exercised this power when Malacañang was attacked by rioters, when we called upon the military to help the Metrocom and the police of Manila.

Then the Constitution reads, in the event of invasion, insurrection, rebellion, or imminent danger thereof the President may suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or declare martial law. Now, here are two awesome powers of the President. What are the basic conditions for the exercise of these powers? They are, first, that there is invasion, insurrection, rebellion or imminent danger thereof, who decides whether there is imminent danger of invasion, insurrection, or rebellion? Only the President. No one can question his authority, not even the Supreme Court. This has been decided by our Supreme Court, and by all courts of the lands wherein the same constitutional provision exists. What can the President do? He can suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or declare martial law. What is meant by the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus? When you suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus you suspend the power of any court to order one who has custody of any person to bring this person to court and produce the body before such court.

In short, with this suspension the military is authorized to arrest anyone without a warrant of arrest, who in good faith they believe will prejudice the state in the situation in which it is in. Now, note that I said, “Who in good faith they believe will prejudice the position of the state in the situation in which it is in.”

Now, what is a proclamation of martial law as compared to the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus? He merely tells the commanding officer or the commanding general of the troops that occupy any part of the country to assume all powers of the civil government, executive, legislative, judiciary. Many of you are going to become generals, I guess, I can see it. Many of you will be in command of units. It is my hope that whoever is President at that time will never find any occasion either to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or declare martial law. Because a declaration of martial law is replacement of civilian authority by the military. The civilian authority is completely pushed out and the military commander becomes the entire government. What he says is law. That is why sometimes I smile when I receive all these urgent telegrams sent to me by many people from all over the Philippines, urging me to declare martial law. I get all these telegrams saying, what are you doing, Mr. President? Now, while the danger can still be met, declare martial law.

Now, do they understand what martial law is? It means that the military government, the military becomes the entire government, unless I, as Commander-in-Chief, put on my uniform and say, I am in command of the entire military. I assume all the powers of the government.

Now, this should not be taken very lightly. We must never reach this stage, this point, if possible, and that is why the military must always be prepared because as long as the military is united, so long as the military is stronger, so long as the enemy does not underestimate us, then there will be no military confrontation.

And that is why I bring this matter before you today. You must always keep the military strong and ready for any eventuality.

In either case, the military plays a great, if not a crucial role in our country. When the state becomes irreversibly engaged in a decisive confrontation with a particular danger, the military steps in as the final guardian of the state’s safety and the protection of the people’s welfare. When the civilian authority collapses completely the military takes over.

With the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, with the proclamation of martial law the military takes over.

Nevertheless, in our system of government, and I must emphasize this, the supremacy of civilian authority is never lost, whether we are in a crisis or in an emergency, the civilian authority is still supreme. It may seem only to disappear in that awesome situation which martial law creates. The consequent military take-over in such an emergency is actually made, however, in continuing obedience to the democratic vision. In the emergency I have described, the military takes over for the sole purpose of reestablishing civilian authority. Remember that, the military takes over only for the sole purpose of reestablishing civilian authority.

As you can see, then, the military has an obligation to remain consistent with the democratic ideals of freedom and of respect for human dignity. The conditions of emergency I have described as a consequence of a serious communist threat are necessarily confused and even chaotic at first, giving rise to inclinations in conflict with the ordered ways which we are accustomed to.

In such an event it is incumbent upon the military to comply even more rigorously with the creeds of honor and patriotism and integrity. I am glad that all these are deeply ingrained in the graduates of the Philippine Military Academy, who are expected to provide much of the leadership in the country’s military forces.

Nor are the precepts which make for good and sturdy character less desirable in a time of peace and orderliness. While waiting for a military confrontation with the foes of our democratic values and institutions, the military must constantly prove itself reliable and trustworthy, if it expects our people to accord it continuing respect and support in a time of disorder.

The military, in time of peace or war, must take special care that lives and property are safeguarded and individual freedoms respected. It is the soldier’s duty to face danger, as you all know, not to save himself or promote his welfare at the expense of the civil society. This is the burden of soldiery. This calls for the utmost in courage and discipline, but this is necessary if the military is not to be alienated from the society of which it is a part.

Imbued with the basic ideals of democracy and raised on the lessons of courage, discipline and honor, which are part of your traditions, the military is, and must be, at all times the sobering and reassuring force in our society. In a world that seems to have grown callous and more reckless, the old virtues which grow out of the traditional sense of honor have become almost an anachronism.

However, I ask you to value them. I ask you to hold them dear to your heart. They are your anchor. When you are in crisis hold tight to them. This is the experience of a young old man who stood fast through many desperate situations.

Your ideals are your only hope for survival, and I repeat, whenever you meet a crisis hold true to these ideals and the tradition of honor, discipline, integrity, and you will not pass up any opportunity for greatness. I ask you to demonstrate this as young men, the kind of young men on whom the country can depend.

To each and everyone of you I say congratulations and I salute you in the name of the Filipino people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1979). Presidential Speeches (Vol. 3). Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines.