Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the UNIDO-ECAFE 1st Asian Investment Meeting

[Delivered on September 23, 1970]

Foreign Investments and Regional Development

I GREET THE various ambassadors and those who have gone out of their way to participate in this UNIDO-ECAFE 1st Asian Investment Promotion Meeting in Manila.

We welcome this meeting sponsored by UNIDO-ECAFE to bring together proponents of industrial projects in developing countries with prospective investors from developed countries in these various projects. In taking the initiative to organize forums like this, UNIDO and ECAFE recognize the limitations of foreign aid and the ever-increasing importance of private foreign investment in assisting the economic growth of developing countries.

The past few years have seen a growing disenchantment on the part both of developed and developing countries with the efficiency of foreign aid. The flows of aid reflect this. In 1957, the net flow of financial aid to developing countries amounted to about $3.5 billion. In addition, $400 million were received by multi-lateral development agencies.

These flows of financial resources reached a peak in 1967 when developed; countries contributed about $5.9 billion directly to developing countries and over $700 million to multi-lateral development agencies. Since 1967, it seems that the desire of the developed countries to increase their foreign aid has somehow slackened.

On the other hand, net private investment and loans, especially in the form of export credits, have doubled in twelve years from about $3 billion in 1968, and there is no sign that this growth will slow down. Most of this increase has been in the form of loans, since between 1956 and 1968, net private direct investment has increased by only $425 million from $2 and 1/3billion to $2 and ¾ billion.

It is therefore relevant to talk at this time of ways of stimulating private investments by developed countries in the developing countries of the world. Historically, private investments from the advanced countries have been made in such areas as mining, petroleum production and other extractive industries. In 1966, for example, less than 30 per cent of these investments were made in manufacturing and most of those manufacturing investments were in enterprises designed to serve only the domestic markets which have surrounded themselves with high protective walls.

The opportunities for such highly protected, import substituting type investments in manufacturing in many developing countries have disappeared fairly fast because their domestic markets are small. Furthermore, the difficulties of competing with foreign firms for such limited domestic markets have been the usual source of pressures and irritants. The apprehension of foreign investors that as time goes on the initial welcome for the new technology and foreign capital in manufacturing will wear out probably stems largely from their experience in these import substituting, highly protected, domestic market oriented areas of manufacturing activities. These pressures for national participation will of course become less as national partners are taken into the ventures. Some far-sighted foreign firms which are already in these ventures have in fact taken steps to induce greater investment participation from nationals of the host country, either through the sale of a portion of the foreign ownership of the enterprise to nationals or by accepting capital contributions from the nationals to provide the funds required for the expansion of the enterprise.

Many of these pressures for greater national participation can be substantially avoided if the foreign entrepreneurs set up export oriented manufacturing ventures. This will enable the enterprise, in which the foreign investor has made his investments, to overcome the disadvantages of the limited market which a developed country normally offers for many kinds of manufactured products. It becomes possible to establish an economic size plant without necessitating a monopoly in the domestic market.

In this connection, we welcome the assistance by UNIDO-ECAFE in promoting greater trade among developing countries in the ECAFE region. It recognizes the technology and economic realities that capital-intensive projects often require a far greater market than a particular developing country can offer. These factors favor the establishment of a regional industrial complex which will enable capital-intensive projects established in individual countries of the region to serve the other countries of that region. We also welcome the efforts of the UNCTAD to obtain unilateral tariff and non-tariff preferences from the developed countries specially with regard to the output of relatively labor-intensive manufacturing activities in developing countries.

Foreign investments and foreign trade are therefore corollary and complimentary and we would ask the prospective investors from developed countries to consider the mutual benefits that would arise if these were linked to one another.

The Philippine experience seems to bear out the various impressions on foreign investments that I have shared with you today. After the World War II, for example, we granted parity rights to American citizens partly because of the hope that American investments would thereby flow in massive amounts into the Philippines. However, it was only during the 1950s when we instituted foreign exchange and import controls that substantial American investments came into the Philippines, mainly for import substituting, domestic market oriented industries. This influx apparently was due largely to their decision to get within our tariff walls in order to avoid being left out of a lucrative domestic market. It now appears that it may have been better in our policy on foreign investment to have given greater guidance and exercised more discrimination in our welcome to foreign investments. For this reason, the Philippines has recently passed two complimentary laws, R.A. 5186 and R.A. 5455, to set the ground rules for foreign investment, indicating their rights as well as the specific areas where they are welcome. In making explicit the positive role that foreign investments is envisioned to play in this country, we have listed the preferred areas of investment in an annual Investment Priorities Plans. In preferred non-pioneer areas, foreigners are allowed to invest in up to 40 per cent of the common and voting shares of the corporation. In fact, they are encouraged to invest on a minority basis in these enterprises because they receive the same incentives given to 100 per cent-owned Filipino firms, including tariff protection and a guaranteed share of the market. Moreover, there is no limit to the extent of their beneficial ownership—the proportion on non-voting shares they may hold.

In the pioneer-areas, foreign investment is particularly welcome. Not only are there more incentives for pioneer than for non-pioneer enterprise, subject only to the requirement that the enterprise must attain 60 per cent Filipino ownership within twenty years. This twenty-year period may be extended by another twenty years if there is not enough Filipino capital willing or able to buy the shares or if there is some other reason which our Board of Investments considers sufficient to warrant such an extension. Foreign investment is particularly encouraged in these pioneer areas because in addition to their finances they possess the expertise needed to carry out the pioneer projects successfully. Our government’s policy is that the development of those projects where the capital requirements are too heavy and the technical skills presently ton specialized for Filipinos should not be postponed because there is a pressing need to accelerate the growth of the economy and generate more employment.

In all areas of business activity permitted by our Constitution, except in retail trade, foreigners may invest in up to 30 per cent of an enterprise, outstanding capital stock on the sole condition that the Board of Investments be informed on the investment for purposes of record. Foreigners may own more than 30 per cent of the outstanding voting capital stock of an enterprise provided that the Board of Investments approves the application for such an investment. It should be noted that the Board is directed to grant this authority unless the investment is in business activities which are already overcrowded, adequately exploited by Filipinos, or inconsistent with the Investment Priorities Plan of the Board.

I have just signed the Export Incentives Act which grants greater incentives to export oriented ventures, especially when they utilize local raw material and fare labor intensive. While the Act presently gives foreign firms in pioneer areas all the incentives that are granted to Filipinos, I have suggested to Congress in approving the Act that certain amendments should be subsequently included to grant incentives to foreign firms even in non-pioneer areas provided that their entire output is exported. I made this suggestion because I am convinced that foreign investment has a legitimate and necessary role to play in the growth of a developing country. I am confident that so long as the host country recognizes the justified profit motive of the foreign firm and so long as the foreign firms recognize the objectives and aspirations of their host country, the flow of private foreign investments into developing countries will increase substantially.

In closing, I extend to all of you the welcome of my country. May our meetings bring; new initiatives into the ECAFE region, generate employment and intensify the economic development of this part of the world.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].