Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the necrological services for Don Fernando Amorsolo

[Delivered on April 28, 1972]

Amorsolo: First National Artist

THE WHOLE NATION mourns Fernando Amorsolo. As President of the Republic of the Philippines, as admirer, friend, and as ordinary citizen of this Republic, I have come to express the sorrow of the entire race.

When we honor a man, we honor not him alone but some ideal he represents in us, some piece of him that is cognate with ourselves, with mankind, and with the universal spirit. Therefore, to honor a great artist is to exalt the artist in every man. There is a moral correlative of the artist in the humblest soul. Collectively, this is the spirit of the nation that strives towards excellence, beauty, goodness.

Today, we honor Fernando Amorsolo, it is true, but in honoring him we also honor the artist as a Filipino. In him we honor every Filipino artist living or dead or yet unborn. For art is also the potential for beauty and excellence that waits to be found, to be encouraged, and to be developed in the whole race. And this is so, not only because Fernando Amorsolo is unquestionably the foremost Filipino painter since Juan Luna. Luna and Hidalgo who preceded him were without doubt great painters. But they bore a special imprint of the Filipino identity on their canvasses of classical beauty. Going a step further than the classicists of the European school, Amorsolo looked for that one indigenous quality which he presented in a painting, stamping it with an indubitable Filipino presence. That element was the sunlight of the Philippine countryside.

I doubt if in the entire history of art anyone captured the gentle quality of sunlight as well as Amorsolo did. In his art, the Filipinos emerged as veritable children of the sun. But at the same time, it is said, this was a sun of social and political innocence, as though the Amorsolo landscape had known no evil. No matter, Amorsolo did not pretend to be profound. Social criticism, in an age of revolution and upheaval, will have enough adherents, practitioners and perverters, anyway. He looked for what was true, what was beautiful, what was good.

In a society that idolizes iconoclasts, and, perhaps, muckrakers, such a quest would seem exotic and even futile. But the true Amorsolo age was not yet the clamorous, rebellious milieu that we take for granted today. The simple joys of the poor were still legitimate and respectable. His quest was fulfilled when he earned the secret of capturing light so that he could make this the very symbol of his art and his own kind of message to his people.

Amorsolo was an honest man and the integrity of his art consists of its very simplicity, lucidity and lack of cant. It will be said, when everything is written of Amorsolo, that he gave nobility to the prosaic and to the common, that was Filipino.

My friends, because Amorsolo was a great artist and a great man, we must utilize the occasion of his death to inaugurate the new practice of the Republic of the Philippines in honoring great artists.

We, therefore, raise to his memory not a monument of stone or bronze but the creation of a new category of awards and decorations for honorees of the state. This category is that of the National Artist.

Today, I have signed by proclamation an order which establishes this category and I have indicated there that Amorsolo becomes the first Filipino to be declared National Artist of the Republic of the Philippines, entitled to all the honors and privileges befitting a hero of our country and people. By this precedent, we hope in die future to honor similarly other eminent men who have elevated us all by the quality of their art, whether in the fields of fine arts, literature, history, the dance, culture and architecture, and others. A great artist not t only elevates but also unites a people. National art becomes part of the heritage that solders a nation and makes it one and indivisible. For the present, the initiative for recommending the designation of such an honoree known as National Artist of the Republic of the Philippines rests on the Board of Trustees of the Cultural Center of the Philippines.

But it is my hope, it is the hope of everyone, that in the near future a Philippine Academy of the Arts can be established to exercise among others this function of recommending to the President of the Philippines the recognition of outstanding individuals as National Artists.

The Constitution mandates the State to promote the arts. It is in that spirit that the government supported initiatives to establish this Cultural Center. But promoting the arts is merely another term for honoring our own artists.

Today, in conducting this funeral for our first National Artist so declared by our government, we are asserting this responsibility to our artists and by implication, to the best and the finest in our natures.

My friends and countrymen, I repeat, on behalf of our people, I bid farewell to this great man who in death has become immortal, as immortal as the sunlight that is the true signature of his art and the hallmark of his vision.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].