Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 35th anniversary of the Philippine Navy

The Expanding Role of the Philippine Navy

I am pleased to participate in the 35th anniversary of the Philippine Navy. On this day, we once again remember the origins of our navy and also of our Armed Forces. You have heard the citations or the acknowledgment of the greatness of all those who received medals today.

In all battles, the Philippine Navy has been at the forefront of courage and faithful service to the motherland. And I also see that they are also good at walking and marching, and perhaps, they are better at this than those on land. I observe the faces of the leaders of the Philippine Navy, Philippine Constabulary and Air Force because perhaps they will not accept this praise for the Navy.

All of us are, indeed, very happy to be here to participate in this ceremony in the name of the people of the Philippines. I congratulate and commend the officers, men and civilian personnel of the Philippine Navy on their 35th anniversary. We are all convinced that in the years that the navy has been in the frontline of service to this nation, it has discharged its responsibility with loyalty, devotion and high efficiency.

Doubtless, we have a small navy compared to other countries. We are a developing nation with limited resources and means. We are a young nation and, therefore, we have time and opportunity to grow. This goes for our navy as it goes for many of the things that we are now building starting with the New Society.

Today, I am proud to report to you that we have acquired a distinct reputation as a nation that has posted achievements based not on our size or numbers but on enterprise, boldness, competence and lately on a new discipline that has added a greater sheen to the character of our people. And, of course, the Filipino soldier has always been known and noted for his valor. The forerunners of the men in the Philippine Navy proved this in the last war. All the fighting men, of course, in the last war had demonstrated this capability in the decades before that as we struggled for our rights and the realization of our dreams.

You will note the peculiar quality of courage, individual heroism and valor cited and quoted in the citations that have been read during the awarding ceremonies this afternoon. I note the participation of navy personnel especially in the fight against insurgents and subversives in the South. I have awarded the presidential streamer to a distinguished battalion, the second battalion of the Marines commanded by one of your outstanding leaders, Lt. Commander Asuncion, who incidentally, used to be with the Presidential Security Command. I have awarded also several gold crosses and a bronze cross and military merit medals, all for outstanding valor.

Thus, it is in this context that our small navy enjoys the affection and the confidence of our people. Not only in combat or in war but also in peace has the navy earned this accolade from the people, for there is something splendid in a small band of men struggling against great odds as during the war when our navy, still in its infancy, faced overwhelming forces and never once flinched in the fulfillment of their duty. In the same way, we look upon the life and times of our navy as the story of our country. The Philippines, from the time of its birth as a nation in modern times has had to struggle uphill, raising itself from the dust and the ruin of war, to begin the noble and inspiring task of making itself in a worthy member of the community of nations, as well as worthy of our devotion, of our toil, of our sacrifices, of the sons and daughters who will come after us.

I like to think that the men and women who compose our navy today having in their veins and in their hearts the faith, the aspirations, the sublime compulsions and visions of our forebears who left comfort and comparative security to rise above tyranny and found for themselves a new country where freedom will be a touchstone of life. Thus, braving unknown seas, sailing frail boats, they immigrated to this land in the course of which adventure they developed unity, a comradeship and a brotherhood that was to stand the test of time.

It was that same spirit and inner compulsion which, if you will remember, brought glory to our aptly named Mosquito Fleet, small, fast Q-boats which during the war performed impossible feats to harass and halt the enemy, buying time for our forces. These exploits loom large today, I feel, in the minds of the men and women of our navy, and inform the activities and missions of the present-day navy. This I feel, has made your organization peculiarly fit and capable in facing up to the challenges of our times.

In performing your traditional role as the first line of defense archipelago, the navy has been not only ready and capable, but highly responsive to the needs of the hour. Though constrained by resources and operational limitations, our navy has continually grown, acquitting itself well with every mission it has undertaken. For instance in giving support to the ground elements of our armed forces, as in the early stages of our pacification campaign in the South, the navy played a crucial role in making mat campaign a success. The navy’s effectiveness in every instance is, of course, the fruit of your realistic and unceasing training through bilateral and multilateral exercises. Of this, I am sure, all our navy officers and men are truly proud.

On this occasion, it is perhaps also timely and proper that I, on behalf of our country and our people, articulate the appreciation mat we have to our allies, especially to the United States of America, represented here by no less than Admiral Shelton and the head of JUSMAG, General Grimsley, who have been instrumental in helping us develop the Philippine Navy. Many of the units now composing the Philippine Navy have come, under one arrangement or another, from the United States government and the American people. For this, let us thank our American friends.

I am particularly gratified to find navy ships deployed not only all over our long coastline but also in more distant waters, serving in every area with distinction and fired by a single objective, to protect the integrity of our country. Our navy today is engaged in continuing and multifarious missions I such as the maintenance of navigational aids, search and rescue operations, weather patrol, ensuring the safety of life and property at sea, looking after boating safety, port safety and helping in solving the problem of pollution as well as committed to the enforcement of laws and regulations. Indeed, I find the Philippine Navy an example of dedication and sacrifice, worthy of the emulation of our people.

As your Commander-in-Chief, I consider it fundamental that armed services must have the sense of unity to the point where coordinating operations become an automatic reflex action. I find this cohesive spirit vibrantly expressed in the navy, particularly in the Marines. This unit of the navy; has served and still serves valiantly with other units of the armed forces in the still unfinished business of stabilizing peace and normality throughout the land. I repeat, the citations and awards and declarations this afternoon demonstrate this outstanding quality of the Marines, this band of men who have been committed repeatedly to the protection not only of the people’s honor but also of the peace and tranquility of our homes.

No less remarkable is the herculean job of maintaining the logistics pipeline of the entire armed forces, which was accomplished by the navy through its military sealift and terminal command during the critical early days of martial law. You will recall that when the crisis in the South suddenly developed, we had to rely initially on our Air Force to airlift troops and critical supplies to the front. However, the rapid increase of the field operational requirements outweighed the physical capabilities of the Philippine Air Force, despite its heroic efforts and despite its use even of civilian air units. Thus, we realized that the momentum of required logistic support could not have been sustained without the Philippine Navy. And your organization responded with such high Spirit that the massive requirements for personnel and cargo transhipment were ably met. On another front the tremendous contribution of the navy is equally on record. I refer to the part played by the navy’s terminal command in vigorous implementation of the government’s national electrification and infrastructure development program. I am, therefore, happy to commend the navy for thesis outstanding contributions to national progress even as it unflaggingly discharges its basic function as a potent arm of national defense.

There is no question that the navy has indeed contributed immensely to the general well-being and progress of our people, and I shall mention here only a 11 few naval programs — the massive and effective home defense programs; this naval ferry in Cagayan; the floating clinic; your participation in the equitable distribution of oil, grains and other prime commodities; and the signal rote the navy has played in the Pasig river beautification campaign. These are just a few of the navy’s concrete contributions to the national interest for which our people are palpably grateful.

The navy is by all indications in the forefront in the equally important task, of developing a self-reliant posture. The launching of the RPS Tawi-Tawi this morning and the Patrol Craft Fast 325, me successful outcome of the first amphibian vehicle built by the navy completed only a few months ago, are again eloquent testimony to the imaginative efforts at making use of our indigenous resources as we stand out to achieve our objective of self-reliance. But self-reliance does not only mean the development of our internal military capabilities. It also means the development of allied civilian industries — these must be assisted and developed to enable them to extend a meaningful assistance to the national effort, especially in times of emergency. It is therefore, with tins need in mind that I ask you to sharpen the growing awareness of our people about this necessity by procuring some of your requirements from qualified civilian establishments, and thus provide the starting point for the effective unification of existing efforts so that in tune of need we shall be ready. This partnership in peace between the military and civilian sectors is not only an essential ingredient of self-reliance but also one of the fundamentals of the reformation we hope to institutionalize in our New Society and to infuse into our people.

Again, I, as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in representation of 40 million Filipinos, extend commendation and congratulations to you, the Philippine Navy, your flag-officer-in-command Rear Admiral Ruiz, to the officers, men and civilian personnel of this organization. You have done well. We salute you on this day.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1979). Presidential speeches (Vol. 5). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].