Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At ADB

[Delivered on November 18, 1981]

Mr. President, Mr. Ambassador, members of the Board of Directors, and distinguished guests:

Throughout the ages, we find history continually records the names of outstanding men in the fields of science, medicine, industry and politics. They have taken their rightful place in history because of some unusual contribution to civilization or unique position they have held — perhaps both.

In light of the development gap between the north and south and the growing interdependency between them, I think the future will see more great men emerge in the arena of international development. Certainly the disparities between rich and poor cannot be tolerated indefinitely. Pope Paul had so implied that when he stated some years ago that “the new name for peace is development.” Willy Brandt also identified development as the “most important social problem for the balance of this century.”

Gentlemen, we are gathered here today to pay tribute to a man who has contributed greatly to helping spur economic and social development in the Asian and Pacific region. And that man I refer to is Taroichi Yoshida, President of the Asian Development Bank. In presiding over an institution geared to conquer the great enemy of man — poverty –Mr. Yoshida has helped thousands of Asians break the bonds of misery. The ADB had been summoned to a high mission when it was formed fifteen years ago, and during Mr. Yoshida’s five-year tenure at the bank he has helped it fulfill that mission.

Mr. Yoshida, during your stay at the bank you have transformed it into a beachhead of cooperation among developed and developing countries. Furthermore, the bank has become a principal architect in creating policies to foster development in the region. For example, under your stewardship it has adopted an integrated approach to rural development and to meeting the basic human needs of the poor. To quote from one of your own speeches, you observed that the core issue of economic development in most developing member countries is how to meet more fully the basic human needs of their populations, a great majority of whom live in rural areas and derive their livelihood from agricultural activities.”

The bank has forged other far-reaching achievements as well. It has grown in stature and influence as an effective international development institution. It has lent more to the region than ever before. It has extended more loans to the poorest countries on terms they can afford. And it has greatly expanded its technical assistance.

It has also increased its co-financing activities, thereby recycling more petrodollars to Asia. It has explored new frontiers to raise additional funds for the region through equity financing, as well as mapped out a comprehensive and viable strategy for years to come.

This is a record which the bank can be proud of.

The Asian Development Bank has also helped accelerate the tempo of development in the Philippines, and for this my fellow Filipinos and I are deeply appreciative. For the government’s part, we will continue to lend strong support to the bank; and in this connection we are — figuratively speaking — building the foundations for the Bank’s new headquarters building and staff housing project.

Finally, Mr. Yoshida, if you kill allow me a philosophical thought at the eve of your departure from the Asian Development Bank and my country, a philosopher once said that great men work on their own salvation by serving their fellow men. Indeed, you have done this through your efforts at the bank to help cast off the chains of poverty of low-income Asians. For this, you deserve your rightful place in the history of the region’s economic and social development. It is with this thought that I ask you all to rise and join me in a toast to Mr. and Mrs. Yoshida as we wish them Godspeed, our best wishes, and an affectionate farewell.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.