Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the AFP Turnover of Command

[Delivered on August 15, 1981]

In these ceremonies today, we carry on a tradition in our Armed Forces which is hallowed in the history of the corps and in the history of our nation.

No tradition in the life of our armed services reflects more deeply their abiding stability and unity, than this rite marking the passage of leadership within the corps.

The passing of command, in any organization, is expressive of continuity as well as change. It symbolizes on the one hand the very human effort and desire to ensure that the institutions we create, the values we cherish and live by, and the ideals and standards we set for our labors, will endure the tests and vicissitudes of time. It signifies on the other the equally powerful desire for progress and advancement, that in the challenges and flux of the times, our institutions will ever provide for orderly movement forward.

This is the meaning of this day.

Custom does not require the Commander-in-Chief to be present at this formal turnover of command in our Armed Forces, but I have today broken protocol to join you here. And I do so in recognition of the import of this occasion in the history of our Armed Forces, and in obedience to the charge of a grateful nation.

We cannot allow this day to pass without remarking upon the eventful time of service of Gen. Romeo Espino, as A-F-P Chief of Staff, and of what his leadership has meant to the morale and vitality of the corps. Nor can we allow this day to pass without paying tribute here to the achievements of the armed services during the last eight and a half years. History will ever mark for us that in this eventful and challening period in our national life, our Armed Forces came through the many tests of fire, and rose above the obstacles of tumult and crisis in the land, to ensure the survival and stability of our Republic.

Whatever we have lived through as a nation during these years, our Armed Forces were fully both witness and partners of the struggle for national deliverance. Whatever we have undertaken in defense of our Republic, our Armed Forces were first and foremost our anchor for security and national survival. And whatever we have initiated and won in the way of national reform and transformation, our Armed Forces were our unfailing and steadfast ally and friend.

There has never been perhaps a time in our history as during these years when our military lived so fully its union with our people, or so distinguished as a civilian force.

For all these, our people and our nation owe our soldiery a debt of gratitude that neither our homage nor the honors of state can ever truly repay. But the accolade nonetheless must be given, and it is in this spirit that I have come here today, as President of our Republic and as Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces, to bear witness to these ceremonies of farewell to the outgoing Chief of Staff, and of welcome to the incoming new leadership of our Armed Forces.

Let me say to General Espino now on behalf of our people and Government, that we shall ever remember and hold in deep esteem his long distinguished service as A-F-P Chief of Staff and as a soldier, his inspiring leadership of the corps during a time of ferment in our country, his unwavering devotion to duty, and his unfailing loyalty to the Commander in Chief and to the Republic. To you, General, we extend the nation’s sincere homage and appreciation.

It has been rightly said that the truly enduring achievement of great and able leaders is the institution that abides and endures when they depart. It is surely a testament of the depth and range of leadership in our military corps, that as we witness the retirement of such a man as General Espino, we also witness here the ascension to the highest leadership of our Armed Forces of men such as the incoming Chief of Staff, Gen. Fabian Ver, and the Vice-Chief of Staff, Gen. Fidel Ramos. To them passes the leadership of the corps, whose innermost workings, whose traditions, and whose responsibilities they have been part of for many years.

Both of them were part of the original group who participated in framing the response of the government to the challenges of insurgency, rebellion and chaos in the country prevailing on the eve of Martial Law, and in directing the implementation of the various measures carried out in the interests of national survival.

With General Espino, they ensured exemplary response of our armed services to their mission: which was to meet the full threats to national security and peace and order, and yet to carry out the same with restraint and foresight. Our military corps never for a moment lapsed into indiscriminate display of force or wanton police action, which under such circumstances usually occurs, and this was largely because of their able leadership and stewardship of our Armed Forces fully inculcated in our soldiery the meaning of courage as grace under fire.

As I congratulate them therefore on their elevation to the leadership of our Armed Forces, I am firm in the faith and the confidence that the high tradition of leadership in the corps during the recent decade will fully be shown in the decade now upon us.

I shall depend upon them to continue with many of the policies that have guided the work of our Armed Forces during the past years, and I shall depend upon them also to undertake a review and reassessment of our operations, policies and programs, in keeping with our continuing goal to sustain and improve the vigil over the peace and security of the country.

In this review of operations, policies and programs, as well as of administrative details pertaining to our Armed Forces, we will endeavor to define anew our emphases and priorities. We will clarify and issue the guidelines for action in various areas of concern.

With regard to the matter of promotions within the corps, I reiterate the original orders I issued a few years ago, to the effect, that before we promote the high-ranking officers of the corps, we should attend first to the promotions of the field-grade and company officers. Our objective must be to see to the overall vitality and morale of the corps, and this must be of central importance now.

It is my intention to call a meeting of the General Military Council to deliberate on these matters.

In looking upon the national situation today, the principal problems facing us are subversion and internal strife.

Accordingly, the thrust and the focus of A-F-P operations must be oriented to attend first to the maintenance of internal domestic stability.

This should form the basic background for the review of policies, implementing orders, and activities. In this light should we direct our operations and measure our work for peace and security.

All these matters call for the highest kind of leadership and vision in the corps, but such a high conception of the mission of our Armed Forces can only find meaning and fulfillment in the continued unity and vitality of our entire military organization.

All of us — from the highest to the lowest echelons of our Armed Forces — have tasks to accomplish. In no other organization is there such an intimate link between layers of officers and personnel as there is in the military service; in no other is cooperation so crucial to success.

Our military organization must see its mission whole, and implement its tasks as one.

In such unity, our Armed Forces have provided exemplary service that will never be forgotten by our people and our nation. In the same, will you carve yet another glorious chapter in the history of our military corps.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.