Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 7th anniversary of the Publishers Association of the Philippines

[Delivered on October 30, 1984]

I am honored and pleased to have again the opportunity of addressing the Publishers Association of the Philippines and, through, the many members and groups who constitute this very vital and important industry in our country.

Your organization marks today the tenth anniversary of its founding, and the decade that has passed has in every way been marked by challenge and reform within the industry.

*Ten years ago, at birth, the Publishers Association had only eight members, representing merely one small segment of the industry. In the period since, the industry has attained a measure of union under the association’s leadership. And today it has a roster of 1,410 members, representing a wide variety of publications and covering practically every point of the country.

*Ten years ago, there was much instability and divisiveness at the heart of the publishing business. In the interval of ten years, a measure of rationalization has been introduced within the industry, and though business problems continue to affect it, there is no question today about the stability and continuity of the service of publishing to our society.

*Ten years ago, also, this organization was formed at a time when many were apprehensive about the effects of crisis government on the freedom of the press in our country and the very future of the media. After an interval of ten years, press freedom has not only thrived, and media institutions grown in number, but it sometimes even seems as though the licentiousness and sensationalism we all used to bewail have fully returned to haunt us.

As is typical of course of such a lengthy period for an entire industry, there are aspects of this story of ten years which are likely to be cheered and appreciated. And there are also those that are inevitably regarded with regret and reservation.

I would not presume to suggest how those of you who man the commanding heights of the industry would view this decade of change, but speaking simply of that vital relationship between the print media and the government, I would venture to suggest that there is a lot more clarity now than before in our relations and more appreciation of the signal role that the media must play in our society.

In speaking of progress on this end, we are not unaware of course that there are those observers abroad who continue to speak disparagingly of the climate for press freedom in our country and who can only treat our media with condescencion. But the efforts for strengthening and advancement of the ideas of press freedom and responsibility in our society were never undertaken for their pleasure or satisfaction. We have striven to address problems with common purpose and resolve, in the belief that by so doing we would thereby sustain the vital service of the press to society and strengthen immeasurably the national purpose.

And we need this service and this strength more than ever now.

In this serious period in our nation’s history, when we are devoting our energies to economic recovery and stability, when we are seeking fairness and justice in our institutions, and when we must strive to preserve and promote the democratic dialogue in our society — there can be no argument as to the central role that the media must serve in these endeavors. There can be no question about their service in enabling our people to understand public affairs.

So much of this service, indeed, rests upon the principle of freedom of the press. But it rests just as much on the idea that this freedom actively promotes free inquiry and discussion, that it leads to a ceaseless quest for truth and knowledge, and that by virtue of the rights, we come in possession of knowledge and understanding. And it is never simply enough to demonstrate our ability to exercise freedom of the press; it is just as a vital that the right be exercised in the service of a public good, whether it be the prosecution of a particular program or the upholding of national principles or ideals.

There is need to be reminded of this from time to time because there is so much in the national dialogue today that is dogmatic and shrill, so much that is distorted and intemperate. And it sometimes appears as though people can speak only to their biases and prejudices, and rarely to the time-honored requirements of impartiality and objectivity in the media.

To speak for instance of the so-called “alternative press”, we would hardly have an idea of what is happening in our country from day to day if it should ever happen, God forbid, that they are the only ones to serve us. The impression one gets in reading them is one’s eyes being glued to a keyhole in which nothing but the warts of our society can be seen. The message is the same from day to day, regardless of the complexion of events, and regardless too of the complexity and roundness of the issues.

This is of a piece with the picture of us that so much of the Western media have tried to purvey to the world for so many years. Based on brief forays into our midst, on occasional and selective glimpses of us, and spurred by an effort to anticipate calamitous happenings in the country, this form of journalism continues to regale the world with facile projections of our national decline and collapse. And it keeps on it, even while year after year our nation continues to belie these facile prophecies.

It has been suggested, and I believe correctly, that whereas American journalism for instance is scrupulously fair, responsible and clear-eyed when it operates in America, the moment it gets out to report on the world, it immediately becomes servant to the grossest forms of bias and prejudice and the tendencies of sensationalism that it frowns on at home. Whatever the reasons for this, and whatever the purpose it serves, it underlines so much of what is inscrutable and unintelligible about the developing nations to the average American.

What is important to us, however, is our own perspectives on our own affairs, our understanding of what is happening here in our midst, because in the last analysis while this may just be a media event for others, for us Filipinos, this is the heart of the national enterprise. What is on balance is our lives, our nation, our future.

As you convene for this national conference of publishers, the industry and the nation know what dangers and peril have been borne by our publishers and journalists in the exercise of their mission in society. Just recently, an editor in Mindanao was slain, evidently because of his crusading work as a journalist. We cannot condemn enough this act of brutality and murder, and I say now that Government will exert all efforts to bring his killer to justice.

The fact that such incidence had happened in our country, however, does not diminish or destroy the foundations of the press in our country. It rather reinforces our resolve to protect those foundations, and to advance the work of the press, whether at national or regional level.

We need a rounder and a fuller service from our media that should enable us to understand better the problems we confront, the thrust of public policies, the decisions and the choices that as citizens we must make. And such service can never be provided save in a spirit of caring and effort. It cannot arise from the indulgence of passions and biases. It can only emerge from a willingness to listen, to watch, and to understand.

To speak simply of the reportage that has happened in recent days with respect to the conclusions of the work of the Fact-Finding Board, and the subsequent actions of government in the light of its findings and recommendations, we can see at once how the service of more responsible sectors of the press has enabled the nation to get a grip on the developments. The actions of government and the process of transition in certain commands of the Armed Forces have been demonstrative of the national capacity for prompt response to the situation, because our channels of communication did their part in providing for perspective and understanding by the people. Were it otherwise, rumors and speculations would have reigned among us, and spurred public anxiety and apprehension.

All of us must live in a sense amidst the clamor and thrust of daily events and developments, and the media more so than the citizen. But for the press, I believe, there is a higher and greater duty to be on top of events, rather than to be swept by them. As President Kennedy once suggested there is both a short and a long view of events that the press ought well to remember: “the newspaper headlines and the television screens invariably give us a short view. They flood us with the stop-press details of daily stories that we lose sight of the real movements in history. Yet it is the profound tendencies of history, and not the passing excitements, that shape our future.”

The short view provides today the impression of our nation being harried and driven from problem to problem. And in the absence of perspective, one can well fear that the roof is probably caving in on us.

But such a short view alone hardly provides for comprehension of the larger developments taking place, of what directions are underway and why. We need to dig deeper into facts. We have to look more closely and examine trends. In a word, there must always be perspective in the media on developments. For without that, journalists would be daily pronouncing catastrophic ruin for the country because of this or that untoward development, or conversely it would be daily reporting about miraculous happenings because of this or that salutary event.

In these times we live in, our people have great need of this service of the media, for without you truly government cannot hope to bring across to the nation for their support its policies and actions, and the people cannot communicate to government their deepest anxieties and concerns. Problems can get the better of us in the absence of some comity in national perceptions.

The hope that our publishing industry can rise up to this high mission rests upon the fact that so much has been achieved during the past decade in terms of stabilization in the industry. There are indeed many problems that remain, and we in government are not unaware of them. But what you achieved through the auspices of this association is creditable and will serve the nation well.

I take the time to speak now of the importance of economic stability within the publishing industry, because truly our hopes for a genuinely free press depend upon its achievement also of economic freedom. Unless they can stand on their own two feet, publishing organizations will of necessity be subject to domination by selfish private interests and by government.

The historical lessons are plain. Even in a developed country like France for instance, there was a period just before the last war when its press became venal and corrupt because it was not economically free and depended upon subsidies and bribes for its bread and butter, often from foreign powers. The results as we know were calamitous to France.

Closer to our own experience, there was a time when so much of our press was dominated by selfish and political interests. Many of our newspapers were not truly business enterprises, but rather weapons in the area of politics. The situation was so anomalous that in the end much that was vital in Philippine journalism was lost, and crisis overtook the industry.

There is an inextricable relationship between the exercise of freedom of the press and the realization of the fruits of economic freedom. One depends upon the other, and the important service of the press to society is realized where both can prevail in the publishing situation.

We are far from this ideal order of things, and PAPI knows better than anyone. There are publications today that are plainly shrill in their politics or sensational and smutty in their fare, mainly because they toil under conditions of servitude to partisan interests or to plainly opportunistic ones. What is commendable in the work of your association has been your effort to look deeply into the problem and to suggest solutions and policies that can correct the situation. It has done much in the way of examining the financial situation of various segments of the industry. And it has not been remiss in making representations with the government.

To all of you, let me say now that I am fully aware of the problems of the publishing industry today. I am aware of the crunch you are experiencing in terms of the spiralling of production costs. I look with concern on the situation of our book publishing industry. And I seek ways whereby we can truly address the plight of our regional press and help it to achieve economic independence and stability.

The totality of these problems at present are of a piece with the problems that the entire economy is facing today. So in a significant way the full and long-term solutions to your problems is intimately related to our program for economic recovery and stability.

As this economic recovery program gathers headway and momentum, it cannot fail to provide dividends for the publishing industry as a whole, and especially that part of the industry that depends on advertising revenues. More important, with recovery underway, our Government will be in a position to address more directly and decisively specific problems of the industry in which it can help and on which it can act.

The publishing industry, like all of media, is perhaps unique in national life because of the way it intimately combines the service ethic with the enterprise ethic. It is both a business and a service. It legitimately seeks profit, while it eminently serves the paramount need of the polity for information and enlightenment. In what it does it enjoys a power perhaps greater than other institutions in society. But precisely because it has such power, it also accepts responsibilities that society would not demand of other business activities.

Amidst such purposes and such responsibilities, the role of our publishers is very important indeed, not only for the health of your respective enterprises but for the nation as a whole. We are firm in our faith that you in this association are first to accept these purposes and responsibilities, and first also to strive to meet them.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.