Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the graduates of the Ideology Seminars

[Delivered on March 21, 1984]

The Imperatives of Self-Reliance

Only a little more than a year ago, I signed Executive Order 879, creating the committee for the propagation of the Filipino ideology. I was impelled then by the realization that only the internalization of that ideology could bring us to a stage in which no man will need to go to bed hungry nor suffer further the injustices that have been our sad legacy from our colonial experience. I was no less convinced that the internal revolution that must take place in the hearts and minds of our people can weld us together and preserve our nationhood. This is an internal resource no one can take away from us even in those moments of crisis that inevitably touch the lives of nations. We therefore require in these times an understanding as well as a commitment to our national goals and the means to achieve them. Only the Filipino ideology can provide us this understanding and this commitment.

Your presence here today strengthens my hopes. It suggests the desire of our people for an articulation of the meaning of our national experience and the directions of our future. The enthusiasm of which you are a happy indication shows that as the present crisis we face passes, our vast spiritual reserves will enable us not only to overcome future difficulties but also to emerge stronger and more certain of achieving our destiny as a people in a society we can all be proud of. We must, indeed, face the future with optimism, and I am the most optimistic of all, because I see in you the spirit and the will that only a deep commitment to the Filipino ideology can muster.

We must continue to view our present difficulties as an opportunity. We must reexamine ourselves, our assumptions and our most recent experience in the light of what the Filipino ideology teaches us.

The Filipino ideology teaches us the imperative of political liberation and economic emancipation so that we may establish a society at peace with itself.

More than this, however, the basic lesson our ideology and experience has taught us is to shake off our dependence on others. This has been the central thesis of our great nationalist thinkers.

From Mabini and Rizal, to Claro M. Recto and our more contemporaneous thinkers, the point has been made again and again: we compromise not only our political independence, but our identity as a nation as well, if our society remains subject to the vacillating and undependable support of the strong.

Our political capability for policy formulation and implementation has been weakened by decades of dependence. Political power, which by right and necessity the government of a developing country must wield in the furtherance of national development, is itself compromised and tends to perpetuate the dependence of the economic system. Apart from the erosion of sovereignty that this implies, the perpetuation of a dependent economy reposes the national destiny in the hands of International Banking and Financial Institutions. This eventually finds expression in the lives of millions in terms of accelerated unemployment, massive inflation and social unrest.

Economic dependence is therefore twice a liability for developing nations. It is a matter of extreme relevance to the quality of the lives of a nation’s people, if not a matter of life and death. It is also the single most important factor that shapes the dependency that plagues most third world nations.

Economic emancipation, one of the imperatives of Philippine National Development, therefore implies not only the achievement of actual economic aims: the abolition of poverty and the democratization of wealth and private property. It has a political dimension as well: it requires the emancipation of the economic system from dependency so that it must be within their power to shape as their needs dictate economic self-reliance is thus both a political and moral necessity.

I have elsewhere described, most particularly in towards a new partnership : the Filipino ideology , the shape of the economy which would, to my mind, most adequately meet present needs.

While we affirm the necessity of planned development, we also recognize that a regulated free enterprise can most effectively serve as the principal engine of growth and prosperity. These elements, though seemingly contradictory, in reality complement each other.

The imperative of planned development proceeds from a singular aspect of our economic history: the colonialism which stunted the growth of a vigorous entrepreneurial class in society at large, while it concentrated entrepreneurial talent in the state machinery.

The optimum social utilization of entrepreneurial talent, as well as the expansion of a sound entrepreneurial base for the private sector, inevitably becomes a state responsibility. State intervention in social and economic development guarantees the maximum harnessing of the entrepreneurial capabilities concentrated in the state machinery.

That the development so envisioned will result in democratic participation and in the achievement of humanist aims — such as the substantial improvement of the quality of life of the people, which realizes the flowering of their spiritual and intellectual potentials — is not debatable state intervention, however, does make these possible, while development without direction makes the achievement of those aims virtually impossible the reconciliation of the diverse, often conflicting claims of various classes and sectors requires state arbitration.

To assure that the state will function towards the realization of a human order through the democratization of wealth and the elimination of poverty, however, the state’s functionaries who are charged with economic policy-making and implementation must be ideologized .

The core of the ideological imperative is the internalization of the necessity of liberation in the political and economic spheres. Self-Reliance in political and economic terms as the basic strategy of development must be understood as a fundamental national goal, without which efforts at development will miscarry sooner or later.

This is not an argument for a closed-door policy, but a recognition of the magnitude of the economic problems we face and will continue to face, so long as the economy remains a dependency of the advanced industrial economies. A self-reliant economy maintaining relations of equality with other economies is not a contradiction in terms: the first is actually a precondition for the latter. Without the capacity to fall back on its own resources, capabilities and technologies, the economy will remain a slave to the vagaries of economic boom and recession. It will remain a creature of fluctuating markets and the changing policies of the international banking and finance institutions, as well as of the foreign governments that control them.

Government has been able to initiate efforts to create the foundations of a self-reliant economy through a rational energy utilization and development program.

The national livelihood program, and the Sariling Sikap Program, among others.

It has been argued — and the argument became loudest after August 21 last year — that planning towards self-reliance must be abandoned in favor of total state non-intervention. Support for this argument essentially consists of the assumption that, economic development having been propelled in the industrialized countries of the world by private enterprise without benefit of state intervention, the same will occur in the Philippines.

This view disregards the distortions colonialism and neo-colonialism engendered in the economy such as technological backwardness, concentration on the production of cash crops, and the stunting of entrepreneurial skills. It also fails to distinguish among the industrial countries.

The western European countries and the United States developed essentially unhindered by foreign interference, and through their exploitation of the new world. This development spanned centuries of unremitting colonial plunder. In the American case, the plunder was internal, and achieved through American expansion westward, towards the pacific and beyond.

Such countries as the Soviet Union, however, were able to industrialize in a relatively short period through planning, an indispensable part of the socialist strategy. We are not socialists, and we do not believe that the returns from the socialist strategy do not justify its human cost. We can, however, appreciate the need for planning, given the scarce resources and the critical state of the economic problem in our own society. No developing society can afford the social and human costs of “letting events take their course” in societies such as ours, this amounts to entrusting in the hands of chance the destinies of the millions who are poor, and whose lives are less than meaningful.

I have, in earlier works, referred to the demands of these millions as the rebellion of the poor. These demands must be met, not primarily to forestall revolution, but precisely to affect today’s revolution. The assumption that one must heed this rebellion only to protect existing social relations and preserve the power structure necessarily leads to ideas of “reform” as palliative. This is a view dominant among western and western-influenced thinkers because such “reform” ignores the basic need not only to plan economic development, but to plan it towards self-reliance.

A self-reliant economy, to repeat, does not imply autarkic development. The normal processes of international trade and other forms of economic relations will continue. What needs to be done is to remove those aspects of dependency that place countries such as ours at a disadvantage – and this cannot be achieved through state withdrawal from the processes of economic development, on the contrary, this need makes state participation even more urgent.

The disciples of state non-intervention, however, seems to make a virtue of dependency. “The interdependence of countries in today’s world” is a phrase that occurs often in their rhetoric. We submit that such an interdependence does not preclude the independence of national economies in terms of basic food, energy and housing needs. Such an independence permits them to resist both political and economic pressures and leads to social stability. It is, as such, a necessity.

Any agenda for meaningful change must therefore begin with the utilization of a self-reliant strategy as the cornerstone of development. This implies the active participation of government in the development process.

It demands that government direct and guide that process towards the realization of the historic demands of the majority who are poor. Without self-reliance as a strategic goal and without such participation, the change that will take place will be at best temporary and at worst an illusion.

As graduates of the numerous seminars on the Filipino ideology that have been held since March last year, you are among those in the best position to propagate among our people the virtues of self-reliance as a crucial element in our democratic revolution.

That revolution reaffirms the unity of nationalism and popular aspirations as the guiding principle in our quest for a just social order. It is our revolution, the revolution our experience as a people and the shape of the future we want, demand. At the core of this revolution is the idea of a self-reliant nation.

We cannot achieve this revolution without internalizing self-reliance this means depending on ourselves and relying on our own innovative capacities and enterprise rather than on the goodwill of others.

I congratulate all of you, and I assure you that this government, taking our interests, our hopes and our aspirations to heart, will continue to pursue, with you and the rest of our people, the goals and ideals of the Filipino ideology. In our quest for our destiny.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.