Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Commemoration Rites for Dr. Jose Rizal

[Delivered on December 30, 1981]

It is not only because of habit or for show that we gather here dutifully every year to pay homage to the memory of Dr. Jose Rizal.

Our life as a nation and as a people take meaning from the lives of our great men in history, and nowhere more truly than from the man who was martyred here in Bagumbayan 85 years ago.

There may be fashions and fads that occasionally may color our veneration of the man and the life, moments of reassessment and restudy of his precise place in our national history, but after such self-conscious moments of reexamination, we return to the one incontrovertible truth: that in Rizal we have an authentic hero of the race who spoke not only to his time but to our own.

In the truest sense of the words that we sometimes casually speak but only dimly understand, Rizal was the nation we are today. He was surely not alone in giving vision and life to the nation that eventually emerged in these islands, for many indeed have been the great men and women who labored to create the nation we were destined to be. But of Rizal perhaps we can say that his role was seminal in our turbulent emergence into nationhood; and more than that, he provided our people a measure for the achievement and possession of nationhood.

It is a paradox that this man whom we venerate more than any other hero in our history denied his support for our national revolution of 1896. And there is supreme irony and pathos too in the fact that the same revolution he denied would lead to his own martyrdom.

Yet he is not, I think, diminished by this lack of faith in revolutionary struggle, and by his belief that to make the Filipino nation, his people needed more time and needed to prepare themselves better.

For while we surely will ever venerate the fervor and valor of arms that marked our revolutionary struggle for independence, so also do we recognize now Rizal’s prophetic vision of the exacting demands of nationhood, and of the need for our people to be unswerving and forthright in the exercise of independence.

Though there is great tragedy in the manner of his passing, and great drama in his signal moment in our national history, it is not as a man of action that we remember him, but as a man of ideas, as a man who awakened our people to visions of themselves they had not known before.

He is surely the most complex and multi-dimensional figure in our history. In a lifetime shorter than that of many of his contemporaries, he combined the role of critic and participant in the great events of his time, he was leader and scholar, scientist and novelist, and many other things besides.

Such a life cannot be summed up in one simple measure of a man’s impact on history. Not one great passion, but many, dominated his rather brief life.

But in all these many directions to which his life had taken him, one stood out above all others: and that was his sense of a living tie between himself and the generations which were to come. For himself he did not dream of seeing the Filipino nation being born during his lifetime; he could only see it dawning for those who were to follow him.

In this perhaps, he was limited in his inability to see the ferment that was churning in the society around him. But in this also is the incalculable legacy that he was to bequeath to the nation-builders of a later time: the insight that a nation is not really born in one great burst of passion, it too must be nurtured by methodical construction and study.

In the great collection of writings that he left behind, he examines over and over again the many questions that attend the task of nation-building.

For him, nationhood was not a question of rejecting the old for the new, or vice versa; all the past is the basis for beginning the future.

“Ours,” he wrote, “is a tremendous task. We young Filipinos are trying to make over a nation and must not halt in our onward march… We are anxious to learn of the past, which we need to understand in order to plan intelligently for the future.”

He shirked the course of revolution, and indeed he did not believe his people ready for independence. “I place,” he wrote, “as a prior condition the education of the people, that by means of instruction and industry our country may have individuality of its own and make itself worthy of these liberties.”

But he was not unaware of the other forces in his society that then were tending in another direction. “If force compels us,” he wrote “to be silent or misfortune removes us from public life — which is not impossible since we are mortal — then we know not upon what courses a younger generation, more numerous and aggressive than we are, and straining to take our places, will embark.”

Rizal’s answer to the challenge of change was reform not revolution, and this was specifically the result of his perception of the situation of his country and his people then, and we may say too that this was the response of a man of peace.

It is not given to us to say which of the two responses — reform or revolution — truly befitted the Philippines at the turn of the century; in the event the revolution did take place and became an integral part of our national history.

But this much may be said: that Rizal’s political ideas, his concept of process in a people’s gradual achievement and possession of nationhood, his trust in evolutionary growth — they have something enduring to say to the Filipino generations that came to birth with national independence already won.

Rizal believed in the unbroken link between past, present and future, and that progress is the result of understanding and nurture.

Progress, he states at every turn, will be the fruits of education and effort put together, and not by any magical means.

And to the end he was constant in the belief that creative effort, not destructive action alone make society hospitable to human life and community.

These ideas born in a time of ferment in our distant past have their own meaning and relevance to our own time — and particularly so, I would think, because we are faced not with the winning of independence, but with giving meaning and truth to our nationhood.

Rizal more than any great figure in our national history does not diminish in relevance because he rises beyond the great issues of his day to address the concerns of generations to come. Again and again, each generation of our people come in homage before Rizal and have something to learn and remember.

And so it is with us at this commemoration during this the first year of our New Republic.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.