Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the commencement exercise of the Philippine Military Academy

[Delivered in Baguio City, February 25, 1979]

The Nation’s “Moral Forces”

ALLOW ME, FIRST of all, to congratulate this year’s graduates from this primate and leading military institution of our country.

I always find it a refreshing and reassuring experience to come to the Philippine Military Academy during its commencement exercises. It is then when I am reminded by the splendid sight of the graduating class — the turnover ceremonies and the formal parade — that this great institution is founded on the sound principle that more than weapons or organization, the individual soldier must possess strength of mind and character.

I remember that when I came here the first time as your guest of honor 13 years ago, I found occasion to refer to one of the pronouncements of Karl Von Clausewitz, the famous Prussian military thinker.

They relate to what he calls the “moral forces,” a term which he used to designate a state of moral and spiritual preparedness of a nation for war. According to him, the outcome of a military struggle may very well depend on the extent of the “moral forces” which are assembled for a given side.

Permit me to resume this theme where I left off 13 years ago, in order that I may state a brief message which I wish you and our people to hear from me today, for I find this particular principle of direct relevance to present circumstances and situation.

The “moral forces” which Von Clausewitz was referring to, do not inhere only in communities or nations; in fact they inhere primarily in individuals. So, applying the dictum of Von Clausewitz further, it might be said that the state of moral and spiritual preparedness of the individual soldier may very well decide the outcome of any military struggle.

What, you might ask, are the “moral forces” with which a soldier should equip himself In order to swing the outcome of the struggle in his favor?

Let us refer once more to the words of Clausewitz. He said, and I quote: “If we take a comprehensive view of the four components of the atmosphere in which war moves — danger, physical effort, uncertainty and chance — it is easy to understand that a great moral and mental force is needed in this baffling element; a force which we find historians and chronicles of military events describing as energy, firmness, staunchness, strength of mind and of character.”

Energy, firmness, staunchness, strength of mind and character — these are the qualities which the French Marshal Ferdinand Foch tried to encapsulate when he said: “My right has been rolled up; my left has been driven back; my center has been smashed. I have ordered an advance on all fronts.”

These words may sound a little old-fashioned for the so-called push-button warfare generation we are presumably living in.

I can only say that most countries have no such buttons to push, and even those countries which do have these buttons have found it neither expedient nor necessary to push them. All the wars and all the armed conflicts we have seen so far have been fought and won or lost on the performance of the individual soldier.

An American president once said in the sixties, and I quote: “Korea has not been the only battleground since the end of the Second World War. Men have fought and died in Malaya, in Greece, in the Philippines, in Algeria and Cuba and Cyprus, and almost continuously on the Indochina peninsula. No nuclear weapons have been fired. No massive nuclear retaliation has been considered appropriate. This is another type of war, new in its intensity, ancient in its origin — war by guerrillas, subversives, insurgents, assassins; war by ambush instead of by combat, by infiltration instead of aggression.”

The words of Von Clausewitz still find application in our present circumstances; and of his words, these seem the most pertinent to military education: “The moral forces are amongst the most important subjects in war.” He could very well have said, the moral forces are among the most important subjects in the military academy.

I am happy to say that the Philippine Military Academy has always heeded these words and has applied them in its curriculum. Especially since the curriculum reform of 1971, the Philippine Military Academy has become an institution where strength of both mind and character is cultivated. In fact, I know of no other regular college in the country that is intent in establishing high academic standards as well as in building up character.

This is an example which I hope other colleges will take into heart. Education is the formation of the whole man, and college education, as much as high school education, should equally be concerned with the formation of character as it is with the formation of the mind.

I don’t think that it is only the soldier who needs strength of mind and character. If war is characterized by danger, physical effort, uncertainty and chance, as Von Clausewitz said, life is similar to war in these respects. And if the soldier must have energy, firmness, staunchness, strength of mind and character, so must any man acquire these qualities of mind and will if he intends to live a full, useful and successful life.

It is not only in the endeavors of life or in the struggles of war where we need these qualities of the mind and of the will: we need them as well in our struggle as a nation to rise above the legacy of underdevelopment and deprivation.

If it is true, as it has been said, that no nation can rise higher than the standard of excellence of its schools and colleges, then we must realize that we as a nation cannot rise higher in the struggle to attain development than what the sum of our individual strength of mind and will can attain.

No one should be in any doubt that we are at war against poverty, inequality — the host of historical ills and deficiencies which have long plagued our society. In this war, it is the preponderance of “moral forces” assembled on our side which will decide the issue.

When I was a student, I remember that President Quezon once wondered aloud before us whether or not the youth of our land of that generation had the strength of mind and character to meet the challenges which were soon to come with the independence and nationhood.

In the presence of this graduating class, whose members have received the benefits of the truly formative influence of this institution, I have no need to wonder whether you have such will and character. You have the strength of mind and will to carry out the mission that you will soon receive with your commission, because here at the Philippine Military Academy, the “moral forces” became your most important subjects.

I, therefore, wish you all success in your careers and welcome you to the Armed Forces of the Philippines as commissioned officers.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].