Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Inauguration of the New Aqueduct of the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System

[Delivered on May 21, 1981]

I do not have to tell you how delighted I am to be here today with the first lady to witness the completion of this new aqueduct of the Greater Manila Waterworks System, and to join the officers and employees of the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System in its inauguration.

The provision of vital and efficient public utilities forms a very high priority of the government, and we are committed not only in Metropolitan Manila and its environs, but in the rest of the country to an intensive and comprehensive utilities development program. Public Utilities Development is a vital part of the process of modernization; in those areas of our country where there are already such facilities, their continued upgrading and improvement is as important as the construction of the same in areas not yet reached by modern electrification and waterworks systems.

What we mark here today, in this inaugural, is an example of redevelopment and expansion of a vital public utility service. And I believe I speak for the many millions of residents in the entire metropolitan manila area that this new aqueduct and what it connotes in terms of water supply have been long overdue. For some years now we have been experiencing in Metro Manila a serious water backlog arising from the inadequacy of the old water system to meet the needs of a population that has multiplied many times over during the last decade or so.

These were needs that could only be met by a major expansion program of the waterworks system, and it was in this light that the MWSS launched a few years ago its water supply development project which was designed to meet the backlog of the previous decade and the anticipated demand up to the year 1986.

All in all, water demand in the MWSS service area is estimated to be in the vicinity of 450 million gallons per day. Five years ago, it was only 325 mgd. The capacity of our water supply system prior to this innovation was only 345 mgd. In aggregate terms, therefore have been only about 67% of ideal consumption requirements of the present population of 6.7 million in the MWSS service area.

This water supply development project is basically anchored on various inter-related plant expansions that will boost, when completed, the water system’s capacity to 660 million gallons per day, from the present capacity of 345 mgd. The total cost of the project was estimated at P3.17 billion, with a foreign exchange component of $182.3 million financed by loans from the Asian Development Bank of $100.3 million and the world bank of $82 million.

The completion of this new aqueduct represents the first phase of the upgrading and expansion of water supply services. This has mainly involved the uprating of the existing Balara water treatment plant and the construction of an aqueduct measuring 3.4 meters in diameter and 16 kms. In length from Bigti to the La Mesa Reservoir.

With the operation of this new aqueduct, the water supply and treatment capacity of the present system is increased to about 400 million gallons per day, from the present level of 345 mgd.

This additional capacity comes at a time when the La Mesa Reservoir will be at about its lowest permissible pool elevation. It will therefore enable faster filling up of the reservoir by July and thus prevent a planned long-term cutback in manila’s supply if the rains do not come early this year.

Within the total framework of the total water supply development project, the new aqueduct, however, represents only the initial phase.

By September and October 1981, the new 400 mgd La Mesa Water Treatment Plant will be put into intermediate operation. In October, the first major release of additional water supply will take place with the completion of the new steel transmission main.

Between August and October 1982, several major changes will take place that will enable the utilization of the projected expanded system capacity of 660 million gallons per day: and these are the completion of the new dam at Ipo; the commissioning of the second-half of the La Mesa Water Treatment plant; the completed uprating of the Angat Auxiliary Turbine Works with peak releases of up to 28.6 cubic meters per second; and then finally the full completion of the two major primary mains ringing the MWSS service area.

As these innovations in the plants are being installed, the laying of the distribution system network takes place simultaneously. The construction of this modern distribution system was started in 1979, and this has intensified this year. Most of these new mains will be progressively commissioned between October 1981 up to the end of 1982. And distribution network construction will continue in 1983 to reach new areas whose needs will peak by the middle of the decade.

What I mean to emphasize in citing here today the highlights of the water supply development project for Metro Manila and outlying towns in Rizal and Cavite is that we are undertaking here not just a simple tinkering with our waterworks system. We are putting in place a major innovation in our water system designed to cope with the needs of a growing metropolis. We are talking of present and future needs. And we are dealing with problems over the long term.

In a sense this project is emblematic of our total approach to national development: that we are no longer content to propose partial solutions or answers to problems and needs; rather, we venture aggressively into labors that can truly result in change. Just as in our energy development program, we are not content with conservation work though it is needed but aggressively push on into tapping indigenous energy sources, so in the area of public utilities, we are beaming our attention to full and adequate responses to needs, both those now felt and those anticipated in the future.

I know that there are many among us, and I include myself, who have been impatient about the water supply development project. I know that we have felt for some time the terrible difficulties that have had to be faced both in terms of reorganizing water supply administration, and of financing an obviously costly project.

But today, finally, we see here the opening up of a major phase of the project. We know what is within our capacity to build and to provide in terms of service to our people in the national capital region and other communities near the metropolis.

In closing, I wish to commend all who have labored to make this inauguration possible, and certainly not least, the officers and members of the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System, who certainly have reason to be proud today.

Thank you and good day to all.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.