Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the First National Convention of Filipino Priests

[Delivered on January 14, 1970]

An Age of Renewal

WHEN I WAS invited to speak before you, I did not know that this was the First Convention of Priests in the Philippines. So I inquired; I sought information from those immediately around me, and I was told that the conferees were indeed rebels sitting down together to present their views. And I was quietly, and in hushed tones, informed that my presence might signify not only tolerance by authority, or government, but in fact a grant of license or privilege to mount a rebellion. But after some intense and, should we say, diffused arguments, we came to the conclusion that I started my career as a rebel, and therefore I have a kinship with the rebels.

As I come before you today, I am reminded of events in 1942, about 28 years ago, beginning with reports among the officers and men in Bataan that the high command of the USAFFE had decided to surrender. And the young men, is the officers and men in the frontlines, the outpost lines of resistance, the main line of resistance, the reserve line which had bore the brunt of attack, were shocked by this information. After so many months of privation, of fighting, of blood and death, we were going to surrender. And the young officers decided to organize a group and seek permission from the high command to speak out their minds.

In the army, as I guess in the church, the younger officers are not supposed I to speak unless given permission to do so. This is one of the strictest rules in the military. You first obey and, if you are alive after obeying, then you may question the order. But this time, it was a question of national dignity and of a policy which was decided upon and imposed without the frontline officers having been consulted. And this is something which has never been written about nor talked about, because it is one of the well kept secrets of the military. The young officers then approached the generals according to military protocol and after properly saluting, requested permission to speak. And after a hurried consultation among the brass of the USAFFE in Bataan, permission was granted.

Then the spokesmen, one of whom is speaking before you now, conceding that surrender was inevitable asked that the young officers be permitted to break out without surrendering their arms. The immediate answer of course was that this meant violation of the laws of land warfare, and that when a unit surrenders upon the orders of a commanding officer, the subordinate officers and men were duty bound to obey. And we were informed that any violation of such an order was subject to court martial and punishable with death. We then inquired whether there was any assurance of the security of the officers and men who surrender, especially those who had been engaged in intelligence work like me, and it was said that the enemy was supposed to be honorable and would follow the worthy tradition of the victor in war, which is to treat the vanquished with proper respected and decorum. However, the issue required a staff meeting which was again an innovation, because Captains and Lieutenants never attend general staff meetings. It’s just like the priests of the parish attending a meeting of the hierarchy of the church. But it happened, and with proper respect again we pointed out that there were strong indications that we would all be wiped out either in a concentration camp by disease, malnutrition and illness — all of the sort of mischance we were aware of — as well as the possibility that the enemy did not have the facilities to take care of so many surrendered soldiers.

And this discussion went on until Finally, the older officers said:’ ‘We have not given the order to surrender. We authorize small unit commanders to decide what operations they should engage in before surrender. This will legalize all activity including a breakout.” So this, in a way, not only tolerated but legalized the actions of some of the officers and men who escaped from Bataan and the Death March and engaged in, what is now well-known to many of us.

I am now reminded of all these. I note there is a meeting of minds, apparently, between the Bishops here and the priests. I do not know whether to classify the Bishops also as rebels, but I am indeed glad to be here in this happening as Father Dimen has called this — in the mod term. I am sure that my remarks will be interpreted by some of my critics as meaning that I am antagonistic to the Bishops because of the letter that they published in the newspapers before it reached me. You know, protocol is supposed to dictate that nothing be published of any communication to the President until after he has received and answered it. But when this was brought to my attention, I said: “But those are Bishops and whatever they say I follow.” And I didn’t say that with tongue in cheek. I actually meant it. You see, I belong to the generation who knew a tidy world, tidy, cleancut, and cognizant of the clear demarcation line of authority between things of the spirit and things of the world. But I have also found in my long experience in the government that when all else fail you refer to things of the spirit and sometimes miracles happen.

This is one of the periods in our history when all of us are praying for miracles. And, therefore, I welcome the support for our people, support for the Republic, from all quarters whatsoever, and, certainly one of the most welcome quarters would be that of our church and our ministers, who have taken it upon themselves to administer to the spiritual needs of our people.

But in coming here today, I feel like an explorer. I have stumbled upon a strange and different world. I feel like Ferdinand Magellan. I am sure that this is the same feeling that a priest feels when he is invited to attend a gathering of men of government. I am sure you all know what it is to exist in two different worlds. We come into each other’s world as, what would you call it, special intruders or special performers. When a priest is invited into an affair of state, what is he asked to do? He is asked to deliver an invocation or say the blessing. And when a man of government is invited to attend a gathering of priests, I supposed that he is asked to deliver a speech, which includes both an invocation and a blessing.

But in this gathering I must confess a greater sense of awe and a feeling of strangeness. In the past, as I have said, according to tradition, our distance from each other is derived from an apparent, a different, a classical and traditional difference of function and performance. You attend to the needs of the spirit, and we in government attend to the needs of the body. Well, nowadays, I think there is no clear demarcation line between what is needed by the spirit and what is needed by the body.

When we speak of morality for instance, and I speak of a new age, a new social and national morality, I speak not only of material things, rather I speak more of the spirit, because it is a change in the heart and in the mind of man that I seek, and in doing this I employ not only the authority of government but my moral authority, the authority of a man elected as a leader by our people. And yet, this is the kind of authority that you employ too.

I see many familiar faces here who belong to our once tidy and well ordered generation. I don’t recognize them as priests, in view of the absence of the usual habiliments of priests, but I guess this is a part of the change that Father Dimen proposed. I gather that the formal attire that has been officially accepted by the Church is the Nehru shirt, but I gather too, that all kinds of apparel are tolerated nowadays.

One day in Malacañang I saw a priest come in. I recognized him as such because he was an acquaintance, but he had long sideburns. Hooked hurriedly at the Cardinal, Cardinal Santos, who was present to find out his reaction to the apparition, and I could feel the Cardinal wringing his hands in dismay.

Seriously, speaking, I was listening to Father Dimen, even as I inquired from Father Suñga too, about the purposes of this convention. And there came to my mind the inquiry: What was it really that we always thought about priests? Because one speaks of attending to priests now in their old age, and to security of the priest. And I am reminded of what one of my younger children told me when I inquired about this matter. What do you think happens to priests when they grow old? And this precocious youngster of mine answered, Oh, they go to a never-never shadow land, like the prophets of old, and they are attended to and they thrive upon the well-deserved ministrations of the Lord through His birds and other creatures.

This reflects, I guess, the feeling of affection that one feels towards priests in general. This legend, like all other ancient and beautiful fables, I suppose, must go, and before long I must tell that young child of mine that this concept is just like Santa Claus, that he existed a long time ago and he will exist for many young children for sometime to come. But you depart from this land of fable, from this land of legends when you have reached, shall we say, the age of puberty, and lose it completely until at a later age, perhaps, you find there is need for such fables, such legends all over again.

My experience with the ways of the Church taught me a long time ago that the priest was someone different from the rest of humanity because of his garb and bearing, and his way of thinking. And whenever I exhort, up to now, whenever I exhort the workers in government and wish to identify myself with their loneliness in office, when they have to make decisions or they have to travel into the far corners of our land, the despoiled corners, the areas of deprivation, and must dedicate themselves completely without any restraint whatsoever because of present and future demands, I speak to them of the priesthood, of the high priesthood to which they must dedicate themselves.

But today, no such telltale signs seem to exist. In this so-called age of revolution and reform, bewildering changes of course have caught up with the Roman Catholic Church. It has caught up with the traditional habit of the priest, and more important, with his outlook on the here and now.

Yet, it is quite ironic really, for these changes have served to bring the priesthood — each and everyone of you — closer to all of us laymen. I don’t feel as an intruder here because everywhere I look I seem to find a face, a mind, not really that distant or different from me as to be unable to share my anxieties about the society we live in, and my aspirations for its advance.

I know that whether you are priests or not, you too are involved in the problems of our nation, and that if any man suffers, you suffer with him, as I suffer. And that if any plan fails you condole with me as you condole with the entire nation and the entire people.

I would not presume to tell you of the many instances of renewal and reform that is happening within the Church. I would much rather wait for you to acquaint me, to explain to me the revolution that has visited the Church.

When I received your invitation to this convention, one of my aides remarked jokingly that the Philippine Priests, Inc., is some kind of a “trade union inside the Church of the Philippines.”

I see the humor in his remark, but I also see the truth in what he said. It seems to me that this unprecedented movement to organize the Filipino clergy into one homogeneous body that can provide for its development and protection, and that can serve as a voice for its needs and for the needs of the individual priests, draws its inspiration and techniques perhaps from labor unionism, partly.

I find in your present movement the real meaning of what the Church underlines when it says she believes in “social democracy,” and that she believes in “social justice.”

I cannot believe that anyone, neither the individual priest nor the Church Hierarchy, could find in this movement any cause for sadness or alarm. For clearly it is a good wind that blows hither. The fact that many of the respected Bishops are here, who can doubt the manifold gains that it augurs within the Church? Who can doubt the benefits that it will bestow on the national community?

For the moment, the present convention is directed to the task of winning rights and status for the Filipino priest. I gather it is as it should be. In the beginning, your movement must seek to test its capacity to survive and prosper. And I have no doubt that it will survive and prosper.

I see, however, in your movement an enlargement of your participation in the work of making our country a better place to live in, which is to say, plenty. It means everything that we aspire for.

It is often said that the crisis which confronts us now exceeds mere questions of economics and politics — it has to do with values. To surmount this crisis in such a way that it will never occur again requires moral courage and moral strength on the part of those who make up our society.

In the conscious and zealous defense of these values, your work is crucial, perhaps more crucial than mine. Those of us whose work is to lead or to govern look to religious groups and of course our parents and our schools to make our people aware of the values that make our society strong. And I cannot but be reminded that in the last century our society was made strong by three Filipino priests — Fathers Gomez, Burgos, and Zamora. They helped forge the Filipino nation, even way ahead of Rizal, way ahead of Bonifacio, way ahead of Aguinaldo and his First Republic. I presume that all of you, since you are priests in their image, more than us in government, you are called upon today to follow in their footsteps by helping to strengthen the foundations of our nation.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 2). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].