Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Graduation Ceremony of the Philippine Military Academy

The Communist Conspiracy

HERE, AT THE Philippine Military Academy, it has become a hallowed custom once a year to pay tribute not only to the group of distinguished young individuals who finish the special four-year course, and this afternoon I also wish to contribute to this hallowed custom by paying tribute to an ideal, and that is the ideal of excellence. For it is the pursuit of this ideal that has given the Philippine Military Academy its great prestige. By pursuing this ideal, the. graduates of the Philippine Military Academy assure the Armed Forces and the nation as a whole a steady source of human material for responsible leadership.

It is therefore my great pride and pleasure to congratulate the Academy’s graduates this year. I am sure mine is only one of countless voices throughout the nation which articulate praise and admiration for your achievement.

While taking note of this achievement, I must also ask you however to bear in mind that the future which you face will demand even more sacrifice and hard work from each of you. We live in times which require endless dedication to the principle of excellence which guided you through the past four years in this Academy.

Owing to the requirements of national development, the soldier today is called upon to perform extraordinary duties, to fulfill responsibilities quite beyond the limits of the traditional military career. I am sure you are aware that the military man in our time is no longer merely a soldier but is also a builder, a social scientist, and in many ways a teacher.

If you are to continue the success that you have already achieved in this Academy, you must be ready to meet the numerous tests of courage and determination by which you will be measured outside this training ground.

Out of the numerous responsibilities that you will be called upon to fulfill, I am mainly concerned today with your responsibility, soldiers, to provide our people with leadership in meeting the problem of subversion. For no matter how hard you and the rest of us may work, we are bound to lose the gains we make if we do not stand fast against the danger posed by those who seek to undermine our institutions, and the security of the nation.

This danger is real, and has been with us for a long time. Although it may be under cover, it may present itself through many faces, but it is there. And the main source of this danger is the Communist conspiracy, which has been a persistent threat to our democratic system for at least 40 years. Allow me, therefore, to speak of this communist conspiracy.

The organized subversion of our democratic institutions began actually on November 7, 1930, when the Partido Komunista was inaugurated at Plaza Moriones, in Tondo. In an endeavor to bring together into a single force the labor and peasant elements, the Partido Komunista established a base in Manila and then worked its way into the provinces, particularly in Central and Southern Luzon.

Three times since then it has been declared a subversive force although this is largely forgotten nowadays — first in 1933, when it was outlawed by no less than the Supreme Court of the Philippines; again in 1948, when it was outlawed by President Roxas; and once more in 1957, when Congress passed Republic Act No. 1700.

Throughout its career, the Communist organization in this country has aimed at the violent overthrow of duly constituted government, and conducted itself accordingly, by a combination of the so-called “parliamentary struggle” and violence, sabotage, and relentless propaganda.

In order to further its ends, the Communist conspiracy has endeavored at various times to coalesce with other elements, including political parties. It has put up a “united front” with one or another of these elements at various times, and set up such organizations as the Frente Popular, the League for the Defense of Democracy, the Philippine Youth Congress and other front groups. In 1938, it merged with the Socialist Party and became the Partido Komunista Ng Pilipinas otherwise known as the (PKP).

Its first formal venture into armed struggle as a means of subversion came in March 1942, when the Hukbalahap was organized in Barrio Batibat, in Concepcion, Tarlac. Since then, it has alternated between phases of pronounced parliamentary struggle and armed struggle, although at all times it maintained a military arm to terrorize the citizenry and, if possible, the government.

Since 1946, it has also taken an active part in elections, merging with political elements which were willing to boost its program of action and perhaps hasten the fulfillment of its aims.

A high point in the Communist conspiracy in this country came late in 1949 when, taking advantage of a certain amount of political instability, the Communist leadership pronounced the existence of a so-called “revolutionary situation” and accordingly sought to foster an atmosphere of strife and crisis. Hukbalahap raids and ambushes, an increase in armed clashes and casualties, and a sense of impending disaster promoted among certain elements in the nation — by means of these, the communists pressed their armed offensive!following a strategy meeting of the PKP politburo in January, 1950. Note that this coincided with the fall of the Chiang government, and the takeover by Mao Tse-tung of the mainland of China. At this strategy meeting, the Communist leadership set the date for their planned takeover of power on May 1,1952.

The communist rebellion of 1950 was thus characterized by guerrilla action, with jabs and thrusts at various places, particularly in Central and Southern Luzon. At one time, if you will remember, some 14,000 armed dissidents bore arms and invested the communist movement with some amount of prowess. These were veterans of the Second World War, utilizing arms that had been used against the enemy that invaded our land and had not been returned to the Armed Forces of either the United States or the Philippines. But the communist conspiracy underestimated the competence, the discipline and the dedication of the Armed Forces.

What started out in the first month of 1950 as a promising guerrilla campaign began to collapse in October of that year when the Armed Forces military intelligence service destroyed the Communist politburo in Manila. Further intelligence work broke the back of a rising communist front organization, the Congress of Labor Organizations. It is perhaps necessary to note that these successes were accompanied or were made possible by the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus by President Quirino.

These intelligence successes were accompanied by unceasing military action by our Armed Forces, which succeeded shortly in putting the dissident troops to rout and scattering their shreds into the mountain sanctuaries. Without the aid of any foreign troops, indeed without in the slightest measure desiring the assistance of foreign troops, the Armed Forces of the Philippines vanquished the Communist guerilla action. It thus established for the Philippines the record of being the only Asian country that has demolished an actual communist rebellion through the sheer courage, skill and sturdiness of its own unaided soldiery.

In 1970, after comparatively quiescent years following its rout twenty years ago, the Communist conspiracy in the Philippines once more mounted a more less massive and overt act to overthrow the government. But it was a rebellion unlike that of 1950.

The accent in the fresh outburst of Communist energy in 1970 and this year has been on propaganda and agitation. Likely elements in youth, peasant and labor groups, as well as among certain intellectuals, are enticed by all means and manner of propaganda into the Communist conspiracy. Political indoctrination is conducted in schools and elsewhere today, some openly, others covertly. Various organizations, including some quite well known nationalist groups, are wittingly or unwittingly the staging ground or breeding place of Communist indoctrination. A number of these front organizations have been active in the promotion, support or actual conduct of demonstrations and rallies set up to give a degree of verisimilitude to the Communist pretense that the entire country is seized with an overwhelming revolutionary fervor.

The propaganda, at certain times, especially in 1970, has been accompanied by violence and armed action against the forces of government. But on the whole the present communist endeavor is carried out by means of jargon. Propaganda has sought to manipulate the attitudes and behavior of various elements through themes with a peculiar fascination for a specific group. Thus the young are induced by appeals to nationalism; laborers and peasants are told about the hopelessness of their economic condition.

All these could in time produce a situation critical enough to warrant a more or less sustained use of the government’s military resources. I am sure that as before, the Armed Forces will acquit themselves with great distinction. For the experience of 1950 has shown that in a time of crisis it is the Armed Forces which bear the brunt of the responsibility for protecting the nation and preserving the liberties and freedoms which are the substance of our present society. But let me not be misconstrued. It is not the military that is the principal arm of the government in the struggle against communism. The principal arm against communism is reform and the socio-economic development program.

I say this both with hope and conviction, because I know that the Communist threat is relentless and no moment must pass but that we are fully awake and prepared. The Communist Party, in its continuing effort to overthrow the government by force, has persisted for the last 40 years, in spite of serious reverses that saw many of its leaders killed or incarcerated after being declared enemies of the state and of constituted authority. The leaders of the Communist movement and the ideologues of the Communist Party say they plan not in terms of years nor in terms of decades, but in terms even of centuries. If this is so, then I speak to the officers who in their time will meet with the problem of communist conspiracy.

The local Communist Party has employed every conceivable trick or stratagem in this endeavor. It has shifted many times in its tactics, using legal and parliamentary means when conditions seem to endow this strategy with wisdom; and when this fails, resorting to skirmishes with the Armed Forces, or killing innocent citizens in ambuscades.

At other times, it resorts to spreading false propaganda against the government, or against individuals and groups who would easily bend to its will. By such means, communism has portrayed itself as the guardian of freedom and democracy in this country. Does this mean that government is perfect, that our society does not need reform? No. In many instances, communism has utilized valid grievances and valid demands for reform as premises for preparing the staging ground against both government and society.

On the other hand, Communist agitators, intent on the success of their deception, have marched in student demonstrations, destroying both public and private property. Never mind if the economy of the nation suffers, never mind if the work of the government and of the private sector grinds to a stop, and never mind if innocent civilians suffer, provided they advance an inch forward in their march to power.

From the start, the Communist Party in the Philippines has sought by every means to undermine the social order. It has attempted to penetrate the government for the purpose of destroying it. It did so during the time of President Quezon, but failed. This serious setback sent the communists into a new flurry of organization, transforming Central Luzon into a hotbed of subversion. From then on, Central Luzon was the center of the dissident movement, under such leaders as Luis Taruc, Pedro Abad Santos, Crisanto Evangelista and some Chinese nationals imported from Red China.

Insurgents, determined to strengthen their hold on the peasants, organized the Barrio United Defense Corps and the National Federation of Peasants in the Philippines. They even formed their own “government.”

For their part, the Armed Forces have dealt with the Communist conspiracy with firmness and dignity, balancing the realities of the situation with the imperatives of national security and survival.

The Armed Forces dealt a decisive blow to the dissident movement, specially the traditionalist, or Moscow-oriented Communists, when elements of the 10th BCT killed Huk Supremo Pedro Taruc last October in Angeles City, and before that, captured Commander Sumulong, their top commander. Likewise, the Armed Forces have put an end to the careers of Huk leaders, Zaragoza and Del Mundo, to mention only the more prominent ones in fairly recent days.

We still have to contend with what the more aggressive Communist Party faction or the Maoist or Peking-oriented Communists today call its military arm and which is referred to as The New People’s Army, of whom so-called Commander Dante is the known leader. There was an attempt in several violent student demonstrations last year, when student activists referred to Dante as “our next President,” to break into Malacañang Palace, shouting his name and that of Mao Tse-tung, and raising the red flag. They threw live bombs into the Palace grounds and burned some buildings. But the Armed Forces of the Philippines resisted the temptation of retaliating with equal force. While they rammed a truck against the Palace gates and some of the elements entered the Palace grounds, the only counter-action was to push them out; this was in accordance with the traditions of the Armed Forces.

But Dante or the students mouthing Maoist jargon will never compel lawful authority to renege on its commitment to democracy and freedom. The people themselves have seen through them, and read the plunder and deceit in their acts. Thus, when the University of the Philippines was taken over by these radical elements, especially those of the student organizations, the Armed Forces of the Philippines were not committed to repel this action. And these radical groups demonstrated that they were more rightist than the government; they were continuously criticized for being more fascist than any abusive soldier, and at the same time for being more abusive than any unthinking citizen.

The same comprehension has moved the authorities to move firmly against Nilo Tayag of the Kabataang Makabayan, who is now under army custody, as is also Leoncio Co, and is facing charges of having incited people to rise against the state.

Consider the record of the Communist conspiracy. Through various operations, it has killed no less than 298 persons from 1962 to 1968. It is responsible for 173 incidents of terrorism in 1969 alone, resulting in 196 killed, 37 kidnapped, and 103 wounded.

For the first two months of 1970 alone, there have been 42 dissident-initiated incidents resulting in 54 killed, one kidnapped and 35 wounded. Needless to say, this does not reflect the peaceable spirit which should counsel all our acts.

I have come here this afternoon to warm that the Communists will continue to try and subvert the government, whoever the President may be, and undermine the principles on which our democracy and our free institutions stand. Like Jose Lava, who said, “I entered prison as a Communist and I will go out as a Communists,” they will persist in waging their kind of war.

We are all engaged in a decisive and critical struggle to achieve progress and prosperity for the present as well as for the future, in order to avert the possibility that our people will succumb to the communist counsel of despair and to prove to the world that we are a nation capable of self-determination and self-government.

The greatest challenge that confronts us today is the challenge of the communist ideology which has placed upon our shoulders the burden to prove mat freedom and democracy, as principles of human society, will work for the Filipino people and secure for them better living conditions.

In the face of these difficulties, the Communist elements in our country would foster upon the masses the false belief that the ultimate solution to our basic national problems is an armed revolution. They cry to everyone, we must reform, we must change, that reform and change is possible only by armed revolution. But we are a nation that has known the meaning of our freedom and the value of our democratic institutions for so long that we hold it as an article of faith that we can overcome our problems without the use of force and violence. The elders of your country and nation, who know the meaning of war, who have seen war and participated in it, answer, and they say, yes, we need reform, we need change. But we can attain reform and change without violence, peacefully and within the context of the Constitution or the law. For the use of violence totally negates the essential value of human life regardless of the cause under which it is waged.

We set ourselves in opposition to the Communist theory of effecting social and political change through bloodshed and the use of arms because we know that the progress of democracy and a free society can very well realize these ends. No matter how ardently we may desire progress, we will not build the edifice of tomorrow upon the mangled bodies of our fellow men or splash its walls with the blood of innocent men.

We have seen in our own time, during the hard and trying years of the war and also in the period of peace, the endurance of our people and their inherent capacity for survival. We are certain that our people and their government can work out satisfactory solutions to the various problems of the nation without going through a wasteful, debilitating and disgraceful revolution of arms.

It is on the basis of our national experience and the fundamental principles of our society, therefore, that we formulate and present the concept of a democratic revolution as our answer to the Communist prophecy of doom.

As I have stated it before, and as I do so again now, the solution to our basic national problems lies in the institution and effective implementation of reforms in the various aspects of social and political life. These reforms can be achieved through peaceful means. This is the essence of the democratic revolution.

I am taking this opportunity to stress the significance of this concept again because unless vital and meaningful reforms are made in our society and our government to bring about a substantial change in the living conditions of our people, in your own time, either as young lieutenants or as senior commanders you the graduates assembled here today might suddenly wake up to the sounds of battle and find yourselves led to the battlefields to fight a war against you own brothers and to redeem with your own blood our precious legacy of freedom. Indeed, it is fearful anticipation of this possible situation of brother fighting against brother, Filipinos killing Filipinos, an event which I know will be a very costly experience for all of us, that I have insisted on a policy of peaceful reform in our government and society.

I call on this year’s graduates of the Philippine Military Academy even as I have called on all the citizens of this Republic, to lend themselves to the successful prosecution of this democratic revolution. The transformation of our society is a goal we have long sought to achieve. Today we have both the opportunity and, I am sure, the ability to make that transformation possible. But we must insist that it be a peaceful transformation, a change mat will endure because it satisfies the requirements of human dignity while it also responds to the values that have moved and sustained this nation and all of mankind for centuries. The change that the communist conspiracy will bring by means of division and bloodshed cannot but be ephemeral, and must be rejected.

You have the power to make that rejection firm and absolute, and to insist on the only reasonable alternative. I invite you to assert that power in the service of the Filipino people.

Again, to each and everyone of you, my congratulations.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].