Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the members of the faculty and student body of Michigan State University on the conferment of the Doctorate in Civil Law on him

[Delivered on September 19, 1966]

President HATCHER and Mrs. HATCHER, Governor and Mrs. ROMNEY, Distinguished members of the BOARD OF REGENTS, Members of the FACULTY and the STUDENT BODY, LADIES and GENTLEMEN:

For and on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines and the 32 million people of this archipelago, I receive this honor, this degree, that you have awarded to me and in turn, extend to you the gratitude of the people who realize only too well that the fountainhead and the source spring of liberty can be found in this kindly land, the United States of America.

I have journeyed ten thousand miles across the Pacific and your beautiful land on this state visit. But as a frustrated student seeking a doctorate in the United States of America, this to me is the highlight of the entire visit; frustrated because I must explain that the war interfered with my plans to take a doctorate from an American university. Now, truly, I can say I have come full cycle and I have returned to the day when I hoped that I would enter the faculty of the University of the Philippines and teach law instead of practice law and government as I am doing now. Which is better, I will leave for posterity to determine.

Frankly, I have no regrets whatsoever, although I still maintain that intellectualism, scholarship, education, may be the answer to all the perplexing problems that agitate the whole world.

It has been said by a great mind that education is Internationalization; it militates against the narrowness of perspective that leads towards parochialism. In fact, it has been called the enemy of nationalism. In the modern world, where men face the dilemma of nationalism and internationalism, certainly education perhaps points the way towards a solution.

I bring to you also the greetings of a people who know that the University of Michigan stands as the source of many of the men from whose hands have come the guidance of our educational institutions; not only from this university but from the State of Michigan, rather, have come men who helped mold the democratic institutions that we have in our country today. I come to acknowledge our indebtedness to the University of Michigan. I come to acknowledge our indebtedness to the American people.

I am happy that I have been given the occasion to speak. If you will allow me, I will speak of the Philippines today, and the Philippine experiment in democracy, because I gather that there is a debate raging in academic circles as to the capacity of the underdeveloped country to accommodate democracy; or, stated the other way around, whether democracy can succeed and thrive in an underdeveloped country. I understand that there is a claim that because of the culture, the heritage, the temperament, the civilization of an underdeveloped country, democracy cannot succeed. There are others, too, who say that because the rapidity of economic development which is the center and realm and objective of every underdeveloped country, democracy must for the moment be dispensed with, ergo, arriving at the conclusion that despotism is a necessary step towards development before democracy.

There is a third school of thought which states that democracy, even in such countries as the Philippines has not been properly assimilated and has not become a part of the social organism, that it can be lopped off without any effect whatsoever on the body politic.

I do not take part in this debate because I consider it academic. I consider that we have established and proved that democracy can, and will succeed in underdeveloped countries as the Philippines. If Vietnam is the testing ground for the new weapon of communism, war by proxy, the national liberation war, subversion through the utilization of indigenous forces within a country sought to be subverted, then the Philippines is a testing ground for this principle and this idea—whether democracy can succeed in an underdeveloped country.

I say this debate is academic because from our point of view, democracy has succeeded in the Philippines, an underdeveloped country. It may be presumptuous for me to speak for all of Asia, but after conferring with the leaders of Asia, I think I speak for each and every one of them. Japan is experimenting with democracy and, notwithstanding the fistfights in the Diet, and the use of the judo and ju-jitsu, I understand, even karate, in their debates, for me this is the basic and fundamental acceptance of the idea of democracy. In fact, there is such a tolerance of honest dissent, which to me is often the test of the existence of freedom and democracy—that President Eisenhower was not able to visit Japan.

There is, of course, the statement of some leaders of India that democracy does not allow such a rapid development that often it is necessary to adopt a modified form of centralized and authoritarian government in order that we may speed up reform or change development programs, which is the obsession and preoccupation of all underdeveloped countries.

This may be true but the conclusions finally arrived at is that ultimately and at last the wave of the future in Asia is democracy. For, as we in the Philippines feel, there can be no return of the harsh and exacting conditions that was colonialism, and yet authoritarianism may be colonialism in some other form. In our point of view, authoritarianism and colonialism are faces of the same coin because they invoke the inquisition of power, for one single objective and, perhaps without allowing and accommodating honest dissent.

In the Philippines, which I have called the proving ground of democracy, I know that there have been many mistakes or failures, both in the economic as well as in the political fields. I know, too, that perhaps you have heard that while the term underdeveloped is some kind of abstract political jargon to make in the United Nations, the term underdeveloped can mean almost anything.

To us, underdeveloped is a term that is viscerally fought. It may mean, as it often does mean, one meal a day. It may mean slabs and dwellings of packing crates. It may mean disease congenital. It may mean ailments of babies still unborn. It may mean blindness without even learning to read one line of the printed word. It may mean despair.

But underdeveloped as the countries may be, there is a greater hunger within the hearts of the men in Asia. It is not a hunger of the body; it is a hunger of the spirit, the desire to rise up to the fullest measure of human dignity and human equality after the long, centuries of colonial enslavement.

Despotism, therefore, is anathema to most of Asia. Let me tell you, too, of the history of my people. There are diggings right now going on, especially those headed by Dr. Fox, the archeologist, in Palawan, which indicate that long before Christ there was a civilization that thrived in that part of Asia. Dr. Fox said there will be consternation among the intellectuals if this is brought out, but consternation or not, we are proud of the fact that the history of the Philippines antedates my namesake, Ferdinand Magellan, Ferdinand Magellan who was supposed to have discovered the Philippines after the Philippines was already inhabited by the Filipinos.

Can the abstraction of democracy have any meaning in a setting of hunger, disease and ignorance? Can freedom of speech mean anything to one who may not know where his next meal will come? Your experience in the Philippines has demonstrated that it must mean something. When the stars and stripes for the first time in the history of your nation was trodden to the ground and there was no hope, when the only possible future, immediately as well as distant, was death, terror, punishment, torture, and the loss of honor, many men staked their lives, their honor, their illusions and dreams for their belief in democracy and in freedom, not necessarily because you were returning to the Philippines or that you were going to be victorious, but because despotism is not acceptable to the Filipino People.

Has democracy really succeeded in the Philippines? Not more than five years after you acknowledged and recognized the independence of the Philippines, communism mounted one of the most serious revolutions, rebellions, against the Republic of the Philippines. All over Asia, then communism was militant and aggressive, seeking to subvert and destroy all democratic institutions. In 1950, in Malaysia and everywhere in Asia, while your foreign policy was oriented towards Europe by the Truman Doctrine in Greece and Turkey, while, then apparently you had abandoned Asia, President Truman was taken aback by the boldness of communism in Korea in 1950. And under the hag of the United Nations and 15 other countries, the Philippines included, the United States again sent troops to Korea.

It is not necessary for me to say that at that time, when we sent troops to Korea, we were fighting for our own survival in our own homeland because about 20,000 to 30,000 troops and communist were bearing arms against the government, with a timetable: November, 1951 to take over the central government of the Republic of the Philippines.

We did not seek the aid of America, the powerful, notwithstanding the existence of her bases there—in Subic Bay, Sangley Point, Clark Air force Base, Camp John Hay and others. We fought them with our own troops and perhaps this is the only case in Asia that with its own troops it met and overcome this danger posed by a strong military group and, having done so, set the pattern for the conquest of similar rebellions. First, of course, by the policy of military might, total force against the ideological combatants and, secondly, total friendship and economic development for the followers and the misled.

And so, today, your experts study the affairs of government in the Philippines and the events that occurred in the period from 1946 to 1951 or during those five years of rebellion of the Hukbalahaps, the armed elements of communism in my country, to find out what the solution was and to discover how the Philippines succeeded in maintaining democracy even against the aggressive onslaught of communism, supported by Asian communism from across the China Sea.

If there is any other danger that the Philippines has met and not overcome, I have not seen it. Of course, there is much to be done. There is corruption, weakness, there is smuggling, criminality. But these are not exclusive to the Philippines. It is true of every democratic country. Whether developed or not, the difference merely is in degree.

I wish to inform you that we have succeeded in meeting all these dangers and thus, as we stand before the world today, the Philippines, from whence I come from, whose shores have long been washed by the tidal ebb and flow of empire, stands with pride. The Filipino people and their neighbors for centuries imbided the surging cultures, the Arabic, Hindu, and the Chinese, and later received generous injections of western civilization through the Spaniards and much later the Americans.

In 1896, the Philippines was the first in Asia and Africa to mount a rebellion against colonialism, against a monarchist regime, the Spanish regime. In 1898, it was the first nation in Asia and Africa to declare the existence of a republic. It has sought and fought for freedom. It is totally committed to freedom.

I, therefore, maintain and submit that democracy has survived. We survived and continue to exist despite the underdeveloped conditions of the Philippines. It had better succeed in the Philippines, for if democracy does not succeed in the Philippines, then what are we fighting for in Vietnam? What are we fighting for in all the countries where we meet communism frontally, in those underdeveloped countries where communism may seek to undermine existing authority?

We are in Vietnam for one purpose and that is, grant to the Vietnamese the option of choosing exactly what kind of a government and what kind of a society they wish to establish in their own country, in their own land, and for no other purpose. If, therefore, we grant them such an option, and it is predestined and known that choosing democracy they will fail, then we are fighting for a mirage, an illusion, and all the dying, all the blood, all this savagery and brutality that we are going through in Vietnam will be for nothing.

And, so, I come to you with a message, and that is: that the 32 million people of the Republic of the Philippines, extending to you their thanks for your guidance in the past, for your participation in this partnership, in the present, in the arduous activities of intellectualism, stand pledged to freedom. We stand by freedom, live by freedom and dream of freedom. And they’ll make of the democracy that they have received from you, not only an illusion and a mirage, but make of it a government, a way of life that shall assure for them not only survival but progress, even under the threat of total destruction.

Again, I say thank you for all the good deeds you have done in the Philippines, for all the aid that you have extended. A number of the doctors that I know in the Philippines hold doctorate degrees from the University of Michigan under the Barbour Scholarship. I understand from President Hatcher and Mrs. Hatcher that they were given a dinner by almost 24 Barbour scholars who had been here. They have authorized me to extend to you their gratitude.

I repeat, intellectualism, education is an internationalizing agent. In the Philippines, therefore, we are seeking the wider horizon of progress, seeking the ancient springs of our national identity in Asia, participating in the destiny of Asia without forgetting, however that it is a part of the world and that it is a sister republic to the great Republic of the United States of America.

I, therefore, again say thank you from these 32 million people who have complete trust and faith in you and the American people, in whose hands lie the salvation of all humanity. And, I have previously said that do what you may, you cannot avoid and escape responsibility, that responsibility imposed upon you by the inexorable verdict of destiny. You are the trustees of human civilization and, as trustees of this modern civilization, you must therefore protect that civilization. Whether by your military might or by the extension of your more benevolent influence through intellectualism and scholarship, as trustees, you must protect the civilization which you have protected in the last two global wars.

We extend to you the hope that you can participate further in this pursuit. The Philippines, the Filipinos have a special place for America in their hearts and they are proud that’ they are counted as friends and allies of the great American nation.

To all of you, therefore, Mrs. Marcos and I extend our gratitude for your hospitality. Your hospitality certainly exceeds our capacity. It is my hope that our nation, which has a moderate claim to hospitality, will have an opportunity to reciprocate this generosity which you have extended to us.

I shall carry the doctorate with pride and bear its responsibility with resolution, knowing that it comes from distinguished men and scholars and, if the problems of Asia may perplex me, I shall turn to it for inspiration. If the night is too dark and the burdens of state too heavy.

I shall find strength in this award that you have given me. If in the confusion of the world today I should be misled I shall return to the right path knowing that intellectualism, scholarship which you have extended to me so benevolently today is still the hope of all mankind.

I shall bear this doctorate degree that you have given me and place it at the altar of freedom of our people and, placing it before them, I know that all the more, we shall have a freshness of resolution to maintain freedom, human dignity, which is the ultimate of all goals that we can aspire for.

Thank you and good day.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1966). Address of President Marcos before the members of the faculty and student body of Michigan State University on the conferment of the Doctorate in Civil Law on him, September 19, 1966. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62(46) , 8593-8599.