Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the KBL Proclamation Rally

It is exhilarating to be home once again in this province of my beginnings, and I thank you all very much for the warmth of your welcome.

Tonight, we formally launch the banner of our movement and our party in quest of the mandate of the people of Ilocos Norte in the May 14 Batasan Elections. Here we proclaim our party’s candidates in the elections, and sound anew, as in times past, our call for our provincemates’ unwavering and ever loyal support for our cause.

We begin this campaign with high expectations of victory, but sadly we must launch it with one of your chosen candidates absent from our ranks tonight. As all of you have already heard and for reasons publicly known, Imee could not be here with us tonight. The unfortunate event that stilled the life throbbing in her womb is a great personal tragedy to her and to our family, but the sorrow of this tragedy is in part dispelled by the knowledge of your compassionate concern and sympathy.

Saddened as we are, however, by her inability to be with us tonight, you have her firm assurance that she fully accepts the burden that has been passed to her by the majesty of your clamor and by the need for party unity in our ranks. And in accepting that charge, she will run for public office, and do her utmost for the victory of the KBL.

Tonight, let us then close ranks in proclaiming our support for our KBL candidates here in Ilocos Norte. Let us affirm our unwavering commitment to all that our party stands for in these elections. And together, let us carry the KBL to victory.



It may be that for many of you the victory of our party is assured in these elections. By the grace of our people’s mandate in every exercise of electoral choice for so many years now, Ilocos Norte has been second to none in giving me and our party your steadfast support. And there is no reason to doubt that that support will again be ours in the coming balloting.

Yet I also believe, and I hope you join me in this, that there are things just as important as winning in these elections. Just as important, if not more, is the need to achieve through this electoral exercise a clear mandate for the course of government we propose, and a clear demonstration of our faith in the honor and integrity of our Republic.

Let us never for a moment ignore those in the opposition who have sought to make a travesty of these elections by inviting the intervention of aliens in national affairs.

Let us never forget that there are some among us who would wager even our very honor and integrity as a nation for their own personal ambitions.

And let us never presume that the shameless designs of our opponents can summarily be frustrated without ourselves exerting every energy and effort to gain the allegiance and support of the electorate for our cause.

We must ourselves submit to the judgment of the people, so that their verdict will be unequivocal and clear.



What are our people presented with as we begin this campaign?

I believe that the nation is presented a fundamental choice between two opposing forces, two parties, two outlooks, two different programs of government.

One side, those who call themselves the opposition, has its eyes turned towards the past, its nose under the bidding of strangers, and its outlook for the future guided by obsolete doctrines and ideas.

It looks to the past because its leaders seeks the return of the old colonial constitution and the old society. It dances to the bidding of foreigners because they have shown in word and deed that they will countenance even the intervention of foreigners for the sake of victory in these elections. And its outlook is mired in discredited ideas, because they have no program to offer the nation other than vague hopes and promises which cannot be fulfilled.

Against this are ranged our Kilusang Bagong Lipunan and all that it stands for—its proven record of achievement, its proven capabilities for local and national leadership which have been demonstrated time and again in many a national crisis and its program of government which alone can lead our country through this time of challenge and opportunity.

To the false hopes and promises raised by those in the opposition, we reply with the solid achievements and advances recorded during the last 11 years.



Let us look at the record.

To the credit of our leadership and our party, it must be said first of all that we are the party and the leadership that bailed our republic in the extremities of danger and crisis 11 years ago. In place of the chaos and disunity of our people in 1972, we successfully installed a stable, strong and effective government. And we have not had as long or as stable a government in our country in our entire national history as we have had in this country during the last 11 years.

Secondly, let us recall to ourselves that this is the leadership and the party that inaugurated the program of national transformation unprecedented in our entire history as a people. From the very first day of crisis government to the present time, we have introduced very basic and major reforms for the strengthening and transformation of our society. These reforms, as we all know, have spanned from the liberation of our farmers from bondage to the soil, to the liberation of our civil service from corruption and inutility, to the transformation of our national capabilities for economic effort and development, and to the critical transformation of our very standing in the family of nations.

Thirdly, because of these reforms, we have carried the national economy into feats of productivity unprecedented in our national history. We began our program of national transformation in 1972 sorely dependent on others for many critical needs and with the economy virtually in crisis after a devastating flood.

Whereas in 1972, we depended on imported energy to the extent of 96 percent, today this dependence has been reduced to 66 percent. And in a year or two, this will further go down to 50 percent.

In 1972, there was practically no farmhouse with electricity. Today, 2.25 million farmhouses have electricity.

In 1975, we still imported 600,000 tons of rice. Today, we export rice.

In 1972, there was a total of 743,000 hectares of irrigated land. Today, the total irrigated land area stands at 1,429,000 hectares, representing about half of all irrigable farm lands, compared to only one-sixth in the 1960 s and one-fourth in the early 1970s.

In 1972, our transport, water and communications facilities were hopelessly limited to fuel any kind of growth.

Since then, road kilometerage has increased 1.8 times by 1982 to 162,274 kilometers;

Strategically located ports were upgraded, increasing the number of municipal and fishing ports by 1.5 times.

The airport development program raised the number of airports by 1.6 times and this included the putting up of the New Manila International Airport and the Laoag International Airport.

Postal communications expanded throughout the archipelago as the number of post offices increased 1.3 times by 1982; and

Provision of adequate water supply increased the access of the population to potable water by 1.4 times.

In education, our educational development program has more than coped with the increase in school population and the need to upgrade the quality of education. From an enrolment level of 7 million in 1972, elementary school enrolment rose to 8. 6 million as of 1982. This was fully met by the construction of school-houses, whose total stock of classrooms reached 240,145 as of 1982. In addition, implementation of the textbook development project in 1976 has enabled us to attain the desired pupil-textbook ratio of 2 to 1.

Significantly too, with the introduction of educational reforms and the facilities buildup, the national literacy rate has risen from 75 percent in 1972 to 90 percent in 1983.

In 1972, the population growth rate stood at well over 3.l percent. In 1983, since the launching of our population planning program, the population growth rate has been brought down to 2.49 percent. And this s further projected to go down to 2 percent at the end of our present development plan.

In housing, under the national housing program, 174,613 new dwelling units with community facilities have been completed, 40,795 units upgraded and 36,263 serviced home lots provided to marginal and low income families since 1972. In addition, the PAG-IBIG fund was successfully launched in 1979, and to date membership has now reached 2.12 million members, with the lending program initially benefitting 21,792 homeowners.

In 1972, the inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index averaged 8.2 percent for the year. At the close of 1983, in spite of the untoward developments during the second semester, inflation averaged 10 percent. And for the entire period from 1972 to 1983, inflation was contained at an annual average of 14 percent.

Finally, there are the key indicators: the GNP growth rate and per capita income. In 1972, our GNP growth rate stood at below 5 percent. At 1972 prices, our GNP has grown at an average of almost 6 percent over the 10-year period since, and this despite the fact that the real gross national product decelerated to only 1.4 percent in 1983 because of the severe drought during the first semester and the unfavorable financial developments during the second half of 1983.

Per capita income hence has increased from Pl,428 in 1972 to ?l,926 as of 1983, at constant 1972 prices.

As significant then as the indicators of economic development are the social indicators which tell us how the lives of our people—especially those living in our rural areas—have substantially improved during this period of 11 years in national life.

It will never be said of our leadership that our nation’s wealth increased during our leadership while the lot of our people failed to improve. For the facts are well known to all.

And we do not need statistics to know that the lot of the people of Ilocos Norte has improved during these years. We only have to ask them.

And so is it true of every region throughout our country.

Indeed, it seems to me telling tribute to our success in raising the well-being and prospects of our local communities that in this present time of contention in national life, foreign observers have noted that it seems to be the rich who are against the government, while the rest of the country, and the poor especially, appear to be in support of it. In all those demonstrations that you read about late last year, you only have to look at what they wore and what they said to realize that these were at bottom an agitation by those whose privileges were cut by our program for the new society. And if they are agitating now for a change, it is for no other purpose than to effect a return to the old society of privilege and patronage.

Let us make no mistake about it. Regardless of the seeming confusion and disarray of the opposition nowadays, let us be clear about the choice being offered the nation. Let us not mistake reactionary ends for social change; let us not be deceived by postures of belligerence for the course of dependence and subservience to foreign interests that they in fact espouse; and let us not mistake promises for gains and achievements that are won only by hard effort and fortnight leadership.



The coming election is a critical test for our very future as a nation.

Foreign governments are interested in the outcome of this political exercise, as much as we are. And if we do not fully demonstrate that as a people we know what this is really all about, if we do not do justice to our republic at the polls, then it may well happen that all that we have worked for all these years may be gone when parliament convenes.

In sum, we should be in no doubt that more is at stake in this election than meets the eye. More serious issues are involved than just the merits of this or that candidate.

And we must thus carry the banner of this campaign with the aim not only of gaining victory for our party’s candidates in the elections, but just as important, of educating our citizenry on the true stakes in these elections, of making them realize that their very future is involved.

The candidates whom we proclaim tonight represent interests larger than just the desire to serve public office. They are part of a total program of government and of a total vision of the national future; and if as I believe our provincemates will give them their mandate, you may be sure that they will sit in parliament as true servants to the glory of our province, our people and our country.

Take them then into your bosom as you have taken me all these years into yours as your ever loyal and humble servant.

Give them the support that you have given me all these years since I first stood for public office in Ilocos Norte.

And I promise you that alongside your loyal and humble servant, and along with the other KBL candidates throughout our country, we will constitute an authentic parliament for Filipinos, representing the interests of all the regions of our country, and beholden to no one but the republic and our people.

Greetings to all of you, and thank you very much!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.