Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 48th Anniversary of the Philippine Air Force

[Delivered on May 2, 1984]

The Philippine Air Force celebrates today the 48th anniversary of its founding, and once more I come here to salute the officers and men of this command and to thank you for all those years of dedicated service to our people and our nation.

Anniversaries are normally occasions for joy and celebration, but today there is in this commemoration the lingering shadow of sadness and dejection. At least once in the lifetime of men and institutions, there occurs an event of great moment and significance which threatens to alter the course of its existence. Much to our regret, such an event has come to pass upon this service of our Armed Forces.

In the eyes of some, the tragedy of August 1983 which took the life of a fellow countryman at the manila international airport has cast a cloud of doubt and suspicion upon the Philippine Air Force. Fairness and prudence should have demanded that we neither condemn nor condone. Anyone until the facts shall have been fully established, yet some of our countrymen have already publicly indicted and condemned not only the aviation. Security command, but the Philippine Air Force itself and even the whole and even the whole of our National Armed Forces.

In the entire history of our nation and our people, there are few events to compare to our sense of shame and indignation in the face of this tragedy. But whatever we may feel about this event, and however we may desire to punish the perpetrators of this deed, our quest for justice in this case should not lead us to lay blame indiscriminately and wherever we may choose to lay it. Guilt is a personal thing and the sin of one or of a group should never be blamed on everyone, however righteous we may feel in our indignation.

It seems to me that we compound the tragedy of August 1983 when we allow injustice and imprudence to color our efforts to bring this case to resolution. And it is in this sad light that the Philippine Air Force has been placed during the past months.

Yet in spite of this, this command and its officers and men should ever take heart from the thought that in time fairness and good sense will prevail and sweep away the cloud of suspicion that has been hung over it by those who wish it ill. It must soar above the turbulence of the times and carry on with its tasks knowing that good deeds and service will pierce the veil of propaganda and restore it to its true place of honor in our national life.

For 48 years now, the Philippine Air Force has seen a vital component of our national defense. If today we feel secure against foreign aggression, it is because we know that the Air Force keeps watch over our skies with radars and through continuous reconnaissance flights over our land and waters. Against the ever-present threat of insurgency, the Air Force provides our Armed Forces with an insuperable edge in mobility and flexibility in the deployment of troops and delivery of arms and material.

Neither has the Air Force been solely preoccupied with defense or military operations. Last year, for instance, combat-related air operations made up only s percent of the total 41,942 flying hours logged by the command. Most of the time spent in flying by the officers and men of the Air Force were for training and proficiency flights, while the rest were used in civic, humanitarian and economic activities, like the airlift of military and civilian patients, the ferrying of Comelec forms and ballot boxes, aerial photogrammetry, weather modification flights, and search and rescue operations. In support of the campaign against drug abuse, the Philippine Air Force coordinated with the narcotics command and together they succeeded in destroying P23.8 million worth of marijuana plants and seedlings in Ifugao, Benguet and the Mountain Province.

Truly there is much to be proud of and commend in these accomplishments of the Philippine Air Force but in the light of our needs and the current thrust of our development program, we must reserve our highest praise to the leadership of the Air Force and its highly efficient maintenance crew who have succeeded in saving from wasteful disuse and obsolence a number of expensive aircraft. At Basa Air Base three F-5A tactical fighters were recommissioned in record time despite the loss of 91 line items in one, 95 in another and 733 in the third. A fourth aircraft whose stabilizer 301 burned during take-off is under repair. The total savings realized from work already completed have been placed at more than $217,000. At Villamor Air base two UH-IH helicopters were repaired in just 144 working days in our own depot level maintenance facility at a combined cost of $395,946. Had we sent these abroad. The cost of repairs would have easily reached $1.06 million. Considering that four other aircraft of the same kind are also in need of immediate repair, it would be easy to project how much we have saved and stand to save because of the foresight of our military leaders and the skills and ingenuity the maintenance personnel of the Philippine Air Force.

All these efforts fit well into the government’s program of austerity and dollar conservation as well as the concept of self-reliance embodied in the Sariling Sikap program . And I commend the officers and men of the Philippine Air Force for this outstanding achievement. I commend you not only because such efforts are supportive of our economic goals but also because they enhance and strengthen the capability of the Armed Forces to meet the resurgent threats to national security.

Although our Armed Forces has succeeded in bringing stability to certain troubled areas, like the Cordillera provinces, eastern Visayas and parts of Region XI, last year, there is growing evidence that the communist insurgency is once more on the upsurge. Intelligence estimates place the armed strength of the communist party new people’s army at 6,810 men in 1983, a full 25 percent from the estimate of 1982. Correspondingly, clashes, ambushes and other violent incidents involving insurgents rose by 41 percent over the 1982 level to 2,430 in 1983. And it is not only in the countrysides where the communist rebels are active. Emboldened by the liberal atmosphere of recent months, these communist elements have succeeded in infiltrating legitimate protest movements in urban areas and have unleashed a massive propaganda campaign designed to whip up mass hysteria, discontent and dissent against legitimate authority. Indeed, we may be reaching the point from where we began in 1972. And it is time once again to warn our people against the perils of flirting with those who would do violence to our democratic institutions and our established way of life.

To the legitimate opposition, let me address a plea for moderation and reason. Let us agree to disagree on the important issues facing the nation, but let us do so without fanning hatred and resentment against those who are in authority or casting doubts and aspersions upon our legal institutions.

To the businessmen and the men and women of the cloth, I say beware of the wolves in sheep’s clothing for you may be their first victim.

To the youth and the rest of our countrymen, I say do not let yourselves be carried away by passion and rhetoric for they are not the solution to our problems and our only way out lies in hard work and resolute action.

Finally to the rebels of any persuasion, let me again say: for you we will keep the door of reconciliation open, do not close it through violent action. Abandon the path of violence and take to the high road of national unity and cooperation so that together we can help fulfill our dreams for our family, our people and our nation.

But if you should keep to the path of violence, then we are left no other option but to reply with the full force of our laws. We are prepared to throw the full weight of our Armed Forces behind the campaign to preserve peace and stability, if necessary. Do not test our patience and determination, for the Armed Forces are ready and able to meet any contingency that may threaten the nation’s security.

As of the end of 1983, our Armed Forces has filled up only 90 percent of the authorized troop ceiling. Despite charges to the contrary, we have kept military expenditures within our means and our needs. I was therefore surprised to read in an international weekly that we have the highest military expenditures among ASEAN countries. Let us look at the figures. In 1981, Indonesia’s military budget amounted to $2.69 billion; Malaysia had $2.05 billion; Thailand, $1.3 billion; the island state of Singapore, $707 million and the Philippines, 702 million. These figures are not our own, they were compiled by the international institute of strategic studies in London. Perhaps they may be a little bit dated, but there is simply no way we could have come up to par with Thailand, Malaysia or Indonesia in the intervening ears. Of even greater interest to us perhaps than a3solute amounts are the comparative figures on military budgets as a proportion of gross national product. According to the same study, Indonesia’s defense expenditures amounted to 3.3 percent of that country’s GNP; Thailand’s, 3.5 percent; Singapore’s, 5.7 percent; Malaysia’s, 8.3 percent; while that of the Philippines’ was only 2.2 percent. We did not only have the lowest figure among ASEAN countries, we had the lowest percentage of military expenditures vis a vis GNP in the whole of east Asia, with the sole exception of Japan.

And yet, all the while, we have been a nation contending with the twin threats of Muslim separatism and communist insurgency. And we have lived through periods when the very life of our republic was threatened.

More than the shrill cries of militarization and profligacy in military spending therefore, these facts surely speak eloquently of where our true national priorities lie and they speak moreover of the inherent strength of our Armed Forces and their ability to keep the cost of maintaining national security and peace at reasonable and economical levels.

If for this alone, every officer and soldier, every service and the entire leadership of our Armed Forces deserve the praise and gratitude of our people.

But we all know that this is not all. For truly our Armed Forces, and the Philippine Air Force not least, have been second to none in terms of dedicated service to our nation and our people. Nor can we forget or overlook that here in our country we have an Armed Forces that fully recognize the supremacy of our civilian government, and that this itself has been a major factor for national vitality and stability.

In remembering and noting these things today, you in this command and the nation as a whole have much to celebrate and be proud of in this day of commemoration, in spite of whatever aspersions cast by some.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.