Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 12th World Congress of the International Federation of Free Teachers Union

[Delivered at the PICC, December 18, 1978]

On the Rights and Interests of Teachers

I GREET YOU as a fellow teacher because as you know, I come from a family of teachers. I was a teacher before I became a politician. I don’t know whether this is an improvement or not.

This is one of the few instances where this big plenary session hall of the Philippine International Convention Center has been jampacked with such beauty and intelligence. I say beauty first, because I note the dominance of the female sex in the audience. I have known statistically that the majority of our teachers in the Philippines are female, but this demonstrates it very, very emphatically.

This matter of my being a teacher, of course, is something which some people say has not altered because up to now even as President, I have the habit of trying to teach.

I thought that I should add that bit of biographical information to Deputy Minister Albarracin’s terse introduction, so that I may offer you a more pleasant variation of Bernard Shaw’s ill-considered quip: those who can, teach; those who decide not to, or cannot, well, I say, probably they can become Presidents.

Indeed, it gives me great pleasure to be able to greet all of you and our guests on behalf of our people, our government and our teaching profession.

We are mindful of this great honor that you have granted and accorded us by holding this congress in our country. As has been noted by the president of the host organization, the Philippine Public School Teachers Association, there are about 400,000 teachers throughout the Philippines. I noted that Mr. Firster stated that teachers should be circumspect about the use of their organization in politics because they have, I think he used the term, “limited influence in politics.” Here in the Philippines, Mr. Firster, the country is run by teachers.

No, seriously speaking, there is a fascinating, interesting and profound sociological study of our society wherein the fulcrums and levers of power were diagnosed and analyzed. And beyond the regular formalized structure of political parties, the question was asked outside the political structure, outside political parties: What are the centers of political power in the village, in the municipality, in the city? And the study concludes there are three centers of political power which you must learn to utilize if you are to be a successful leader. The first are, of course, the local administrators; the second are the professionals; and the third are teachers. But their influence is in the reverse order.

The government of the Philippines instinctively knew this and confirmed this in performance. Because in any project, program, nationwide or limited to, say, the region which is composed of several provinces or province with its municipalities, the city or the village, whenever there is any doubt as to who should perform the job, the government always says, “let us give it to the teachers.”

It is an awesome thing to contemplate that the profession you represent, which is the largest in the world, is as numerous as the combined populations of some of the smallest states in the United Nations and is certainly more numerous than half of the 45 million population of this country.

The growth in the number of teachers is likely to continue in the forseeable future as the growth in the young populations is expected to continue and the increase in the social and economic demands for education are expected to accelerate with the years. Indeed, it has been said, only half in jest though, that the trend in the expansion of education can be statistically projected into the future if half of the population of the world were to sit behind the teacher’s desk and the remaining half in front of it.

But we need not wait for the future to feel the impact of this educational explosion, for already the staggering magnitudes involved in the present educational activities and aspirations in the world have sent parliaments and development planners to repair to the new science of the so-called economy of education, from whose new prophets they would seek some confident doctrine or less uncertain guide on which to base their massive decisions on education.

One major aspect of the education challenge of our time is the problem posed by the status and the working conditions of teachers. In the midst of so much faith and value placed on education, it is the anomaly of our times that there are no commensurate economic and social rewards paid to the educators. We have placed a high value on education, but we are unwilling or unable to pay its full price.

In the developing nations, there are obvious factors contributing to this anomaly. Allow me to mention two of them.

The first is the fact that more than two-thirds of the teaching force is composed of women. In many developing countries, where the tradition of discrimination against women still lingers, this factor operates to minimize the social recognition and to depress the economic rewards which should accrue to the teaching profession.

It is for this reason that I wish to commend your involvement in the movement for the enhancement of women’s rights, demonstrated, for example, as recently as last year by the IFTU-ASEAN Conference on Equal Opportunities for Women. Such an involvement is a wise recognition of the fact that the status of the teaching profession depends in part on the status of women who comprise the large majority of the profession in both the developing and developed countries.

The second and even more important factor which militates against the elevation of the status of teachers and the improvement of their working conditions is the inadequate economy of the developing nations. When poor societies pay their women teachers poor salaries for the ostensible reason that the women teachers are not supporting a family, it is as much a sign of economic insufficiency as it is an instance of social discrimination against women.

Poor developing societies can produce little physical capital to finance development. In their destitute material circumstances, they find that the generation of human capital constitutes their only alternative to permanent poverty and underdevelopment. Education considered as the accumulation of human capital becomes for the individual and the society of developing nations the indispensable supplement, if not the full substitute, to scarce physical capital. And the result has been to make available more education that either the poor individual or the poor society can really pay for.

It is in the light of this problem that I wish also to commend you for taking up as the second theme of your congress, “The Role of Teachers’ Organizations in National Development.” It is again a wise recognition of the fact that the working conditions, at least, of teachers, if not their status, depend in part on the economic development and sufficiency of the country.

This list of contributing factors does not fully explain the plight of teachers, for it does not even begin to explain the plight of teachers in developed countries, where there is far less discrimination against women and far greater capacity to pay the full cost of education.

There is, I venture to say, at least a third factor, which is present in both the developing and the developed countries, that contributes to depress the status and the working conditions of teachers. I am referring, very gently I hope, to the deficiencies of the teaching profession itself.

The rapid expansion of education in the last half century and attendant great increase in the number of the teaching profession have aggravated the twin problems of maintaining the general effectiveness of the educational system and of ensuring the high competence of the educators. These problems are not entirely within the responsibility of the teaching profession alone or within its capacity to solve alone, but fairly or unfairly they reflect seriously on the reputation and the performance of the teaching profession. To the extent that the teaching profession does not bestir itself to help solve the problems, to that extent it will be responsible for the present level of its professional status and the present conditions of its work.

Thus I welcome the congress and the principles for which the IFTU stands. I am very glad that I listened to Mr. Firster because the principles which he has enunciated or which the teachers should understand are indeed the principles for which the New Society of the Philippines stands. The New Society of the Philippines stands for equality of opportunity, it stands for the work ethic, it stands for the revolution of the poor, it stands for the elimination of this wide gap between the privileged and the underprivileged. It stands for the elimination of the economic czars and the oligarchs. It stands for the grant and recognition of full rights to all individuals irrespective of their birthrights. And it also stands for the dignity of the individual. For this, therefore, I must say that the New Society of the Philippines, which I have the honor to lead by virtue of this wide and constitutional revolution, is aimed at a radical but not bloody transformation of our society, constitutional because it is in accordance with the wishes of our people, in accordance with the elections and the referenda, as well as the plebiscites that have been held.

The other deficiency which I wish to allude to before 1 close is one which has been aggravated by the very great numbers of the teaching profession. I am referring to a certain diffidence in the profession to engage in self-reliant organized activity to promote its own status through insistence on high professional standards and to improve its own working conditions through collective action or perhaps through some form of organized bargaining.

I wish you well in all these efforts and certainly as one who began his professional life as a teacher, I can assure you that so long as I am President, I shall see to it that the rights and interests of teachers in the Philippines will be well protected.

In our elections, I remember when we were engaged in reforming the election code that all the legislators, the members of the executive department and the judiciary were unanimous that we should discard this system of giving inspectors or election inspectors to political parties, and this was done. Political parties could no longer appoint their inspectors to participate in the voting, in the elections, in the giving of the ballots, in supervising the casting of ballots, in the counting of the ballots and in the final tally. They were out. So to whom did we give this role, this pivotal role that required honesty, integrity? You know the answer to that, you who come from the Philippines know the answer to that. For want of anybody else who could be trusted, we gave it to the teachers of the Philippines. Undoubtedly, there is no higher accolade that could have been made to the teachers. This is why I take exception to the alleged limited influence of teachers in my country, oh no. This is one reason why I am here.

My memories of my schooldays, as both a student and a teacher, are most pleasant and deeply gratifying. I feel that every teacher deserves and every pupil should have such memories.

One of the few bright areas of international cooperation in our contemporary world is international cooperation on education. I trust that you will live up to the bright expectations of your international organization and of your world congress.

I have no doubt of your success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].