Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the UP Law Alumni Association

[Delivered on November 7, 1984]

I welcome this opportunity to meet again with my fellow alumni from the UP College of Law, and to renew a fellowship that has continued unbroken since my days as a U. P. Law student. Within this fraternal association which stretches over the long history of the college, I have known a lifetime of friendship and trust. And here too, during my years in the highest office of our government, I have received without fail the benefit of your counsel and your wisdom.

Our meeting today is especially timely, because so much that dominates attention and concern in public affairs today has to do with questions of law and with proper understanding of the purport and import of the laws and institutions of the land.

And I have often thought that the thickets and mazes of public discussion today could easily be dispelled if more of our legal minds were trully allowed to clarify them, and less of those who evidently do not know the law or willfully misunderstand it, restrain themselves from muddling the situation. We lawyers are sometimes accused, and perhaps justly, for venturing into realms where we are not needed; but this is one situation where we can consider ourselves essential and useful.

I should like if I may to take this opportunity to address some of these questions in our meeting today, and I hope that you will join me in further discussion of them in the course of this luncheon.

The Importance of Judicial Process

To take up first the issue which seems to exercise so many today—our decision to refer the Aquino case for disposition by the Tanodbayan and the Sandiganbayan and the contrary proposal of some for the creation of a special court via legislation—it seems to me that so much of this so-called controversy stems from misunderstanding of what judicial process is all about, of what it must uphold and maintain.

It is axiomatic that in the protection of personal and property rights, in the redress of grievances and in the vindication of honor of the aggrieved citizenry, the operations of the judicial process, the rules of procedure as well as the substantive law be previously agreed upon by society through its duly constituted institutions, like the legislature which makes the laws. This organizes the judiciary and establishes the substantive law. Whether in ordinary life or in the more exacting and rigorous realm of implementing the law through the duly organized courts, society has always demanded that the rules and processes be pre-arranged, agreed upon and unchangeable before anyone is brought before them, just as in a sport or a game, the rules cannot be changed once the game is on, so in the judicial process, rules and procedures cannot and should not be abandoned or changed, not even by the Batasan or the President, where an issue or a case is brought to it for trial and decision.

Once the judicial process has started to roll, the previously accepted procedures and substantive laws governing the fair and equal treatment of all parties coming before it must apply, and they must be applied by the previously appointed referees or judges.

We cannot under any pretext whatsoever change the rules in the middle of the game, or change the referee before the game is finished, because then that would be not only patent but inexcusable injustice and disregard of the individual rights enshrined in our Constitution and other laws.

In this particular case, the Sandiganbayan was created under Presidential Decree No. 1486 dated 11 June 1978 as amended by P. D. 1606, and the Tanodbayan was created under P. D. No. 1630 dated 18 July 1979. The Agrava Fact-finding Board was appointed under P. D. 1886 on 14 October 1983. These are the dramatis personae of the drama of judicial process relating to the Aquino case. The Sandiganbayan is a special court created pursuant to the provisions of Section 5, Article XIII of the Constitution, which reads as follows:

The Batasang Pambansa shall create a special court to be known as Sandiganbayan, which shall have jurisdiction over criminal and civil cases involving graft and corrupt practices and such offenses committed by public officers and employees, including those in government-owned or controlled corporations, in relation to their office, as may determined by law.

I emphasize the phrase, “and such offenses committed by public officers and employees, including those in government-owned or controlled corporations in relation to their office, as may be determined by law.”

The question that arises therefore is this: was the alleged crime of the accused committed, and I quote, “in relation to their office, as may be determined by law.” What is the law in this case? The law as interpreted by the Supreme Court of the Philippines in the case of the People of the Philippines vs. Hon. Gregorio Montejo, et al., No. L-14595, May 31, 1960, pages 613 to 623. In this particular case, the mayor of Basilan, Mr. Leroy Brown directed his police forces to put up checkpoints for the search of bandits and subversives. In one of the check points a civilian, unfortunately, was killed. A murder case was filed against the police and Mayor Leroy Brown. At the time, then Senator Roseller Lim filed his appearance as counsel for the accused. The issue was: is this a case wherein the crime committed was in relation to the performance of duties in office, if so, Senator Lim would be disqualified under the provision of disqualification of the members of the legislature in appearing for those accused who are public officers or who have committed acts in relation to the performance of their duties.

The ruling of the Supreme Court was clear, and I quote the decision:

Although public office is not an element of the crime of murder in abstract, where the offense charged in the information is intimately connected with the respective offices of the accused, and was allegedly perpetrated while they were in the performance, though improper or irregular, of their official functions, the constitutional provision that no Senator or member of the House of Representatives shall appear as counsel… In any criminal case wherein an officer or employee of the government is accused of an offense committed in relation to his office (Art VI, Sec I ___, Constitution of the Phil. 1935), is applicable thereof.

With respect therefore to the action of the President on the recommendations of the Fact Finding Board, it is quite clear that we acted properly and promptly in referring the case to the Tanodbayan and the Sandiganbayan on the basis of clear precedents and laws and with due regard for the full operations of judicial process.

Within the Tanudbayan and the Sandiganbayan, we have already the established Rules of Procedures for the disposition and handling of cases, which cannot be altered to suit the partisan or selfish interest of any interested party, whether it is the party in power or the party in opposition. In these institutions, there are already duly appointed referees or judges and they should not be changed in the interest of fair and impartial application of the law.

On the other hand, if we create another special court, and it is proposed that both parties be represented in it, then we can only have what is dangerously close to a tailor-made law designed to fit whatever partisan interest it seeks to satisfy. The clear danger in this is conviction by legislation, not by judicial process.

This has been one of the banes of parliamentary legislatures in England and Europe, and I can cite volumes and histories of various countries for this has been denounced as one of the instruments whereby oppressive rulers have eliminated their enemies. If this is allowed, then any leader in control not only of the Presidency but of the Batasan can willfully order the creation of a hang judge or court and some day declare an innocent act as a crime and dispose of his enemies as easily as the despots of history.

But it was precisely to ensure the impartiality of the machinery of justice that our Constitution provides for the independence of the judiciary from the political departments of government. Our judicial processes are designed to suit the abiding interests of justice and fair play, not the temporary arrangements of political power in government.

Proposals for the creation of a People’s Court whose only jurisdiction is to try the accused in the Aquino case are being made at a time when the Tanodbayan has already taken steps towards the conduct of a preliminary investigation in the case by the issuance of subpoenas against those who are accused by the Agrava Fact-Finding Board. In the middle of this game therefore, there is an attempt to change the rules and the referee which is patently contrary to our concepts of fair play, justice and equity.

At the same time, the proposals would not only deprive the Tanodbayan and the Sandiganbayan of jurisdiction already awarded to them by the Constitution of the Philippines, but deprive them of jurisdiction over the persons on whom they have already started to apply the judicial process. The proposal would therefore undo not only the action of the president in referring the matter to the Tanodbayan and Sandiganbayan, it would also undo actions already taken by the Tanodbayan and jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan.

It has also been opined that the proposed People’s Court will be similar to the People’s Court created immediately after the war. In fact, it is entirely different. In the Aquino case it would be a People’s Court for a specific group and definitely named persons for a specific crime. The People’s Court after the war was organized because of the lack of an efficient and already operational system of courts throughout the entire country.

The People’s Court after the war was meant to try the collaborators and those guilty of treason against the Commonwealth in general without specifying who they were and what their names were. The People’s Court after the war was organized to meet an emergency. The People’s Court sought to be organized now is not meant to meet an emergency but meant to meet the demands of political spite.

The proposals, therefore, suffer some constitutional infirmity as well as lack of wisdom and propriety.

I don’t know the legal training of those who have authored these proposals in the Batasang Pambansa, but may I suggest that the next time they venture into the domain of legal hermeneutics, they should consult the U. P. Law Alumni Association who I am certain can give dependable advice gratis et amor

The Blight of Terrorism

We cannot emphasize enough the need to uphold the independence of our judicial processes from political influence and the majesty of our laws, for we live at a time when the institutional foundations of societies are in challenge everywhere by the forces of violence and terrorism. Much more than the outcome of one particular case is at issue if we bypass judicial process in the interest of partisan politics. What is on balance is the capability of government to meet this blight in national and international life. And that capability in the last analysis inheres in the stability and strength of the processes of administering justice, of lawmaking and lawgiving, and of implementing law and public policy.

Let us not delude ourselves in the kind of thinking that for so many years has tended to sow moral confusion about the phenomenon of violence and terrorism in society and sapped effectiveness in the fight against them.

Of late this confusion has been especially evident in the kind of justification being given for terroristic acts being perpetrated here and abroad. They mask themselves behind all kinds of causes and concerns, but there can be no blinking the fact that terrorism always and everywhere is a menace to society and civilized life.

The act of violence that struck down Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in the world’s largest democracy is only the latest in a grim litany of terror. In the span of only two months, to refer the latest statistics, 42 acts of terrorism and assassination have been perpetrated by no less than 15 terrorist groups against the people and property of 22 countries, to this, we can add the violence and terror that of late have been perpetrated in our midst.

Obviously, what lies at the heart of the spread of terrorism in so many societies stems from an inability so far to fully comprehend the nature of the problem and to fully summon the will to combat it.

In a recent lecture on the subject of terrorism in the modern world, U. S. State Secretary George Schultz presents a persuasive survey of terrorism in international life and of how it tends to strike mainly at democratic and open societies. “We must understand,” he writes, “that terrorism wherever it takes place, is directed in an important sense against the democracies for democracy rejects the indiscriminate or improper use of force and relies instead on the peaceful settlement of disputes through legitimate political processes… It is an unfortunate irony that the very qualities that make democracies so hateful to the terrorists… Also make them particularly vulnerable. Precisely because we maintain the most open societies, terrorists have unparalleled opportunity to strike at us. Terrorists seek to make democracies embattled and afraid, to break down democratic accountability, due process, and order; they hope we will turn toward repression, or succumb to chaos.”

With this analysis, we fully concur. For at heart all open societies are really societies are really being challenged to fight violence and terrorism without in the process throwing away the very values, the very openness it lives by. It is challenged to maintain that heraclitean balance between authority and freedom, where too much of one leads to despotism and too much of the other to anarchy and violence.

It follows, I believe, from this, that every society which truly means to combat terrorism must be prepared to undergo the rigors and stresses of establishing an effective mechanism for response. And it is not an easy agenda to fill. For again as Secretary Schultz points out, “the technology of security has been far outstripped by the technology of murder.”

We must face up to the fact that our response to be effective must measure up to the degree of the challenge, that it must deter, prevent, pre-empt and frustrate the acts of terrorists. And it is well known that one of the best deterrents, in countries for instance like Israel, has always been the swiftness and the sureness of the measures taken against those who engage in it.

And along with that system of response, there should be public understanding and support of the need for such response. For we can ill-afford the kind of confusion and self-doubt that in many societies have tended to abet rather than correct the blight. Public support must be strong and sustained, given the assurance that our government in its actions will be firmly guided by the rule of law.

Obviously in this challenge we faced in common with others, there are security there are security as well as legal problems involved. There is need to come up with an effective remedy, but the remedy must fully square with what is lawful and just.

Already there has evolved of late an entirely new page in legal thought addressing the legal issues raised by terrorism and the urgent need to fight it. Only last October, President Ronald Reagan signed into law the United States 1984 Act to Combat International Terrorism, which provides resources and authorities essential in countering this insidious threat to democracy. In the case for instance of hi-jacking some countries have already adopted laws in response to it. Codes of conduct for political offenders and terrorists are being studied and examined. And many new laws are today being debated for the specific purpose of combatting terrorism.

I cannot emphasize enough the importance of our legal community in the process of shaping our own society’s way of meeting this threat. There are adjustments to be made perhaps in our laws. There is need to provide for an effective guide to those whom we charge with the principal task of containing and preventing terrorism. Above all there is need for the public to know what we adopt will be fully in keeping with the rule of law.

All this is to say that in the overriding problems we are facing today—in the security, the political and the economic spheres—there is no substitute to the stability and strength of our institutions. For in them as I said earlier inhere our earlier inhere our capacity to meet every challenge aimed at the very heart of our democratic life. We should be wary of any action to bypass our judicial processes, no matter what the reason, just as we should take care to nurture the strength of our legislative and executive chambers. And we should not be hesitant but resolute in defense and in support of the system of government we have.

The Program of Recovery

What I have discussed so far is germane to my final point: which has to do with the actions we are taking in support of national economic recovery. For there can be no gainsaying the fact that political stability is wedded to our economic health and vigor.

With the approval of our IMF program, we now are in a the position to put our economy of the road to recovery and growth. The IMF program, which in itself was a signal to our creditor banks that we are determined to live within our means, has made possible the rescheduling of our external debt, with the banks providing a total of $9.7 billion of rescheduled debt, trade facilities, and new money.

Continued sacrifices will be needed as we adjust our economy, but clearly, the difficulties of the future will never be on the scale or magnitude of what we have experienced this last year as our economy was reeling from the lack of foreign exchange.

While the worst is over, I do not wish to discount the difficulties for the immediate future. The IMF program, by definition, is a program of austerity so that we can adjust our economy to the requirements of the new environment where developing countries are no longer able to finance their deficits and, therefore, must eliminate those deficits. But I do want to point out that in our case, we have already endured much of the pain of adjustment. From June of last year to October of this year, the relative value of the Philippine peso to the U.S. dollar went down from P10.20 to P20.00, almost a 100% devaluation. Thus, in a little period of over a year, we have made imports twice as expensive as they used to be and we have made exports twice as attractive than they used to be.

This severe adjustment has not been without cost to our people. Today, we have to contend with an inflation rate of 63%, one of the highest in our history. But the light at the end of the tunnel is clearly in sight and I want to describe to you what we can expect for 1985 and beyond.

First for 1985, we can expect the following:

– Inlfation has now peaked and is expected to be at the 50% level at the end of this year and should average between 20-25% in 1985. With our determination to control money supply and to limit budgetary expenditures, it is expected that this will be at a level of 15-20% at the end of 1985.

– Our effort will be to see to it that real interest rates are positive, i.e., that the interest rates are higher than the rate of inflation. Thus, since we expect inflation rate to recede, we likewise expect the interest rate to follow suit during 1985.

– Because of the more realistic exchange rate, we expect that we shall have a trade surplus in 1985 of about $100 million with exports growing by 10% to $5.8 billion and imports remaining at $5.7 billion.

– For 1985, it is our intention to limit the budgetary deficit at 1% or GNP of P6.6 billion. This will mean continued economies in both our capital and current expenditures budget.

The effect of all the above will be a substantial recovery from the negative GNP growth rate experienced in 1984. With the recovery of the economy, we expect positive growth rates already in 1985 and certainly in 1986.

Beyond 1985, we expect that the economy will resume a normal rate of growth, although at a pace somewhat less than what we were used to during the 1970s in view of the changed external environment where financing for the development of countries like ours will not be as available at it used to be. At the same time, we can expect a much sounder basis for our economy, relying principally on our own resources and much less on borrowings. Thus, while we clearly have another year of sacrifice before us, it is now clear that this sacrifice will lead to the strengthening of the economy. We shall have an economy which will rely more on our resources and capacities rather than on borrowings. And we can assure ourselves that no matter how adverse external conditions are, we can overcome them and never again have to undergo the traumatic experience of the past year.

I have taken up these matters with you today because I know that these are paramount concerns among men of the law in our country. The stability of the nation is assured, but the dangers facing us have not diminished and our vigilance over our institutions and our laws must continue. Hope is returning to our economic life as recovery gets underway, but there are sacrifices to be borne and still many challenges to meet.

Yet I do not doubt our national capacity to meet such dangers and to carry out the tasks before us. Because underlying everything else, underlying the resolve of government today, there has always been and there is the demonstrated capability of our people themselves.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.