Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Eighth Conference on the Law of the World

[Released on August 21, 1977]

The Challenge of Liberty

IT IS INDEED a pleasure and an honor for me to be able to speak before wise men who have dedicated their lives to the law.

It is with some trepidation of course that all of us approach this gathering. For as the cynics do say, when two lawyers get together one must immediately sense danger, but when three lawyers somehow arrange to meet, then one must start running away as fast as possible. However, when there are more than a hundred of them, then one had better just give up and give them whatever they ask for.

There is probably nothing I can say on law or on human rights that will not be said, and said better, by the legal luminaries assembled here but I am still too much of a lawyer, and still too much of a politician, to let an opportunity like this pass by without saying something.

This brings to mind the story of the Oriental observer watching an English trial. He found it an odd process in which one man was silent, another man talked all the time, and then 12 men condemned the man who had not said a word.

Although I do not expect this to be anybody’s trial, I hope you understand if I feel I must contribute more than just my silence to this Conference.

In bestowing upon us the honor of hosting this Eighth Conference on the Law of the World, the World Peace Through Law Center brings this unique forum to a part of the world whose most sublime struggle in this century has been in the field of freedom, law and order, social justice, human dignity and human fulfillment.

Long after the oppressed classes had won their rights in the advanced nations of the West, entire peoples in Asia were yet only beginning to wage their own struggle. Our country preceded all of Asia in this struggle for freedom and though we won it only to lose it to the greatest empire that ever spread its wings across the nations of the globe, that struggle implanted in the Filipino psyche the seed that would become part of our permanent heritage.

From the dark shadows of colonial rule through the labyrinth of decolonization to self-rule and finally to our present program of national transformation, the history of the Filipino nation has been a consistent move towards expanding the limits of freedom.

I have come today to pledge anew that our new society which I have instituted is dedicated to the attainment of the true dignity and freedom of our people under a rule of law.

This is my passion, this is my life, as I know it is the passion and the life of the Filipino people. And as I have sworn allegiance to the Constitution and to our flag, so do I personally resolve and swear that neither time nor tide, neither men nor events shall swerve me from this purpose.

The subject of this Conference calls to mind the historic conflict of liberty and authority. The balancing of liberty and authority has been the object of the search of government since the beginning of time. Some call the resulting balance justice, others call it equity. It also comes under the generic term “public order.”

The Roman codifier has said that the two pillars of public order are law and authority. The unrestrained practice of individual liberty, so it is said, is anarchy. It is also the survival of the strongest irrespective of the claims and rights of the weak. In short, the law of die jungle prevails. The unlimited use of authority, on the other hand, results in tyranny the imposition of power by a few or by one over the many. In either case, force is its life and the degradation of the human being, its ultimate result. Thus, both must be avoided.

A government of laws is in between these two extremes. How far in between is the continuing puzzle of mankind. In every period of ferment and innovation, the question presents itself. All countries must confront it sooner or later, in one form or another. And all countries, all states, all people must formulate their own peculiar, unique answer.

The Philippines has been no exception, and we have given our answer. Rebellion, secessionism, private armies, the extremists of the Left and of the Right, criminal elements fishing in troubled waters, interventionists from foreign lands the — corrupters and the corrupted — all these existed in the old society flouting both law and authority. This marked the period behind us before 1972, the proclamation of martial law. They brought about the loss of both political or civil and economic or social rights of the majority of our people. But democracy and the law are not impotent or defenseless organisms. For wisdom and foresight as well as precedent have provided their self-regeneration even after serious injury.

The Commander-in-Chief provision of our Constitution of 1935 as well as the Constitution of 1973 mandated a crisis government or a constitutional authoritarianism under such circumstances. The political leadership had the other option to discard the restraints of the Constitution and the law and to establish a completely new government — in short, a revolutionary government that would more expeditiously deal with opposition and criticism.

But I decided, even against the well-reasoned advice of some, that we needed the anchor of the law. There was need for a rule of conduct especially for the new rulers who had not known how to exercise authority before. We followed the Constitution. And we have never regretted it — this rule of law. What has brought about inquiry was not the exercise of this power to proclaim martial law but its utilization, not merely to return to the status quo which was its historical usage, but to bring about a radical restructuring of the entire society and the eradication of the causes of rebellion, whether economic, social or political. For the old society was an unjust and unbearable society, and under it the majority of our people had lost their most elemental rights, including the right to life, liberty, property, happiness and the right to participate in their government.

There was, therefore, the need to re-establish the balance between liberty and authority, and to return the government to the position in between, which had been lost somewhere along the way. The New Society has sought to bring about such a balance not on a temporary basis but on a permanent one. The institutionalization of radical reform shall always raise questions of law as well as of authority. This will be the eternal cycle not only in this part of the world but everywhere else as mankind seeks its perfect society. And no nation, no state, no group of men in whatever part of the world, or endowed with whatever talent, can claim to have reached such an ideal, that no one raises any question anymore.

In the Philippines, too, we have not been content with the law following after the footsteps of change and innovation. Rather the law has been utilized as the cutting edge of innovation and change.

Thus, land reform that restructured agrarian relations and land ownership throughout the country was not brought about by first establishing economic and social relations and then the law following to ratify and confirm. Rather the law mandated this change in such economic and social relations. At the same it made the change mandatory, sanctioned by the force available to the government. The same is true of the reform in labor as well as in monetary, tax, educational and other economic, social or political policies. In the latte, the organization of the barangays or the smallest political unit which is the village as well as the Sanggunian or the council in the villages and municipalities and provinces, the Sangguniang Pampook or Regional Assembly, were directed and ordered by law. The law did seek to revive an old tradition which used to be a part of Philippine culture now unknown to the new generations of the Philippines. Even the cooperatives, whether in irrigation or in farming, in production as well as in marketing, were brought about directly by law.

The radical transformation of our society has raised the question of the length and duration of martial law. I have no intention of leaving as a legacy to our people the institution of a command society.

There is an impression that no elections have been held under martial law. Nothing is further from the truth. There have been elections for the members of the Batasang Bayan or Legislative Council. We are moving irretrievably towards normalcy as we come closer to a solution of the southern secessionist movement as well as the leftist-rightist rebellion and the economic crisis.

I announce today, therefore, that there will be elections for local officials not later than next year, during which I hope to initiate an inquiry as to when we can hold the other elections for all other positions in the government. The effects of martial law itself will be lifted during the period of campaign and the elections.

I also wish to announce that as of yesterday, in celebration of World Peace Law Day, I have lifted the ban on international travel and terminated curfew. Lest I cause undue alarm among those who have advised me not to do so as yet, I hurry to announce that we will test the effects of these moves on our economy and our situation in the matter of peace and order.

Finally, I wish to announce that as of yesterday, I have issued a decree for the amnesty of those who have been guilty of subversion, which amnesty terminated last year, and which I revived, to extend for the next year. If there be any persons or detention prisoners who have not been tried by military tribunals and come under this decree, as of today, I order their release from detention.

I guess I should have made those announcements at the end of my speech, for these additional discussions may became anticlimactic. But let me proceed.

The world today is going through a new crucible of the spirit in which each nation must account for itself in the area of human rights.

No issue has attached itself so closely to the spirit of our times, and no issue will probably determine more how humanity will march out of this century into the next millennium.

Yet, however inescapable has been the outcry of this issue for universal recognition, consensus on it has not been easy to come by.

While we have made considerable progress in establishing the fundamental rights of humanity as a matter of primary international concern, mankind continues to witness some of the grossest violations of those rights, including certain acts that appear to be unique expressions of the problems of our contemporary world.

In an era that has brought forth undreamed-of advances in the human condition — the possibilities of longer life, the achievement of great wealth and abundance, the flowering of genius in the mastery of nature and the conquest of outer space — we continue to see grim reminders of adversity and suffering, compelling not only for their violence but also for the fact that they are often abetted by our very achievements in science and technology.

And this phenomenon is not easily summarized as a case of authority gone berserk and tyrannical; it is also many times the expression of liberties gone awry and anarchical. There are deplorable cases of state violence upon the citizenry, and there are also deplorable acts of terrorism by individuals and groups which in recent years have grown in brutality and horror. As some societies have struggled to maintain their stability, often to the extent of postponing the full enjoyment of certain rights, so also have there been societies overwhelmed by the tumult of revolution and political unheaval.

And overshadowing these problems in human affairs is the bitterness of the ideological conflict on the planet, which has already claimed the lives of millions — most of whom were not all protagonists or even in conflict but merely the tragic casualties of a world that insists on living on dogmas and doctrines.

Meanwhile, the economic gap between the developed and the developing nations has ripened into new forms of challenge to the security and well-being of mankind. We understand not at all the mounting crisis of rising populations and shortage of resources, if we do not see this as a fundamental denial of the rights of human beings to life, dignity, and individual fulfillment.

These are all symptoms of instability and decay in our contemporary world and we cannot, I think, resolve any of these problems with our eyes glued only to one aspect of the situation, indifferent to the others, or locked as the world appears to me now in a debate about virtues.

It is a situation that should rightly provoke a crisis of conscience, but an appeal to international morality alone will not suffice to deal with the problems we face. It must be matched by an equally dynamic response by the law of nations to deal with the problems and the issues of human rights.

This is why we cannot commend enough the efforts of this private association of men of the law from all over the world to promote the rule of law as a safeguard for the rights of men.

This is why this conference must lend itself to fresh approaches in the promotion and protection of those rights.

We are persuaded by the work that has preceded this conference that the way towards “the enthronement of human rights” in global affairs need not be an impossible goal, in spite of the great differences that divide the nations on its implementation.

From the time of the ancients to the present is a progression in the achievement of human freedom that has not been erased by even the most malignant instances of brutality and oppression in our world today.

Man’s idea of freedom has been decisively transformed by the epoch-making developments of the centuries; at each new turn in human affairs, there has always been an addition to the catalogue of rights that society and the world must win for the human individual.

The struggle for political liberty began as the struggle of subjects against their kings, and it ended in the unique declarations of the French and American revolutions which decisively changed the course of human history. The right of man to work and to the fruits of his labor, to a measure of well-being and social security, arose from the Industrial Revolution, and it changed radically the expectations of millions everywhere. The rights of peoples were won on the anvil of imperialism and colonialism and they continue to dominate the attention of men and nations in our time.

This is a heritage the likes of which no previous generation of men has known in its own time.

Most important, these are rights that have found recognition not only in human consciousness and aspiration but in a full body of laws in human society, not perhaps throughout the world as we would wish but in a good number of societies nonetheless.

Not for nothing will it be said that there is not a single country in the world today that does not swear by the ideals of “democracy” and “freedom.”

Substantial progress in the growth of human rights in international consciousness on the one hand is sometimes obscured by the denial of these rights in a number of societies on the other. This reflects to us what a great liberal spokesman of our time has called the “difficulty of the transition from nationalism to internationalism, and from unilateralism to multilateralism.”

It has been a difficult passage for the United Nations system of international cooperation; it has been more so, it would seem, for the international protection and promotion of human rights.

The international observance of human rights has its roots in a venerable number of treaties dating as far back as the Treaty of Augsburg of 1555, and all the way up to the critical period of the Second World War when the Grand Alliance made “the protection of human rights” one of its peace aims. These provisions in international agreements reflected a much more definitive development: the adoption of many European and American nations of the so-called “rights of man through Bills of Rights in their various constitutions and laws.

But the human rights movement in the modern context of protection on a global scale did not really begin until the signing of the United Nations Charter in 1946, which affirmed “faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small.”

Although the Charter enjoins member-states to observe a duty of joint and separate action in the field of human rights, the pertinent provision did not constitute a legal norm. What it did envision was a future international system of human rights, to be implemented by political means within the United Nations.

As conceived by the early signatories of the UN Charter, this system was to be embodied in an International Bill of Rights, to be stamped with the approval of the General Assembly by formal vote of its members.

Already, however, the non-inclusion of the Bill of Rights in the Charter was a reflection of some differences among the member-states concerning the issue. In developing a separate bill, the states would again encounter some differences, and this resulted in the decision to write an International Bill of Rights consisting of various parts: a Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and a Covenant on Social, Economic and Cultural Rights.

The Declaration passed easily enough the UN General Assembly in 1948, but it took another 18 years to draft the covenants and for the Assembly to adopt them in 1966. And for the covenants to take effect as a convention legally obligating state parties to the observance of their provisions, another ten years were to pass before a sufficient number of states finally ratified them.

Between the signing of the Universal Declaration and the ratification of the Covenants, new difficulties had plainly overtaken international consensus. In the passage of the Universal Declaration, almost total unanimity was achieved, with the Communist countries of Eastern Europe abstaining and not blocking the document. The Declaration, by and large, has represented a comprehensive listing of fundamental values, not only those that have enjoyed special attention and protection in the Western tradition but also those rights that have been the product of social and economic revolutions in this century.

The question of the Covenants and the machinery for implementation of human rights protection as a part of positive international law was another matter altogether. The member-states of the United Nations from the start already were divided as to which type of implementation would be desirable, and as to whether enforcement of the rights enumerated in the Declaration should even be attempted. There were those countries which, while accepting the Universal Declaration, thought that there should be no provision on international enforcement and that it should be left to the initiative of every state to raise itself to the full observance and promotion of human rights. And there were others which, while conceding the necessity for some measure of international control and protection, considered the procedures for enforcement laid down by the Covenants unsatisfactory and objectionable.

Many of these objections remain, and they are one reason why the majority of countries have not ratified the Covenants.

The Philippines, while ratifying the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on July 6, 1974, has not ratified the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as the Optional Protocol on Civil and Political Rights. While this has been interpreted as obtaining from the fact that the country is at present under martial law, it is in the records of the United Nations that in 1966 when the draft of the covenant was approved, the Philippines was not under martial law. The Philippine representative put on record during the deliberations in the Human Rights Commission its opposition to the means of implementation as constituting a derogation of national sovereignty inasmuch as it authorized other states to petition when the petitioner-state considers another state as not complying with the provisions of the covenant.

We entertain anxiety that this provision may result in the interference of the super powers in less-developed countries, without advancing the cause of human rights. This is the position adopted by most, if not all, of the developing countries.

We do subscribe to the rights enumerated in such covenant and the Optional Protocol on Civil and Political Rights, attaching special importance to the rights added to the covenant which are not specified in the declaration, particularly the rights of minorities.

The Philippines would prefer a regional approach to the problem of ensuring human rights protection.

But if the human rights movement has fallen short of creating positive international law to protect and defend rights all over the world, it has succeeded eminently in establishing the observance of human rights all at the forefront of world consciousness. While the Universal Declaration is not as binding as a convention, its moral and legal value cannot be gainsaid. As a development of the United Nations Charter, it brought human rights within the scope of positive international law. In point of fact, international agreements, new constitutions, and legislation in various parts of the world have referred to the Universal Declaration either specifically or by reference. In this manner, it has grown into “the final arbiter and standard of reference to which every new text on human rights must conform.” There may be differences among the nations about the value of wisdom of the method for enforcement of the Covenants; there may be contentions about certain rights cited in the Universal Declaration; but there is no quibble today about the irreducible minimum of fundamental values, the violation of which must subject any nation to international censure and disapproval.

These fundamental standards draw for us the dividing line between nations that truly observe civility and those that do not. And they are worth restating: the prohibition of genocide and terrorism; the freedom from torture and cruel and barbarous punishment; the guarantee of due process of law to all who are accused; and the basic rights to life and security of person.

But the challenge of human rights does not merely require us to protect and promote these essential standards of civility and conscience; they require us also to promote and expand the larger freedom of man in society, and here the issue becomes very problematic because of differences in values, priorities and needs of different peoples and different nations.

Here we are face to face not with the irreducible minimum of fundamental freedoms but with a larger conception of human rights as the goal of human community.

As I perceive this aspect of the human rights issue, it is here where the campaign for human rights bitterly divides into a contention over ideology, rather than on realities; a competition for ascendancy in global affairs, rather than a genuine effort to advance the lot of men in the international community. And it is all the more confusing, because the debate is carried on with nations, and spokesmen using the same terms “democracy” and “freedom” as their yardstick, while attaching to these terms widely divergent concepts with varying emphasis.

On one side of the ideological spectrum, we are told by the apostles of communism that human rights are a “bourgeois illusion” until the social and economic emancipation of man is truly achieved by human societies. The cherished civil and political liberties of liberal democracy only serve to conceal from view the real enslavement of man in human society, because they appear to protect the human individual in his rights.

Now there is no question that both these conceptions of human freedom — of social and economic emancipation on the one hand, and political liberty on the other — have their claim on the agenda of every society. Recognition of both is well established in the United Nations program for human rights and in the very covenants that have sought to protect human rights in the world.

But are all impatient, and dogma insists and we are anx.ous to label that society which does not come up to the measure of either doctrine as either uncivilized or reactionary.

It is difficult enough that these doctrines should hold sway over the flux of global affairs it is regrettable that dogmatism has often resulted in the interventions of the strong in the affairs of the weak, to enforce an objective they consider universally-ordained.

From here have flowed the malignancies that have thrown mankind into war and its indescribable horror.

From here flowed the interventions on behalf of “freedom” that turned internal conflicts into unmitigated international tragedies; from here have flowed the conflicts that today rage in the ancient land of Africa and elsewhere.

And so we arrive at last at a full-bodied consideration of the status of human rights in the developing countries of the world — those countries which constitute so much of mankind today and whose experiences have not always conformed to cherished beliefs and assumptions in the field of human rights.

Most of these countries were at one time or another outposts of Western civilization, and so it has been a constant wonder why their long exposure to the West and its institutions did not suffice to prepare the soil on which Western democracy could grow and flourish.

It has been suggested elsewhere that of the more than 142 countries of the world today, only about 15 could be described as truly democratic in the Western tradition.

I do not commend this statistic to you with relish for it is certainly a fact that the Philippines has struggled long and hard to live by that tradition, to support its cherished institutions on Philippine soil; and when five years ago, we instituted crisis government, we became in short an apostate in the orthodoxy of liberal democracy.

Now what do these facts tell us?

The cynic will, of course, say that freedom and democracy are demanding ideals and that in the course of our histories, divisive forces simply overtook the will to sustain them and we marched forthwith into the bosom of tyranny, revolution and despotism.

But there is a deeper answer for those who would but consider the real experiences and hopes of the developing countries. Let me talk of the Philippine experience.

The choice of the democratic path at the dawn of independence for my country was not, even when we consider the evangelical fervor of American colonization, a choice dictated by outside interests but a genuine aspiration of our people. We wanted a government based on the consent of the governed; we wanted a political order that would allow for the free play of individual initiative and purpose; and we believed that this was the road that would lend us to a just, progressive, and humane society.

But it was a program that did not in the event prosper and realize itself. In the interval, our society far from attaining the established gains of Western democracy and far from developing the moorings of a democratic civilization, gradually passed into a state of profound decay and drift, in which the forms of democracy could no longer conceal the malignant inequalities, injustices, and tensions in the society.

It was a situation which in the view of the Left was ripe for revolution. Equally it was a situation, too, that was ripe for the intervention of Rightist reformers. We were resolved however — we who recognized the danger— that our democratic system would not submit to execution or consider its own suicide, that it would not surrender to either coup d’etat or revolution. And so it was that we invoked the final measure enshrined in our constitution — the extraordinary protection of martial law.

We say that martial law has been proclaimed to protect the people and restore our true freedom.

But here, you might say, has been the rub. In our situation, we believed that martial law conceived simply as an interruption in democratic processes to meet the challenge of insurgency and reaction, would not suffice to stabilize political authority and order. For behind the forces that besieged the Republic, there were reasons rooted not in the fanaticism of revolutionaries alone but in the social and economic conditions of our people. Our democratic system had manifestly failed to reconcile its aspirations with national realities, and to make institutions and processes built on these aspirations effective to alter the conditions of our society.

This realization and the need to break out from the circle of futility, as has often happened in other societies, led us into the utilization of crisis rule itself as a means to effect vital and radical reforms in our society. It led us to a resolution that no less than a new society must be the outcome of this convulsion in our national life.

This is a process that can develop in several directions, as is well known to contemporary history. By choice, however, we have pledged that this must be a movement toward democracy and freedom, that this must be a period of building the infrastructure of a democratic society and then a process of constructing the full form of democratic government.

Now this is a claim which I am aware is often seen by foreign observers as merely a camouflage for authoritarian rule. There is anxiety that this interval of crisis rule may have resulted in a prolonged and prevalent suppression of human rights.

To this we can only commend a zealous examination of events and developments in the Philippines. And we stand by our record as a measure of how we protect and promote the fundamental rights of our people, and seek to expand the meaning of freedom for all.

And I will point out further that in this interval of emergency, we have not lost sight of our commitments to fundamental values and human rights. The Republic of the Philippines will rigorously adhere to the rule of law.

And though there have been to our lasting regret a number of violations of the rights of detainees, still it must be recognized that this is a society and this is a government that has not, does not, and will not tolerate the torture or maltreatment of prisoners, whatever charges they may face.

Periods of emergency in human affairs are usually the times when the lives and rights of individuals are at their greatest peril. It cannot be, it seems to me, an insignificant aspect of the Philippine experience that martial law in our country has never walked this edge of chaos and violence.

“No country, no people” said the United States Secretary of State at a meeting in Latin America last year, “for that matter no political systems, can claim a perfect record in the field of human rights.” The shortcomings are the issue of an imperfect world, dominated still by problems unrequited and prejudices aplenty. If so, we can only pledge our determination to do better, to work as sovereign societies towards those conditions in society that ensure human dignity and human community, and to work together towards the improvement of those structures of international protection and promotion of human rights all over the world.

We welcome this conference as we welcome all efforts to bring legal and political institutions in step with scientific and economic advances as well as the greater objectives of human freedom.

For the whole world is, and all states are, under pressure from a continually growing and more complex environment. All the social and political or legal institutions — and I mean all — created by man are now under questions, if not attack.

The natural scientist has been free in the secrecy of his laboratory to carry out his tests and experiments. For his studies can be safely cordoned and sealed off from directly affecting men and his world in general.

But the social and political scientist or engineer must of necessity find his laboratory and make his tests in the very center of life and use for his subjects men for whom he must hold deep and abiding emotions.

And the people on whom the legal, social or political innovations must be tested are keenly sensitive to any immediate prejudice to their lives. Since legal, social and political innovativeness must depend not only on popular tolerance but popular consent if not commitment, often the dim and distant long-term goals must be made palatable with immediate benefits.

The political leader may be unsure of his following or of the palatability of proposed innovations or he may be unable or unwilling to risk his political fortune or his good name and honor on a gamble based on incomplete knowledge, and therefore prefers the cautious and safe policy of the status quo following the principle of the legalist’ stare decisis.

Natural science, too, is a realm whose terminology and activities are specialized in by its limited number of initiates. Observation and comment are necessarily left to the few wise men of that discipline who are not notorious for their loquaciousness or their obsession with publicity or popular approval.

The reverse is true of the legal or social and political science.

It is the concern of everyone, and everyone is an expert on the subject.

Woe to the legal or social and political innovator who cannot face up to and stand firm before the furious mob of advocates of the status quo, all completely convinced that the comfort of known and already appreciated danger is better than the glory of unknown and unfelt advantages and benefits.

Every legal, social or political concept is interpreted as a threat to human survival.

Certainly no premium is placed on the inquiring mind in this field. It is about time that as we grant incentives to the pioneering natural scientist and the economic entrepreneur, so too must we give incentives to the legal, social and political innovator.

Or face the bleak future of man’s legal, social and political institutions ever remaining impotent or unequal to the demand of an ever growing complex world.

But what should concern all men of foresight, whether lawyer or not, is the state of international law and its enforcement.

National laws promulgated by competent authority are more or less uniformly drafted, formed along humanistic lines, and result in common observance and mutual benefit.

And national governments have authority of varying degrees and competence to enforce such national laws.

But in the realm of international relations, the general simplistic observation is that there is neither law nor authority.

The miracle is that the world has survived this long without either.

Sovereign states have succeeded in preventing the construction of the two pillars necessary for international public order.

And the conclusion cannot but follow that in the absence of law or authority there must prevail the law of the jungle — the survival of the strongest — short, anarchy.

The slow instinctive groping for a world order marks the graves of those lost in the wars and famines of nations caught in international disorder — in anarchy.

The last two world wars spawned the League of Nations and the United Nations.

The hope for an international order, however, remains an illusion.

The world government is a dream of the philosopher and visionary.

Except for the existence, erratic and disconnected though they may be, of some regional or tri-sectoral interdependence, the world’s economic order is in disarray.

Free intercourse, the life of international trade, is on the retreat before the onslaught of national protectionism.

How many individual human beings will sleep hungry tonight because of the failure of our generation in this area of human activity?

How many desperate acts and decisions by nations and their leaders will be made, or lives lost by pressures brought about by such prosaic and common figures like deficits in trade or balance of payments? And all because the world’s leaders cannot agree on the law and the new mechanisms to rule their economic conduct. Nor on the authority to enforce their decisions.

How many years have we been meeting on the law of the seas? And what have we accomplished other than to emphasize the variance and conflict of interests not only of ideology but of selfishness?

What about air space? The atmosphere or the stratosphere? And international terrorism? Or a hundred other items of the unfinished agenda?

There are any number of manifestations of international disorder or anarchy.

Some thinkers have well said that the third world war is not to come. It is here and now.

The proliferation of arms is unabated.

The prayers of all men go with the so far puny thrusts towards the limitation of weapons, especially of nuclear arms.

The big powers, so the apocalyptic prophets say, are being pushed by the logic of circumstances, that we do not even seek to deflect, towards the day they shall incinerate themselves and the world with them.

I fear that if the task to establish international law and authority is left alone to governments, it will remain undone.

Just as scientific discoveries and knowledge transcend national territorial boundaries, so too should the visions and hopes of the wise men like you who dream of world order.

It is a mission too noble to be abandoned to men of common clay. It is a calling for the devotee whose loyalty is not to race or nation but to man and his humanity.

We may not find them in leaders or would-be leaders of governments and states whose very survival and existence hang upon vociferous bigotry and demagoguery or demonstrated patriotic and nationalistic zeal.

But we may find our survival among men like you, the men whose dedication is not creed or race but the law as the embodiment of man’s ideals and whose flag is not that of a nation but of the world.

The men of the law and of the mind shall be the arbitrators of the clash of national interests.

Moral sanctions are the only authority behind the law of nations, so they say. Let the integrity of the thinkers and the men of the law add prestige, add strength to that law. For they shall overleap boundaries and persuasions, overcome combative ideologies and conquer suspicion and distrust.

I look with hope to the day when philosophers will be kings and kings will be philosophers.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library