Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the presentation of the National Artist Award on Vicente Manansala

[Delivered on August 27, 1981]

The Legacy of Vicente Manansala

We come in mourning here today, but we also come in homage, to the memory of Vicente Manansala.

There is the lasting sadness we all feel in the ending of so rich and creative a life. But there is also the imperishable legacy of his art that consoles us in our grief.

None of us can truly say what has been taken from us into the darkness. Yet in the works that he has bequeathed to us, he lives on as truly and as surely as any great man who has lived among us.

Those of you who knew him well — as fellow artist, as disciple, as student, and as friend — knew him first and foremost as an artist of extraordinary range and talent, who left his mark in many mediums, who opened doors for Philippine art and for other artists, who generously gave of himself to others.

Those of you who only knew his work knew him as intimately as his friends and his students, for such is the unique life of art, that in beholding his works, we come also to know the man behind them, his generosity and compassion, his humour, his humanity and his imagination.

On my part, I have known both the man and the work, and though I cannot claim to being a critic of art, I have admired the work greatly and am very proud to have met the man. I have understood a little why he was hailed as “the master,” and why even in the twilight of his life, there was this pilgrimage of art lovers to his native Binangonan.

As time softens the sadness of his passing, we will all the better see Enteng Manansala in perspective, and appreciate more fully the richness of his legacy for our people and our nation.

In presenting the National Artist Award to Vicente Manansala, we merely confirm in tribute to the man and the artist what every man, woman and child in this country reap in joy and recognition in their encounter with his work: the depth of understanding he had of our life as a people and of the land we love, the vividness of the images he created to evoke them. It is never the great man or the great artist who needs memorials to their names; it is us because we need always to make public our appreciation of our inheritance.

In the truest sense of the word, Vicente Manansala’s life was shared with others. He shared it with us not in the usual way we know, for he was not a public man, but in the unique and glorious way of the artist: in the works of his unique imagination, in paintings, in murals, in sculpture, in the timeless images of art.

Art touches us in a manner that we do not always see, but can only fee. And the highest and the greatest art reaches out and touches something very deep and beyond time: the truth and beauty of life, the essential dignity of man. This is what we feel when we are in the presence of great literature and great art: when we behold as it were so much that is precious but eneffable to us literally unfolding, when we find shaped in images and in words the texture of our life as a people and as a nation.

In Vicente Manansala’s work of a lifetime, as our critics have said for us on many an occasion, there is this largeness of feeling for what is uniquely Filipino. And he did not so much discover it, as invented it: shaped it in the medium with which he worked.

We sometimes think, because we are not artists, that what we are as a people is only there to be discovered and mapped. Art in fact does not merely discover, it invents.

And when I think of the whole range of our cultural and artistic inheritance, I am more than ever convinced that it has been our artists as much as our national heroes, who have shaped our identity as a people. They have integrated for us the diverse experiences of our people, the fragmented life of our many islands, and have transformed them into what we call our nation.

This is the service of Vicente Manansala in his own way.

As truly as any great leader among us, he has gathered us together in the vitality of his art. He has felt and given meaning to our being this people, this nation, and not another.

Enteng Manansala, deeply influenced as he was by the styles and movements in world art, never lost the primacy of his roots as an artist. However, he travelled, he was always at home among us. And in the end, he made what was foreign only another key to the discovery and the shaping of art and culture.

This is not to claim him only for ourselves, to the exclusion of others. The language of art is finally universal, however native the heart in it may be. Just as our great painters of the past, Luna, Hidalgo, and de la Rosa, have taken their places firmly in the world of art, so will Manansala now and in time, be part too of this larger world. But always, he will be first and foremost an artist of our nation.

This, then, is our heritage from Vicente Manansala: a legacy of imaginative works that to this day do not fail to astound in their beauty and in their truth, a legacy of artistic achievement that has and will continue to lead others into the difficult vocation of the artist, a legacy that makes us all proud to be his countrymen.

Enteng Manansala himself may have provided the enduring description of this legacy. “There is really an essence of beauty,” he said, “and time does not matter. A masterpiece is always beautiful… Walang panahon.”

Time will never dim the richness of his legacy. It can only broaden it, as more and more among our people come to behold its riches and variety, its truths and its rewards, as more and more among us take up brush to follow his inspiration and example.

Against the greatness of his work, his passing is only a momentary shadow that will be dispelled in time.

It is in a spirit of gratitude for what he did with his life and for what he has so generously bestowed upon us, that we proudly hail him “National Artist.”

I thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.