Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 23rd anniversary of the National Science Development Board

[Delivered on July 15, 1981]

I am pleased and honored to be asked to join you here today “for this 23rd Anniversary of the National Science Development Board. But circumstances prevent me at this time from honoring personally your kind invitation, and I must express my profound regrets to you all.

In my stead, I have asked that my prepared address for this anniversary be read on this occasion, so that all will be aware of the high importance that government attaches to the place of science and technology in our development programs for the nation.

Several theories have been expounded to explain the development of human society. Each identifies some facet of human and social activity as the principal cause for progress: politics, religion, the arts, and economics. While many of these theories contain some of the essential truths about the forward movement of human society, each can never deny that science and technology have been pivotal in arming men with the tools and the knowledge that through the ages have allowed us to adapt to and even radically change our natural and social environment.

Every landmark in recorded, and perhaps even prerecorded. History has been accompanied by the discovery or popularization of some instrument or process that the men of science had handed down to the rest of mankind. The journey from the wheel to the nuclear reactor is, we now know, such a brief period when compared against the eons of our planet’s geological history. Once a pawn to nature’s vagaries, man—through science and technology—has managed to liberate himself from many of his natural vulnerabilities.

Today, this fount of wondrous knowledge has erased the impossibility of man ultimately gaining full mastery over the natural forces that not too long ago awed and overwhelmed him. While obscurantists may always damn this knowledge as the root of our problems, science and technology on the whole have made it possible for us to improve our quality of life. However, like any other instrument and like any other knowledge, science and technology may be employed for both evil and beneficial ends. Like any other theoretical discipline, prudence and judicious wisdom must always be the premise of its use. But a far graver error is to lose sight of its intrinsic value in social development.

In the history of our country, for instance, many of the mistakes of the past and even of the present administration is traceable to a denial of the counsels advanced by our scientists and technologists. In fact, it is easy to understand why many of our men of science and technology have chosen to pursue their careers in other lands. Perhaps because of our people’s exposure to centuries of fanatical dogma under colonialism and partly, because ours is a comparatively young society, it was not until only recently that we have been able to properly appreciate the potentials that science and technology possess for the betterment of our people. It was only under the New Society that the much delayed official recognition to this vital sector was extended. This is the reason why a science minister presently sits in the highest councils of the land. This is why we have poured in substantial funds and other scarce resources into our scientific and technological agencies, knowing that in the long run these investments would pave the way towards raising the productivity and enhancing the quality of life in our society.

With the launching of the New Republic, I assure you that science and technology will continue to play a vital role in the general effort to create a better life for our people. Our recent experience has served to make even more clear the role of science and technology in the Philippine context. More specifically, this means providing the techniques and inputs that will allow our farmers to get more compensation for the same amount of work done along with increasing the volume of agricultural production.

This would have to be accomplished at the soonest possible time not only to create the buffers against future periods of scarcity, but also to generate the savings and investments necessary to accelerate the growth of other economic sectors. Science and technology, must also be harnessed to upgrade the capabilities and capacities of our industries to sufficiently absorb crowing numbers of employable citizens to make our products competitive in the markets of the world, and to develop an industrial base that will ultimately redeem our nation from the curse of underdevelopment. In the process, our scientists and technologists would have to discover practicable alternative sources of energy, the present shortage of which has hindered our progress and mobility. But more basic than all this, is the need for science and technology to devise the systems and materials required for satisfying the elementary requirements of our people at a scale, cost and made that would be most economical in view of our economic limitations. In sum, the task of science is to find out which of our natural resources are useful, how they can be turned into goods to satisfy our basic needs, and what our people must do to lead long, healthy, and useful lives. The urgency in developing our scientific and technological capability was the compelling factor in the designation of the National Science Development Board into a full-fledged ministry. While recent suggestions to streamline the workings of our government propose a realignment in your agency’s position in the overall bureaucratic matrix, we can never gloss over the N-S-D-B’s recent achievements.

With the N-S-D-B, scientific research is now being conducted not for its own sake, but to respond to the more pressing need of providing our people with the skills and techniques that would help them improve their lives. Coming as it did at a time of severe economic dislocations both here and overseas, this thrust was a timely approach, especially for our rural communities where the greater portion of the research effort has been directed. In solving our country’s energy needs, the N-S-D-B’s pioneering studies and surveys have facilitated the full development of our geothermal resources, as well as the tapping of alternative and indigenous energy sources. In increasing agricultural production, the N-S-D-B’s researches have served to improve the strains of our staples and other crops. In improving public health the efforts of the N-S-D-B have given us an objective picture of the food consumption habits and nutritional status of our people, thus identifying the priority areas that our nutrition and health programs must confront. In providing low-cost housing, the N-S-D-B has developed simpler and less costly methods for manufacturing housing materials. In providing for job opportunities, various N-S-D-B projects have devised alternative or supplementary forms of livelihood especially for our rural communities. In manpower development, the N-S-D-B’s educational and scholarship programs have served to upgrade our pool of scientific and technological expertise as well as existing facilities for science education. While all these accomplishments are by any standard laudable we must nevertheless accept and learn from the mistakes and shortcomings that have somehow been committed along the way.

The national leadership, of course, realizes that the government has so far been unable to extend to our scientific community the latitude it seems to require to more successfully carry out its mission. For a developing country such as ours the ability to achieve the proper balance between investments for immediate concerns and investments for future benefit is far too delicate for any rash evaluation. While we realize that our scientific community constitutes our nation’s foothold on the 21st century, the business of government also includes confronting those factors that endanger the present stability of the national community. This alone is the main reason why the government has not been able to deliver the level of support that it would otherwise want to extend to our scientific and technological sector. Conceptually it is fairly easy to recognize that, scientific development should be a top national priority, but the realities of governance and the other complications in our national life make it nearly impossible for us to pour into it the kind of resources and render the same level of recognition that we are presently compelled to render to, say, the maintenance of peace and order.

However, let not this statement be misconstrued as rationalizing what, even I would admit, is inadequate support for our scientific community. Instead it must be viewed, as an explanation for our national priorities. Even with the unfolding of those processes designed to hasten the coming of political normalcy, government must still address itself, first and foremost, to those threats, that imperil this movement. While we shall not cease in. rendering whatever official assistance we can to science and technology, we are compelled to ask our scientific community to understand our predicament. It is only when these more pressing contradictions are finally resolved that we will be more able to address with keener focus the scientific and technological development in our country.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.