Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the resumption of the Sixth Regular Session of the Batasang Pambansa

A New Vision, A New Dimension

Mr. Speaker, Ladies and gentlemen of the Batasang Pambansa:

For perhaps the last time in the term of this Assembly, I have the privilege and the honor of joining you in your deliberations as you reconvene your sixth and final Regular Session.

By operation of law, this Assembly as presently constituted will pass into history within a few months’ time, and following the scheduled Parliamentary Elections in May, a new Batasan will convene six months from now.

These forthcoming events will understandably linger in the minds of many of us here today, along with the memories of the fruitful and collaborative work we have shared together over the years. But it is urgent tasks here and now that summon us here today. And in keeping with our respective duties and responsibilities, so must we take up those burdens and together lead the nation across this critical time of national difficulty and challenge.

Four days ago. Our people went to the polls to decide upon important amendments to the Constitution. But even while the citizenry was preoccupied with this important political exercise, we were as a developing country busily engaged in warding off the dangers of a global economic crisis which has been spawned by policies in the developed world and which has most severely injured and prejudiced the vulnerable economies of developing nations like ours.

The wise man says that the human brain will either be man’s destruction or his salvation. We must harness our collective ingenuity now as our instrument for national salvation.

The crisis in which we find ourselves today vividly illustrates what a whole series of developments over the past decade have made memorably plain: that as a nation we cannot entrust ourselves to the operations of the free market forces and the always self-centered interests of the large market nations, without inexorably losing power to decide upon our own destiny. And that now we must conduct our national and foreign policies in such a manner and purpose that we can depend upon our own efforts, our own dedication and resolve, to ensure national salvation.

And never should it come to pass that this nation looked to the generosity of others, and not to its own capabilities, its own sense of self-reliance, to ride over this time of trial.

To state the problem frankly is the first important step towards its resolution. We at this time must look our problems squarely, and endeavor to understand the roots and the dimensions of our present predicament. And in taking stock of what we are up against, let us not fail to take careful inventory of the reserves of national strength that in the end will enable us to surmount all difficulty and bring about the recovery we seek.

The times may not call for a recital of our blessings and assets, but we should never forget that we have today in our people, in our God-given land, and in our Government, the will, the resource and the capability to face all problems frankly without panic or fear.

Let us review how we have applied this will and resource to meeting the challenge of national development in a decade marked by so much uncertainty and instability in the world.

We began our effort at national transformation in the midst of a time of shock for the entire world economy. The first oil crisis of 1973 multiplied at least six-fold our oil import bill. From an average cost of about $2 per barrel of crude in 1972, we were charged over $12 a barrel after the first flurry of price increases.

And that was only the beginning of an unremitting price spiral that was to culminate in the second oil shock of 1979, which brought oil prices to $32 per barrel and triggered an ever worse worldwide recession.

In the midst of this trying time, we were compelled to spend a good part of our resources on energy. But the .terms of our response were not merely to commit precious resources to the purchase of energy supplies, but to commence as well a comprehensive Energy Development Program and a massive Food Production Program.

The results of these programs are there for everyone to see. They are obvious and palpable.

The priority given to energy and food — with all that this implied in terms of irrigation systems. Farm to market roads, vocational and agricultural schools, and alternative energy development projects — is not debatable and they remain up to now a supreme national priority.

Whereas in 1972, we depended on imported energy to the extent of 96 percent, today this dependence has been reduced to 66 percent. And in a year or two, this will further go down to 50 percent.

In 1972, there was practically no farmhouse with electricity. Today, 2.25 million farmhouses have electricity.

In 1975, we still imported 600,000 tons of rice. Today, we export rice.

In 1972, there was a total of 743,000 hectares of irrigated land. Today, the total irrigated land area stands at 1,429,000 hectares, representing about half of all irrigable farm lands, compared to only one-sixth in the 1960s and one-fourth in the early 1970s.

In 1972, our transport water and communications facilities were hopelessly limited to fuel any kind of growth.

Since then, road kilometrage has increased 1.8 times by 1982 to 162,274 kilometers;

Strategically located ports were upgraded, increasing the number of municipal and fishing ports by 1.5 times;

The Airport Development Program raised the number of airports by 1.6 times and included the putting up of the New Manila International Airport.

Postal communications expanded throughout the archipelago as the number of post offices increased 1.3 times by 1982; and

Provision of adequate water supply increased the access of the population to potable water by 1.4 times.

In education, our Educational Development Program have more than coped with the increase in school population and the need to upgrade the quality of education. From an enrolment level of 7 million in 1972, elementary school enrolment rose to 8.6 million as of 1982. This was fully met by the construction of schoolhouses, whose total stock of classrooms reached 240,145 as of 1982. In addition, implementation of the textbook development project in 1976 has enabled us to attain the desired pupil-textbook ratio of 2 to 1.

Significantly too, with the introduction of educational reforms and the facilities buildup, the national literacy rate has risen from 75 percent in 1972 to 90 percent in 1983.

In 1972, the population growth rate stood at well over 3.1 percent. In 1983, since the launching of our Population Planning Program, the population growth rate has been brought down to 2.49 percent. And this is further projected to go down to 2 percent at the end of our present development plan.

In housing, under the National Housing Program, 174,613 new dwelling units with community facilities have been completed, 40,795 units upgraded and 36,263 serviced home lots provided to marginal and low income families since 1972. In addition, the PAG-IBIG Fund was successfully launched in 1979, and to date membership has now reached 212 million members. With the Lending Program initially benefitting 21,792 homeowners.

In 1972, the inflation rate as measured by the Consumer Price Index averaged _______percent for the year. At the close of 1983, in spite of the untoward developments during the second semester, inflation averaged 10 percent. And for the entire period from 1972 to 1983, inflation was contained at an annual average of 14 percent.

Finally, there are the key indicators: the GNP growth rate and per capita income. In 1972, our GNP growth rate stood at below 5% . At 1972 prices, our GNP has grown at an average of almost 6 percent over the 10 year period since, and this despite the fact that the real Gross National Product decelerated to only 1.4 percent in 1983 because of the severe drought during the first semester and the unfavorable financial developments during the second half of 1983.

Per capita income hence has increased from P1,428 in 1972 to P1,926 as of 1983, at constant 1972 prices.

These palpable increments in national productivity and well-being. Let us say now, are the result of the massive investments we have made towards national economic development and growth.

It will be asked in the light of the extraordinary financial developments of 1983, whether the massive investments we have committed to the national development effort are worth the burden we now carry.

I would answer that they have effected a decade of achievement in our economic and social development programs which has directly benefited the masses of our people and has expanded the fundamental strengths of our national economy.

From 1973 to 1979, an average of 15.3 percent of our development needs was financed from external sources. This helped national development during the period when GNP grew by an average of 6.7 percent. In the period from 1980 to 1982, about 22.3 percent of investments were financed from foreign sources. During this period of almost pervasive global recession, our GNP expanded by 3.6 percent on the average.

There have been some observations made that foreign borrowings have resulted in high investment costs relative to the income generated, or the so-called high incremental Capital-Output Ratio (COR). This point is only partially true and is to be expected.

In the case of small irrigation and energy projects, and other foreign assisted projects for instance, the return to farmers in terms of higher production and incomes exceed the investment costs involved.

For the larger infrastructures such as power generation. Major highways. And many multi-purpose projects. The returns are of course staggered over time and will benefit many generations to come to argue that these projects are in appropriate is to miss the crucial point: that the very process of development requires the establishment of these infrastructures in order for the economy to develop on a more sustained basis.

We may bewail for the present the difficult pass in which we find ourselves. Because of the pressures of the global recession and because of the monetary and protectionist solutions applied by many developed countries. We may take note of the fact that during this period of national effort. The prices of our imports rose three-fold. While the prices of our exports only doubled, resulting in pressures on our payments position. And we will no doubt moan the current financial crisis that has severely restricted trade financing on our side and left us short of foreign exchange to finance vital economic activities.

But these new difficulties do not diminish the substance of our collective achievements.

The problems are real, difficult and complex but their solution lies neither in abandoning ourselves simply to the generosity of others, nor in our retreating from our determined efforts to develop our own land.

In the midst of all present uncertainties and difficulties, we must look to ourselves. We must seek in ourselves those reserves of strength and imagination to turn this time of difficulty into one of opportunity.

And so I would say to this Assembly, that this for us is a time to inject new vision and direction to the national development effort. This is the moment to harness and concentrate our national resources. Talents and energies towards making ourselves a truly self-reliant and productive nation.

On Constitution Day, last January 17, I said then that no man is truly politically free unless he is economically liberated. So is it true for a nation.

On this basic philosophy do we now present our new program for the conversion of every community and every citizen into a productive unit of society. Just as with respect to energy and food, we concentrated resources, talents and energies to the effort and succeeded; so now do we believe that a National Productivity Program for self-reliance can be the basis for national survival and progress.

The initial model and starting point for this program will be the “Sariling Sikap” Program. It will initially utilize low-salaried employees of the government including the men in uniform and those in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports including the teachers and non-teachers. But eventually it will involve the masses of our people.

I have just ordered the organization of a Provincial Development Fund to be managed by a Corps of Presidential Fellows for Economic Management (PROFEM), and the authorization of provinces and cities to use City Development Funds to be managed as an expanded component of the KKK Program which is part of the nation’s agenda for growth. That I announced during the opening of the Batasang Pambansa last July 1983.

The creation of the Provincial Development Fund will provide the mechanism to utilize the savings of provincial governments for viable livelihood activities of the province in accordance with the Provincial Development Plan. To encourage the provincial governments to realize savings. The Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran through the KKK Processing Center Authority and/or the Development Projects Fund will invest a matching equity fund of the same amount to the Provincial Development Fund.

The implementing Corps of Presidential Fellows for Economic Management (PROFEM) will be composed of provincial economic managers who will act as the chief executive officers of the Provincial Development Fund with the provincial governors as the chairmen of the Fund. These economic managers will be appointed by the President for a period of three years. They will be seconded by the top executives and businessmen of the private sector and compensated with private sector rates.

This program will provide the system to organize private and government efforts, reorienting provincial development to a corporate viewpoint.

The Provincial Development Fund which is co-funded by the provincial government and the KKK and/or the Development Projects Fund may enter into a joint venture with private corporations and may invest in wholly-owned projects. The projects may also qualify for loans from existing loan programs.

A Presidential Assistant will be appointed for economic and development affairs to handle the supervision of this program, with the economic managers directly under him.

You will remember that we identified one million hectares of forest land for replanting for what is commonly referred to as industrial tree plantations with the initial planting of ipil-ipil and the permanent planting of central or orchard trees. The initial step is first to create a large source of pelletized animal feeds for both domestic and export purposes from the leaves of ipil-ipil, and veneer. From ipil-ipil as well as fast growing sources like albicia falcatta for both domestic and export purposes. The orchards may include cacao, coffee, langka, suha, and other types of fruits which could be processed either into drinks or canned food.

I have been moved by the present difficult times and am now seriously studying with the rest of the Administration how we can increase the salaries and emoluments of teachers, officers and soldiers, officials and employes of the Government. As you are well aware, I come from a family of teachers and I myself once had the ambition of becoming a teacher. I cannot but feel sympathy for those who have humbled themselves to a point where they have been sitting down on their assignments as teachers and are almost causing a breakdown in the school system.

I have therefore studied with all the advisers, especially the First Lady. The problem of how to increase the emoluments of the salaried employes and officers of the Government, especially the teachers and members of the military.

While it may be necessary to ask the teachers and soldiers and other officers and employes of the Government to wait a little while more. It is urgent that as soon as possible we create new incomes for these officers and employes without burdening the Government — that income to come from sources other than the budget. It must come from the production of goods and services, utilizing of course, the resources of Government but allowing for the augmentation of the incomes of officers and employes of the Government.

I have in mind. Therefore, the utilization of public land for the low-salaried and the least advantaged in our society. And one way is the establishment of tree farms or “People’s Forest” that I have already ordered for every province and, if possible, for every city and municipality.

We should immediately start with 1,000 hectares for every province. There are 73 provinces and so there should be 73,000 farms. The studies indicate that after two or three years, if not less, the income from pelletized animal feeds from ipil-ipil and veneer alone can produce an additional income of P25,000.00 per hectare. For every province therefore, theoretically, there should be an increase in income of P25 million for every 1,000 hectares that is planted only to ipil-ipil. This does not take into account the other sources of income potentially available in such a province for processed food, truck gardening, orchard, coffee, cacao and other kinds of plants.

If we were therefore to assign one employee or one teacher to each hectare, theoretically this should produce for him an additional income of P25,000 a year or at least another P1,000 per month. We must emphasize, however, that it will be necessary for us to concentrate the resources and the energy and talent of Government on these projects. We will have to install the Sariling Sikap Program so as to make it applicable on a wider scope to all the provinces and cities.

Perhaps it will be necessary for even the heavy equipment of Government to be utilized and concentrated on these projects in the meantime. It may be necessary for even the construction engineering battalions and the military itself to be utilized in bringing these areas into production. It will be necessary for us to cut down the expenses of maintenance and operations of our Government to the tune of two or three billion pesos annually in order that we may utilize these savings as seed capital for the project. Perhaps it may be wise not only to assign the teachers to these tree farms but also to employ the students so that they can learn new skills and at the same time earn some income.

At maaaring kailanganin ang paggamit ng mga walang gawain sa kanayunan. Ngunit ito ang nakakaintrigang aspeto ng programang ito. Kaya nitong tanggapin ang maraming Pilipino hangga't kinakailangan.

There is no intent here to cause more deficits by expenditure of government funds. We shall have to discipline ourselves and take the capital from savings.

In the meantime perhaps we should now seriously consider the increase in the salaries of teachers nationwide on the basis of a new school tax and on the basis of savings by the national and local governments. These two will require the cooperation of all the ministries, the offices, and agencies of the government.

But we must look beyond budgetary answers to the ever-present and all-important goal of increasing family incomes and national productivity. And this is the importance that I attach to the Sariling Sikap Program. And the plan to develop “People’s Forests” throughout the country.

It is now time for all of us to change gear, so to speak. To focus all our energies on the attainment of self-sufficiency in our basic needs. To strengthen our posture of self-reliance. It is time for us to slay and bury the image of “Juan Tamad.” The image of the Filipino as lazy. Indolent and weak, helpless before the vicissitudes of fortune and destiny. And to enshrine in its place, the ideology of sariling sikap.

Let me at this point call and issue a challenge to all Filipinos to engage themselves in this national productivity campaign. Let us now systematically and on a massive-scale coordinate the effective utilization of our human and natural resources.

And one step we can surely take now is the productive utilization of some 10 million hectares of denuded. Idle, and/or underutilized land. Let us make all this land productive.

Accordingly, I hereby direct the Ministry of Human Settlements to finalize, in coordination with the Ministry of Natural Resources. The Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Agriculture. The Ministry of Local Government. The Ministry of Public Works and Highways, and all other related agencies, a national mobilization plan that will ensure the establishment and cultivation of a “People’s Forest, in every town, city, and province. Every barangay captain together with the barangay brigades shall ensure the implementation of this directive the military shall likewise support and enlist its civic-action teams to assist in the program.

The Ministry of The Budget, together with our financial institutions shall design and implement innovative funding and savings systems. Together with the “Shares in Kabuhayan” Program of the KKK, in order to provide the necessary developmental funds for the program.

I have spoken here merely of 1,000 hectares per province, which means a total of 73,000 hectares for the whole country. But the potential of the program is considerably more. For we have actually identified some 10 million hectares of barren and overlogged areas in the country. And so while our target for the first year will be 73,000 hectares. We can progressively raise this until we can even develop as much as one to five million hectares of these idle lands.

The meaning of this program in income terms is to say the least tremendous. For if it becomes possible to realize P25,000 per hectare per year, we would then eventually realize an additional income of P25,000 billion annually for every million hectares developed.

I was myself pleasantly surprised by the implications and practicality of this study. Not merely because of its income potentials. But more so because of its clear lessons for individual and national self-reliance. It vividly illustrates to us what events have dramatically made plain: that we must find our answers to national problems in ourselves, in our own productive labors and capacities. We must recognize that while the benevolence of friends and allies can occasionally help; the interests of foreign capital can assist; the introduction of whatever external assistance can ease part of our burdens — they cannot do the job of making development real and self-sustaining in our country.

We ourselves must create by our own labor here in our own land the life we crave for ourselves.

We ourselves must bring the ethic of production and achievement into our ventures and our labors, whether we be growers of food, manufacturers of exports, tillers of the soil, laborers or titans of industry, or servants of government.

We ourselves must transform our resources — our lands, our waters, our minerals and our forests — into productive income-generating enterprises, not just through the efforts of large scale enterprise, but of every Filipino who takes pride in his labor.

This cannot be done short of complete national resolve and dedication.

This then is the new vision, the new dimension to national effort, that I commend to the support of this August Assembly, and beyond this hall, to the support of every sector and every citizen of our society. As we plunge once more into a year of struggle.

No man, no nation, I will say again, is politically free unless economically liberated. And no economic liberation is possible unless there is self-reliance

In these times of difficulty and stress, when realistically we must recognize that conditions in the world could get worse before they get better, let us prove once and for all that this nation, our nation, can survive and prosper on her own. And that never again will we allow national destiny to depend upon the generosity or forbearance of others.

God willing, we will fulfill this noble vision.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library