Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 106th Birthday Anniversary Celebration of Andres Bonifacio

[Delivered on November 30, 1969]

The True Revolution

WE CELEBRATE TODAY the birthday of one of the noblest Filipinos, Andres Bonifacio. He affirmed the greatness of the race, not through an elite but through the common man, the faceless masses who compose the bone and sinew of any nation.

The revolution that Bonifacio ignited was a true revolution, for it was kindled by the essential intensity of feeling needed to bind men together under one cause, and it was undertaken to bring change to a country weighted by centuries of oppression.

The Cry of Pugad Lawin unleashed a chain of events which inevitably led to our independence. We stand here today as free men because a few hundred Filipinos, fired by a towering leader to great deeds, dared to challenge the vested power of a colonial overlord.

Today, we are in the midst of a new revolution. We seek a new victory, not of arms over a cruel adversary, not to found a new nation, but to reaffirm the old and give it a new meaning and a new dimension.

I believe that the present administration, which our people have summoned anew to lead the nation, has defined the shape and content of that revolution.

As in Bonifacio’s day, it is a revolution aimed at change. It is not a revolution for the sake of revolution. It does not aim to create chaos, to achieve momentary novelty or to indulge pet notions. It is a monumental effort to provide an answer to the quandaries and dilemmas which have beset our people since we became a free and sovereign nation more than twenty years ago.

The revolution which we must fight today is that of survival as a nation.

Beyond that, it is a revolution aimed at intensifying awareness of ourselves, our birthright and our capabilities. And it is directed at the enhancement of the quality of Filipino life.

There are many among us who question such lofty goals, partly because the doubters have no faith in themselves, partly because they remain captives of an old order which, unfortunately, continues to exist in our land. I have often heard the greatness of the Filipino disparaged as myth. Indeed, considering the stagnation of our country since independence, considering the prolonged colonial hangover, considering the nature of our politics, it takes deep faith to believe in our powers and in our capacities, to reverse age-old conditions and to gain the higher peaks of achievement.

Aware of this mentality, and mindful of the realities of our situation, my administration from the very start set its sights on disproving these old wives’ tales. The only way to do this was to make the breakthroughs toward those high plateaus of achievement — in other words to demonstrate our creative capacity, and to recall the greatness which once illumined our land through such giants as Rizal, Mabini and Bonifacio.

We made those breakthroughs by design in such prosaic but critical areas as rice and corn production, in the building of infrastructure, in the expansion of schools, in government efficiency and management.

These breakthroughs correct the old myth of the indolent Filipino. It is also a decision in favor of human priorities. What is the decision to pour all available public resources into the rice and corn production program if not a decision to serve the human being first? Food is a prime necessity; rice and corn are our staples. Therefore, we must first give our people sufficient food.

Yet there is an even more important consideration. Underneath, there is the need to affirm the capacity of the Filipino for meeting challenges. If in the past there were repeated failures in attaining self-sufficiency in rice, then this is the very sector for new enterprise. This is where we can prove ourselves, and forever establish our capacity to do and to succeed.

In the other areas where my administration has succeeded, the same twin considerations underlie the priorities and the goals. We built the roads to prove we could do the job, and at the same time to meet an essential need. Some call the roads impact projects, and they are right. But the impact is less on the visibles than on the intangibles, on the Filipino spirit, on the Filipino will, on his heart and mind.

Who will dispute that change has begun to be seen and felt in our country? Before even the people spoke at the polls, change was manifest. The rural communities finally woke up to their responsibilities, performing tasks in the partnership with the government, or carrying out programs they themselves planned and supported. And there were the youths in our universities and colleges, stirred to rebellion against intolerable inequities.

These are the forces of change which have been released by the revolution generated under my administration. And these are the forces which will expand the frontiers of that other revolution — the revolution of rising expectations. If I may say so, the present administration has moved those rising expectations of our people even farther forward, by asking for the return of the Filipino nation to greatness. What is wrong with extending a man’s grasp farther than his reach?

We should not be intimidated by our problems. We should not fear doing more than we feel is our share. Increasingly, the history of man attests to the standard rule of civilization that solutions to problems create problems. But a time will never come when problems shall cease. This is true of all countries, for even the developed nations are weighed down by prodigious problems. Let us ask not that we should be spared the difficulties but that we should gain the necessary strength to overcome them.

What we should confront are the larger possibilities open to us. Let us believe in ourselves. Let us think in ever greater dimensions. Let us not shrink from the enormous responsibilities we have to meet lest we shrink as human beings.

It is true, as I have said, that we have made meaningful and dramatic strides in the last four years. It is also true, however, that much more remains to be done, for we have set a high standard for ourselves.

To these problems that lie ahead, we offer not panaceas, but hard work and sacrifice. Ever mindful of the struggles of Bonifacio, we are determined to finish what he had begun, and to meet the same challenges and obstacles with the same resolute courage and determination.

I therefore call on you to rally behind our own purpose as our forefathers rallied behind the cause of their own revolution.

Let us not be overwhelmed by problems, remembering that Bonifacio and his generation faced even greater obstacles.

If we ask of you to join us in our program of austerity, let us remember that Bonifacio asked of every man not merely the sacrifice of personal convenience but the sacrifice, if necessary, of one’s life.

The call for unity that Bonifacio sounded in this very place in his own time needs to be sounded anew.

I ask every Filipino to join us in this new sacrifice. In doing this we assure you that we will not shirk from our own responsibility — responsibility to set a convincing example. We will lead the way.

Years from now our children, if not we ourselves, would reap the benefits of our sacrifice.

The Filipino nation is still being born and that is why we continue to agonize from the birth pains. Human beings, who live only fleetingly measured against eternity, are young and callow at twenty; in the same manner a nation may remain a fledgling after many centuries of existence.

We begin a new decade, a decade which is crucial to the whole community of man. The complexity of our age, the continuing divisions among nations, the encroachments of technology on humanity — all these form an ominous background for our national community which is still struggling to assert itself in the world.

But let us not despair. Let us be like those of the Katipunan, who, possessing only courage, faced impossible odds — and in the end won.

The odds we face today cannot be greater, surely, than those Bonifacio faced. And our options are many and greater, and the possibilities for achievement almost unlimited. If we succeed, if we build a nation that will stand, and which will give our people the dignity and the certitude of a good life, then we too might glimpse that destiny which gives Andres Bonifacio his secure place in the history of our country.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 2). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].