Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines

[Delivered on September 30, 1969]

The Poverty Barrier Has Been Cracked

LET ME CONGRATULATE the new officers of the Chamber, the men who as they assumed office tonight presented their program of activities for the coming year. I note this for it is my hope that the two parties who now seek the popular mandate will similarly present their program of activities for the coming four years. If the officers of this organization find it necessary to prepare a program for governing your chamber even for one year, I think that it is necessary that the two parties present a program of government relating to our economy.

We are all looking ahead to the changes in the 70’s, and we must present a plan to you now.

We feel that we have just passed a great danger, and insofar as the economic health of the nation is concerned, we have surmounted what used to be considered as insurmountable problems, owing to the perseverance and the unflagging confidence of our people in themselves.

We have demonstrated what can be achieved through foresight and the will to achieve and we have passed through the breakthrough years. But this will not mean very much in the next decade if we do not proceed with the same spirit in the coming years. There has to be continuity. We must take advantage of this momentum, we must accelerate the pace that has already been set. The vision must be sustained if we are finally to attain the progressive society of our dreams.

New international policies, unexpected problems of various national economies, will certainly affect us in the Philippines, and we must plan for this now. If necessary, we must change policy, we must change attitude, for the mental cast of the past will only be overwhelmed by the increasingly complex problems that will surely come in the future. It is evident, therefore, that political decisions must cope with this new complexity, and this means greater sophistication on the part of the decision makers.

In this context, the Philippines can no longer afford to be parochial or provincial. This risk is, of course, ever present; much depends, however, on the kind of leadership we have. It is also in this context that we have formulated the economic program that I would like to discuss with you now.

Basically, the program continues to strive for greater improvement in the living standards of our people and in our environment, which should foster sound economic growth. This goal is reflected in terms of increasing the annual average growth in real per capita gross national product from 2.5 per cent as envisioned in the fiscal years 1967 to 1970 plan, and 3.5 percent in the years; 1970 to 1974 plan.

Having started the momentum which has accelerated growth in the recent years, and I must add, having surpassed the major targets in fiscal 1967, the new plan aims to capitalize on this momentum to further accelerate the attainment of aggregate gains to more ambitious levels. The real GNP’s are expected, therefore, to grow at an annual average of 7.1 percent, higher than the 6.2 percent average of the existing target.

Specifically the new program is geared towards the attainment of the following objectives:

First, generate more employment and provide various other social services i for a rapidly expanding population;

Second, further improve conditions of production, marketing and distribution in the agricultural sector, in particular, and the economy in general;

Third, rationalize the industrial sector; and

Fourth, improve the balance of payments in order to increase foreign exchange available for the attainment of development goals.

But while the new plan envisioned is a continuation of the development process as embodied in the present or previous plan, it also seeks to place emphasis on new areas deemed instrumental or of sustained economic growth. Let no one say that this is just developmental rhetoric; I invite you to measure these goals against what has been planned and achieved in recent years. I need not cite statistics at this point. The claims are verifiable by a simple trip around the country.

One of the secrets of development that we discovered in the past three years is the concentration of limited resources on a given point, thus preventing what an economist terms as the overextension of limited resources, which is the cause of failure. When I was listening to your two Presidents list down all the objectives of economic development and say that we had to attain all these goals at one inclusive time, I decided that in the coming years we would request our two friends to sit down with us and discover once again that overextending limited resources is not the answer to our problem. Rather, we must concentrate our limited resources on given priority areas, one at a time, for to do otherwise,

I reiterate, would be to repeat the failure of the previous administration.

Before I proceed any further, may I again, at the risk of repetition, inform you of the growth that we have attained.

The economy’ s actual growth showed a 6.2 per cent increase in the last two years, as against the target of 5.8, and a 6.4 per cent increase in the last two years, as against the target of 6.2 per cent. This is the highest sustained rate of growth achieved by our economy in any given period since after the war.

I have chosen this occasion to announce the highlights of the government’s draft five-year plan for the fiscal years 1970-1974. This plan takes cognizance of Joint Resolution No. 2 of the Congress of the Philippines.

But before I do so, it is necessary to review, no matter how quickly, the performance of the economy during the past several years. We can build the future only on the basis of present achievements.

The private sector has been a driving force in these years of vigorous economic growth. Tonight I am grateful for this opportunity to convey my appreciation to you as leading members of our dynamic private sector.

Our economic development has just begun. The process of evolving from an underdeveloped, dualistic and poor economy to an integrated, self-generating and ever-growing economy is a long process; indeed it may take a decade. The cycle of poverty is tenacious and enduring. And to break it completely requires a lifetime.

We can only begin, and we can only so orient our economy and accelerate our pace that no accidents of political leadership, and no accidents of political decisions, will alter the inexorable movement forward of our economy in the future. And that is why it is necessary that the same hand that guided our economy in the past four years, which saw the highest rate of growth and pace of development, should continue to guide it in the next four years.

We have not fully overcome the cycle of poverty but we have interrupted if not halted it.

There are critics, of course, who say that we should have overcome poverty by now, in just four years, but I repeat, it will require a lifetime to break the cycle of poverty in our country. If the United States, a highly progressive country, still finds poverty among its people, if other countries equally progressive find poverty among a great number of their citizenry, let us not be so childish as to think that we will be able to eradicate poverty among our people in a period of four years. We have cracked the development barrier, and this is about the most accurate statement that I could make; we have Cracked the development barrier that had isolated us in poverty and shut us off from genuine progress. These very cracks, the new gaps that we are creating, are the measures of our development and our grounds for hope. For paradoxically, in the sequence of the development process, the solution to problems at one level creates the problems at another.

The breakthrough in rice production and the initial impact of our infrastructure projects are creating shortages in warehousing and bulk storage facilities as well as under-capacities in domestic trade.

We are developing piers, only to discover that our domestic shipping is deficient. We are developing airports only to discover that our air navigation communications are deficient. The very success of our refinancing schemes for distressed industries, the general acceleration of economic growth, over-achievement of growth targets, initial successes of our Board of Investments and the increase in the generation of government-sponsored development projects, have increased our import requirements for capital goods and raw materials to a level above our past ability to earn foreign exchange. These are some of the problems we now face but did not face before I took over as President, when our rate of growth was not as rapid and therefore did not require this solution.

The aim of the plan is still the same: to break economic dualism and develop a vigorous, integrated, self-reliant and ever-growing economy. The new plan capitalizes on the development momentum to accelerate economic transformation. Real gross national product is set to grow at an annual average of 7.1 per cent. Per capita gross national product is scheduled to increase from 2.9 per cent in 1970 to 3.8 by 1974.

Now, specifically, the new plan commits itself to the following objectives:

a. generate an average of 460,000 new jobs a year;

b. upgrade and increase available social services for a rapidly expanding population;

c. improve conditions of production, marketing and distribution in the agricultural sector and in the economy in general;

d. increase the competitiveness of the industrial sector; and

e. improve the availability of foreign exchange for the attainment of development goals.

We must now apply the lessons that we learned in the rice and corn program to other agricultural products, to other crash programs and food crops.

Finally, to further bridge the income distribution gap between the rural and urban sectors, land reform efforts will be intensified.

We must now actually look closer into the means of bringing about a new system of acquisition of land. To manage this, the Land Bank is eyeing a land I swap project, and we are studying this. The marketability of land bonds will be improved by giving the Land Bank a preferred list of bids for the purchase of public lands selected for disposal. The preferred list shall work in terms of limiting purchases to the holders of Land Bank bonds. Land owners in priority areas of land reform will then have greater inducement to exchange their lands for Land Bank bonds and this in turn will enable more effective acquisition of land in the priority areas for distribution.

Now, in industry, the program contains a more detailed listing of priority projects, together with the investment requirements, thus enabling the rational restructuring of the industrial sector. These are the areas that the Board of Investments has provided with incentives to encourage private investment. Furthermore, taking cognizance of the role of technical research in agricultural and industrial development, the program includes an outline of the areas for research which will receive major government attention.

We have reached the point where we must now integrate agricultural and industrial activities, and this is one of the sore points in planning as well as in implementation. Just exactly what do we mean by the integration of agriculture and industry? People have different definitions of integration. However, we should start with domestic trade. There must be more efficient distribution of goods in the country between the producing and the consuming sectors of the economy. This is an essential complement of the integration of agricultural and industrial activities. Movement of agricultural commodities to industrial plants and consumer markets will be improved; industrial output will have ready access to urban and farm products. The end effect would be balanced growth, stable prices and the expansion of domestic products.

Direct government assistance will concentrate on pioneer or deferred industries as listed by this Board of Investments. Thus far, the Board of Investments has approved 120 out of 151 applications for registration. The total cost of these projects is some P1.8 billion. These projects will require some P211 million in loans and equity financing from government financial institutions.

The second investment priorities plan of the Board of Investments aims at the generation of integrated industrial complexes in food processing, metal processing and intermediate petro-chemical production. Total investment requirements for these integrated industrial complexes will run to some P6.3 billion.

Infrastructure projects will maintain their high priority in the coming years. Total investment in infrastructure facilities in the next five years are estimated at some P4 billion.

We will now look into the further extension of feeder roads. We have constructed in the past three and one half years about 12,000 kilometers of roads, and the feeder roads will be extended so as to complete about 5,000 kilometers more of feeder roads in the next several years.

We must develop our human resources, and that we have started with the manpower development program. We must continue with this, since this is one of the basic answers to unemployment; and we must provide increasing education, health, community development, social and welfare services.

The centers of manpower training will turn out an average of 100,000 skilled workers composed of school youths and young adults every year, who will be eligible for immediate employment.

The manpower plan is geared towards reducing the unemployment rate from the present 7.8 per cent to 6.3 per cent by 1974. This plan will absorb the 430,000 annual entrants to the labor force as well as increase labor productivity by some 4.3 per cent a year.

The plan on the matter of balance of payments suggests two programs to solve our present foreign exchange difficulties:

a. re-structuring our external debt, and

b. export promotion and diversification combined with rational import substitution.

Re-structuring our external debt will gradually eliminate those instances when we are temporarily pressed for short-term funds. In the past we relied too much on short-term foreign funds to tide us over the lean months. Such a method of financing forces us to come up with dollar payments even before development projects start producing. This imposes a heavy burden on our foreign reserves.

Re-structuring our foreign debt will enable us to postpone dollar payments to the time when these investment projects become productive and provide the dollars with which to pay their loans.

The import substituting industries approved by the BOI will save some $125 million in foreign exchange annually. And when the exporting manufacturers registered with the BOI become fully operational, they too are expected to earn $150 million annually.

We must continue to expand trade relations and thus we are even now experimenting with trade with East European countries in accordance with the recommendation of your Chamber of Commerce.

Finally in the pursuit of all these goals and in the implementation of various projects to attain our objectives, we will be guided by the principle of developing the potential of our own countrymen for entrepreneurship and economic leadership. This is the basic principle of Joint Resolution Number Two of Congress

Every encouragement shall be given by the government to Filipino businessmen and investors to establish and operate basic and integrated industries essential to economic growth. Industries in accepted areas of priority shall be accorded credit facilities.

On this principle of the Filipino’s priority in his own country, the two major political parties take divergent paths. This is one of the vital issues now being submitted to our people for decision.

In proportion to the magnitude of the tasks we must yet attend to our resources which remain scarce. For that very reason, we must learn to utilize them fully and wisely, with minimum of waste, in accordance with the priorities defined.

In the past we tended to waste our resources by yielding to the temptation to spread them too thinly over the whole spectrum of local and national problems. If in the past three and a half years we solved the rice problem and built more first-class roads, than all previous administrations, and erected more schoolrooms than the combined output of previous administrations, the reason is that we selected the problems to confront and concentrated our energies and resources on them.

The test of management in business is always economic performance. There is no necessary identity of criteria for management success in business and in the government, but the performance of the Philippine economy in the past three and a half years in a period considered-critical for most developing national economies has been, in the view of the World Bank and other impartial authorities, quite outstanding. This result reflects not only sound economic management but also the vitality and drive of our private sector.

This is the best assurance that the progress we have gained is now irreversible. For the new vitality, self-confidence and competence of our people, reflected especially in their entrepreneurs and economic leaders, will protect these gains as foundations for continuing growth.

The present administration has started a new revolution. It is an unfinished revolution, but it is showing certain manifestations, and we welcome scrutiny of all sectors, the students, the labor elements, the public and private sectors, all who are looking into the deficiencies in government. Never before have the people demonstrated such an interest in the affairs of our government, and we encourage this interest. We welcome this because this is the very meaning of the partnership between the private and the public sectors.

This revolution, however, is barely half through and this revolution is best understood by the men who started it. The men who started it were those of us in the Nacionalista Party, and therefore we who belong to this party come to you with a knowledge of the motivations, the beginnings, the limitations, and the basis of this unfinished revolution.

We are, for instance, looking towards developing our industries, and yet right now the private sector has not moved into one of the richest areas of economic activity. We are supposed to have one of the biggest and most valuable copper deposits in the world, and yet we have barely started extractive mining of copper.

And many of you would probably be surprised to know that our country is supposed to have the richest marble deposits in the world, that every island in our country is supposed to have marble deposits. When we speak of marble deposits; we immediately refer to Romblon. However, studies made by the public and the private sectors show that the Romblon enterprise is limited to a few men, perhaps not more than 10 men. Now, the studies show that the value of our marble deposits is very high. The President of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Manalo, has referred to our nickel deposits in the Surigao area. May I call attention to the fact that nickel deposits are found all over the country, from the North to the South. In Davao, I think, there are copper mines to be developed, as in Zambales, and deposits are being discovered in almost all the provinces in the North.

At the same time, abaca pulp and paper are supposed to be of the highest grade, and yet we have done nothing to develop this area. Again, I call upon the private sector to come into these areas because this is an area from which the government shies away. And we furnish almost 90 per cent of all the raw materials for Nationalist China and Japan, and yet the private sector has not come into this particular area where government cannot enter.

All these are matters which we have looked into and have included in the plan. We look forward to a partnership accord between the private sector and the public sector.

Now I go into the requirements for the sweeping changes needed in our government. I have noticed that one of the questions often asked me is: What are the plans for changes in the government in relation to the utilization of private talent and the amendment of the Constitution?

May I anticipate the question here, and say that no other administration has utilized private talent as the present administration has demonstrated. In fact, I have been charged with pirating private talent from both industry and academic circles. There are many numbers of men who were pirated from private corporations, including one member of the Monetary Board who was borrowed from PHILAM. And so many of these private consultants are now working on our plan. I also wish to call attention to the fact that I have just received from the UP the new plan for the next four years. We have gathered about 300 consultants to help in the planning of development and we hope that they will get together as soon as the elections are over.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 2). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].