Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of Labor-Management Congress

Our Goal: Industrial Peace with Freedom

MY FRIENDS, TODAY should be another historic confrontation between labor and management in our country but not as sworn class enemies, but as friends and partners together with the government in securing our nation’s progress. I congratulate the Labor-Management Advisory Council which has initiated this conference, the first to be held since 1958 in accordance with the Industrial Peace Act of 1953 or the Magna Carta of Labor. I am one of those who honestly believe that the battle for industrial peace is already half won once we succeed in bringing labor and management to the negotiating table.

The Labor-Management Congress is not necessarily a table for negotiation, with two panels primed for attritional warfare. You are rather called upon hereto meet not in the role of economic combatants but as statesmen of labor and management impelled by common goodwill to find solutions to problems, to achieve a broad area of agreement or consensus on some baffling and stubborn issues of our times.

Under the Magna Carta of Labor, otherwise known as Republic Act 875, the President of the Philippines is authorized to recommend to the Secretary of Labor the calling of a national conference of representatives of employers and labor organizations to consider and adopt a voluntary code of principles for labor-management relations, designed to prevent or minimize industrial disputes, particularly those affecting the general welfare.

In 1968 a Labor-Management Congress was held but since then none has been held until now. Considering the present economic condition of the country, particularly as regards the development of our industry and agriculture, it is but proper and fitting that this Labor-Management Congress be held.

If you will remember, Mr. David Morse, former Director General of the International Labor Organization, in the concluding part of his report to the 43rd session of the International Labor Conference, made the following comment and I quote verbatim:

“In the first place, the worker as an individual must be fully respected, both his dignity and personality, and be allowed to develop his sense of responsibility, for a man is not truly a man who is bereft of responsibility. A satisfactory labor relations system is one which furthers respect for fundamental human rights — the freedom of labor, the freedom of assembly and association, the opportunity to work, non-discrimination, free choice of work, and fair and satisfying conditions of work.

“As far as collective relations are concerned, the aim should be not only to provide an orderly means of resolving conflicts between workers and employers but also of harmonizing their interest in the broader community of which they are members. For these purposes, labor must be given its proper place in contemporary society and workers’ organizations should be associated in the solution of problems concerning all workers. The requirements of economic progress must be recognized and some method must be found for workers to cooperate with employers in improving production methods, raising productivity and distributing its benefits equitably.”

It is for this purpose that the state, in its primary responsibility to give protection to labor in industry and tenants in agriculture, encourage the holding of another conference like the one you are now holding in order to review the gains that have been made by labor and the laws, particularly in social and labor legislation, that have been passed by our Congress, and in order to update them.

Under present social and economic conditions, what is the role of the state? The role of the state in industrial relations has changed considerably in recent years. Many years ago, the rights of the master were considered sacrosanct and any effort of the employees to challenge these rights was looked upon as a revolt. Such revolts were promptly and ruthlessly crushed by the state. It was not social enlightenment only that brought about recognition of the rights of workers. The recognition was secured by the workers themselves through a long and bitter struggle spread over many decades and involving great hardships and even bloodshed. The struggle was rendered the more inequitable, difficult and bitter because till relatively recent times the right of the workers to get together for the purpose of dealing with their employers was itself denied and suppressed. Indeed, even today, this right is by no means universally recognized and even where it is recognized in principle it is sometimes denied in actual practice.

The interest of the state in industrial relations arises because, firstly, government considers it to be its duty to protect the rights of one party against another party’s encroachment. The community on the other hand has a prior interest because industrial disputes affect economic activity, the production of goods and operations of services, and sometimes law and order in society. With the rise of the concept of welfare — of the welfare state — the positive obligations of the state beyond the field of law and order to assure the well being of the citizens gradually assumed prominence. It is, as part of these obligations, the objective of the state to secure the well-being of the worker, and this role has assumed significance.

However, justice has come to be understood not only in its legal aspects but also in its social aspects. It has been recognized that industrial relations involve considerations of social justice.

The importance which industrial relations have assumed in the eyes of public authority during the past half century is indicated by the fact that after the first World War, the governments of a large number of countries in the world came together and set up what is now known as the International Labor Organization. The ILO, the International Labor Organization, is an inter-governmental agency dedicated to the promotion of social justice through publication and dissemination of information on labor, social conditions, the formulation of international standards and the supervision of their national application, the undertaking of specialized studies, and the provision of technical assistance. And today, 108 countries are members of the ILO, a large part of whose activities are in the field of industrial relations.

One of the more immediate objectives of industrial relations policies is, of course, industrial peace. The wide range of issues on which the claims or expectations of employers and workers are opposed to each other are potential al causes for active conflict between the two parties. The conflict may take various forms. The workers may resort to a slow-down or they may refuse to work and call a strike. The employers may refuse to negotiate with the organization formed by their workers, fire the workers, or declare a lockout. They may try, when faced with the strike, to carry on their operation by recruiting other workers the strikers would describe as blacklegs, strike breakers or seal s. To prevent blacklegs from breaking the strike, the strikers may post pickets at the factory gates. In such a situation, hostility and tension may go on mounting and violence may, and often do, occur. Industrial conflict, whether peaceful or otherwise, involves much loss, trouble and hardship all around, not excluding the party which may ultimately emerge victorious. It also affects production which the whole community needs.

Hence, it is generally considered desirable to avoid industrial conflict. This can be done and sometimes is done by simply prohibiting conflict by law. But such a prevention of conflict does not really remove the cause of it. It will leave either or both parties nursing a sense of injustice which will do serious harm to the smooth operations of the undertaking. Worse still, it may drive the conflict into less desirable channels like sabotage, personal violence or open defiance of the law.

I have referred to the fact that industrial conflict affects everyone adversely, including the society in which it may be created.

In the study of the economies of various countries we have come across the fact that industrial conflict in the present world has become so costly that in some countries it has caused a serious imbalance of international trade. In countries like Great Britain and even the United States and other countries in Europe, a serious factor that has contributed to their unfavorable problem of balance of trade is the lack of industrial peace. It has increased the cost of production, decreased the volume of production and rendered countries unable to meet international competition.

What then is the constructive approach to conflict? The constructive approach to avoiding conflict is to try and resolve the issues in dispute before they lead to actual conflict. The establishment and operation of such constructive processes for settling differences between employers and workers is an important role of the state in industrial relations. Prevention of industrial conflict is, however, a negative objective, nor is it to be assumed that it is an overriding objective. There are often situations involving great hardship or injustice to one party, more often than not the workers. All amicable ways of changing this situation and removing the hardships and injustice may prove abortive. In such a case, conflict may become unavoidable and even desirable for removing the injustice may be more important than mere maintenance of peace in the undertaking.

In the field of industrial relations, there is a point at which the employers’ and workers’ interests do not coincide and where actual and potential conflict has to be resolved. But there is also a point where the interests of employers and workers coincide, serving as a foundation for cooperation in a spirit of mutual respect. To build on this foundation the edifice of cooperation, to devise and set up institutions and processes for such cooperation, is a positive aspect of industrial relations. A relationship of mutual trust and cooperation is helpful in achieving such desirable objectives as the utilization of all productive resources, higher productivity, safety and health, and a sense of dignity and fulfillment for workers. Further, such relationships also have a healthy effect in matters over which the interest of the employers and workers do not coincide. For in an atmosphere of mutual cooperation it is easier to find constructive solutions to such issues as those involving divergent interests. For instance, if a demand for higher wages is to be met, economy and higher cost of production may perhaps be jointly explored.

What is the ideology of conflict? This view of the objectives of industrial relations may run into headlong opposition from certain ideological and political attitudes. There are schools of thought which hold that an industrial strike is a manifestation of inevitable clash of interests in a capitalist society. The relationship of employers and workers in itself is looked upon as a relationship of exploitation by the former of the latter. Thus, conflict is a weapon of a social revolution which expects that this exploitation will cease only through such means. This view demands that class conflict, including industrial conflict, should be sharpened and accentuated. Further, different ideological and political views and forces are themselves in conflict with one another and to the extent that the workers are affected by these forces, the general trend of development of industrial relations may be also affected.

Whatever may be the validity of these ideological considerations, we aft not here to pass upon them. So far as the study of industrial relations is concerned there must be, if a new production process is to be introduced, a satisfactory procedure for spreading it over a reasonable period of time, which is needed for the retraining and deployment of displaced workers, and this should be worked out jointly so as to avoid retrenchment and consequent hardship. It is important to realize that this relationship of mutual consideration is not the automatic result of the mere elimination of industrial conflict. Even where conflict is absent, where disputes as a rule result without active conflict the relationship of mutual cooperation can be and often is totally absent. Conscious and well thought-out efforts of both sides are called for in achieving such a relationship. The employers have to be prepared to give up some of their traditional prerogatives and admit workers to areas which have been for so long the closed preserve of management. The workers on their part have to be prepared to undertake new responsibilities which heretofore were not considered to be theirs. The concept of control by authority has to yield increasingly to that of control by integration.

The vital factor in all questions concerning industrial relations is the status and role of the trade union. Workers or individuals must in most industry situations function collectively. They need for this purpose an agency which can represent them, speak and act for them. To be genuinely representative, the agency must be their own, of their own choice, fully mindful of and sensitive to their interests and aspirations. It must enjoy their full confidence and be fully subject to their control. The right to organize, the right to form their trade union has been earned by workers through long and bitter struggle, great hardship and suffering. And even today, they have to remain vigilant and sometimes must fight to maintain and retain that right. This is why the ILO adopted convention recognizing the right of workers to organize unions and to bargain collectively through organizations of their own choice.

In many countries there are special laws granting special facilities and privileges to trade unions. We have a good number of labor and social legislations today but we may have to introduce new ones to cope with the rapid growth of our social and economic order. This is one subject of your Congress today. The grant of the legal right to organize does not always mean that the right will be enjoyed in practice. All of us are aware of this. The employer may resort to various practices in order to thwart the efforts of the workers to organize themselves. Active union organizers may be victimized or even physically threatened or attacked. In some cases, they may be bought or won over through some allurement. The employer may sponsor a company union which will remain under his thumb. He may offer better wages and other conditions better than those prevailing elsewhere in order to keep a union out of his plant. The history of the labor movement all over the world shows that as a rule employers do their best to prevent the organization of unions, and agree to negotiate with unions only when compelled to do so by the strength of the union. In some countries, legislation has speeded up the progress of unionism but has not by itself brought about the growth of trade unions.

We are all aware now that a strong trade union is essential for sound industrial relations. The union gives coherent and practical expression to the expectations and aspirations of the workers and make discussion and negotiation between the two parties possible. The existence of a strong union is itself a source of confidence to the workers, assuring them that their legitimate interest will not be encroached upon. And this confidence is helpful in building satisfactory industrial relations.

However, I repeat. A strong union also means greater responsibility on the part of the workers, a responsibility which means also to protect that same management which sometimes may be an antagonist, in order that the two elements of production may join hands in enhancing the progress of all.

The success of an enterprise and the benefits that might accrue to the workers depend on many factors. For instance, joint consultation, joint participation of workers and management, and lastly, tripartite consultations. In the first place, it is the employer’s function primarily to manage his business. But workers are interested in how it is managed. If they are consulted on at least some aspects of management, they feel a greater sense of satisfaction. Joint consultation, however, is quite distinct from collective bargaining. It is important that the two are kept separate, otherwise confusion may result.

Joint consultation between management and labor does not concern itself with such questions as revision of wages or of other conditions of service. That is the field of collective bargaining. The participation of workers in management gives the laborers a sense of security and responsibility, and this is very important . Thus, the need for joint consultation. However, the final decision on policy and other management concerns should be made by the management alone, which may accept or reject the workers’ views. This, again, is another sensitive point which may lead to disagreement.

A tripartite consultation takes place when representatives of the employers and workers and the government get together. The government’s participation however should only be confined to formulating growth policies for a whole industry or for the whole country. And consultation must involve wholly the three parties, on a tripartite system. For instance, there may be a proposal for social or workers’ legislation, for wages and employment, policies and their implementation, social security, housing and welfare problems and such other subjects, and this proposal becomes an appropriate subject for tripartite consultation.

You will note that under my administration I have tried to encourage tripartite consultations on a broad range of policies that affect labor and management. And these are important subjects to be taken up in this convention.

May I wish you all the best of luck so that after this convention there maybe better relations between labor and management. I repeat. The task you face is to work out realistic proposals and guidelines for industrial peace. I have faith and confidence that through its appropriate organs, the government may act, on them in the furtherance of industrial peace based on justice.

We have a Constitutional Convention going on. Congress is in session. If you will remember, in two months’ time we shall once more mark the anniversary of the Industrial Peace Act, which, incidentally, I also had the privilege of participating in while it was being written, when I was a member of Congress in 1953. But it is not too soon, really, for the leaders of labor and management, not to mention the government, in this Congress to address themselves to this fundamental question: How has the era of collective bargaining and free trade unionism worked in the Philippines during nearly two decades of its operation? There must be a reassessment. What should be done to realize the fullest potential of this system for industrial peace based on social justice? What defects have been revealed by experience and what corrective steps should be taken to update the law?

And with the Constitutional Convention going on, should not this Congress also face up to the property question and in general the social and economic relationship that should prevail in a reconstructed society?

The truth is that I believe your Congress could be more useful and effective if you took more time to consider concrete questions of industrial peace.

For instance, while I have said that employers tend to discourage the organization of unions, the unions are not entirely blameless in some instances and we must now be strong enough to face the reality that inter-union dispute caused more than 47 per cent of all strikes at least in 1910 — and the implicitly of unions in a given enterprise is definitely not conducive to industrial peace. A third factor which impedes the task of promoting industrial peace is the inadequacy of government’s own facilities not only for conciliation, but perhaps more important, for preventive mediation.

The first and second of these issues are sensitive enough to cause instant sparks in a meeting of labor and management. I know.

I am certain that in discussing or in re-assessing the situation of free trade unionism in the Philippines in the past two decades, and in determining how to realize the true potential of this system for industrial peace based on social justice, as well as the defects that experience may have revealed, there will be instant conflict between labor and management. I have been rather closely exposed to some of your problems during the past six years, when the President, at the request of the Secretary of Labor, had to perform the role of conciliator himself. I know that management is not above busting free unions, in spite of pious utterances and I know that labor may sometimes invoke high ideals in the not-so-noble pursuit of liquidating a rival union — sometimes wantonly disregarding the public interest for the sake of a vendetta.

We all know of this. All of us do, but sometimes we do not face up to this reality. And I know that you will allow me this opportunity of being candid and frank about the problems of both labor and management. Sometimes, labor and capital, in the case of provincial disputes, have to finance a Labor Department conciliator’s transportation to the site of the dispute, for this is a Department tragically short of funds with which to carry out its valuable work.

And that is not a commercial for the Department of Labor’s budget pending in Congress. Truly, the Department of Labor really needs funds, and if our legislators are listening, perhaps they could increase the Department of Labor’s appropriation.

I have cited three factors besides the paucity of government funds and the inadequacy of government facilities to meet the demands of industrial conflict. I believe that here we have three large but concrete problems on which to focus tripartite attention and action in this Congress.

I am happy to note that labor leaders have called attention to the fact that whereas countries other than the Philippines and countries around us, have shown a tendency to repress labor unions, in the Philippines government tends to encourage labor unionism.

For although we strongly desire and unremittingly pursue the goal of economic growth, I know that even management itself or the capitalist, is not f willing to relegate to a secondary priority the freedom of association for workers as well as for employers. The thrust of our social effort is not merely towards bread but towards bread with justice and freedom.

I ask that labor and management in this Congress join forces with us in the government to defend and preserve freedom of association as a major postulate of our commitment to industrial democracy.

Great challenges face all of us in the ’70’s and these are trying times for all of us. There is always the grave risk that labor might consider itself alienated from government; foreign ideologies fan class enmity for their own ends. That is why government and management must take extra care that their decisions, whenever workers are affected, are enlightened, defensible, and reasonable, lest the myth of exploitation become a reality in our democratic system.

We do not know exactly what form our political and economic community may take when the delegates to the Constitutional Convention shall have done their work. But I leave it to the joint Labor-Management Congress to come to terms with the social and economic realities of our times, so that together labor and management may voice their hopes and demands for the kind of society that is more responsive to their interests and welfare.

I have no doubt that the sense of this new society, if indeed it is now in the making, as I think it is, is fundamentally, nay uncompromisingly democratic. But it is my hope, as it must be yours, that this democratic society shall mean the extension and not the curtailment or limitation, of freedom, that it shall guarantee individual self-fulfillment, not only politically but also, and more importantly, economically and socially as well. I have complete faith and trust that you shall lead the way towards a better and more progressive society.

God guide you in your undertaking in this Congress.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].