Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines

[Delivered at Clark Air Base, Angeles City, June 21, 1972]

New Vistas in Filipino-American Relations

I TAKE SPECIAL pleasure in extending to all of you my warmest congratulations on the completion of your university education. You belong to one of the most unusual groups of college graduates anywhere in the world: Americans for the most part, working and studying in a United States air base, under Filipino professors, in a special branch of the University of the Philippines. This arrangement would be difficult to duplicate anywhere and, indeed, the academic program of U.P. at Clark Air Base may well be without parallel elsewhere in the world.

As an alumnus of the University of the Philippines, I view this academic operation of my Alma Mater in this United States air base with a great deal of satisfaction. It demonstrates, first of all, the wide-ranging capabilities and resources of the State University, an academic institution supported by the taxes of our people and serving as the apex of our system of education. Beyond their knowledge and skill as teachers, however, Dean Favilla and his colleagues from Diliman deserve your special thanks for their loyal dedication to their success of this program.

Even more noteworthy is the fact that this academic program illustrates the best and most generous type of collaboration between Filipinos and Americans. America’s most precious gift to the Philippines has been the gift of public education. Following the end of the Philippine-American war at the turn of the century, hundreds of American soldiers took off their uniforms to become the first teachers in our newly organized public school system. They were joined by thousands of American teachers who sailed across the Pacific and volunteered for service in every province of the archipelago. The posts of Secretary Public Instruction and Director of Education were held by Americans until the thirties. The University of the Philippines, founded in 1908, had Americans as its first and third presidents.

There is a kind of poetic justice in the fact that the children and grandchildren of the Filipinos who had studied under American teachers should now, in turn, be teaching the latter’s children and grandchildren, and in their own tongue. One other fact worth noting, of course, is that most of the professors who come to teach at Clark took their advanced degrees in the United States, many of them with the help of American foundations.

This, then, is one of the most extraordinary and heart-warming examples of collaboration between two peoples differing in race, language and culture, and separated from each other by ten thousand miles of ocean. It is all the more extraordinary because it involves an activity that is totally distinct from, if not alien, to the primary purpose of a military installation like this. It is as if Filipinos and Americans, standing firmly together in this time of confusion and violence, are telling the world: “We assert the primacy of the human spirit, we shall keep the lamp of knowledge burning, we insist on the basic human right to education.” What a great thing it is that Filipinos and Americans should be making this affirmation under conditions that have completely obliterated all accidents of race, and in particular, any and all false notions of racial inferiority or superiority. For here, at Clark, there are now two races of men trying to discover what makes them different; mere is only one, single group of human beings engaged in one and the same task of pursuing knowledge and acquiring an education—the only activity that separates man from beast.

I am informed that U. P. at Clark Air Base was to have been phased out and closed two or three years ago, mainly because of serious difficulties that had developed in the course of its operation. Those difficulties were, of course, inevitable: education, by its nature, its nature, is open and free, while a military base, by its nature, is anything but open and free. It was not easy for the University of the Philippines to adjust to the conditions and requirements of a military base, and neither was it easy for a military base to adjust to the spirit of the university. Only by a mutual recognition of the inherent difficulty of the relationship could this educational collaboration be continued. I am gratified by the information that the University has agreed to maintain this unit at Clark on the strength of assurances given by the authorities of the base that the professors of the University will enjoy at all times the right to enter the base in order to perform their legitimate functions, without demeaning requirements of any kind, and to be treated at all times in a manner compatible with their rank and dignity as professors. Whenever the authorities of the base should determine that this kind of treatment cannot, for security or other reasons, be accorded the professors of the University, then the only recourse would be to terminate the operation of U.P. at Clark Air Base. This would be a clear-cut decision based on the recognition of incompatible necessities. We should not tolerate one more source of irritation in an area that is plagued all too frequently by needless misunderstanding between Americans and Filipinos.

We are gathered here on an extremely sensitive enclave on Philippine territory. This base, one of the most important bases of the world’s first super power, as well as others like it, will soon be the subject of negotiations between the Philippines and the United States. The problem, in effect, is to determine what role the United States bases in the Philippines is to play in the coming years, having regard to the re-alignment of forces and the new configuration of power relationships that are taking shape in our part of the world.

These bases were established twenty-five years ago at the inception of the “cold war”, at a time when the division of the world into two bitterly opposed ideological camps seemed total. It was relatively easy for nations, acting in their national interest, to choose sides, lending their support to that which they thought would better ensure their security and happiness. In the black-and-white political world of the ’40’s and ’50’s, most nations did take sides; they joined ideological blocs, economic unions, or military alliances and some agreed to the establishment of foreign military bases on their soil such as Clark Air base.

The world of the ’70’s is an entirely different world. With the Nixon doctrine and as a result of President Nixon’s historic visits to Peking and Moscow this year, the polarized world of the ’40’s is no more. The black-and-white chess board of power politics is being replaced by a new board of indistinct gray. Or perhaps, it is the game that is being changed; it is no longer a chess game but a game of poker with five or six players participating.

Chess is a two-handed game, a confrontation of champions representing two camps; but poker is basically a game of four or more players each committed only to winning for himself. The world appears to be moving in the direction of a colossal political poker game in which the traditional concepts of blocks and alliances are doomed to become obsolete.

It is in the context of this changing pattern of world politics that the future relations between the Philippines and the United States, and therefore the future of American bases in the Philippines, must be re-examined.

This is not the occasion to indicate what the nature of those relations and what the future of these bases will be. Only one thing is certain: these will have to be modified in line with our respective conceptions of national interest.

Our hope is that, after careful reflection, we shall discover a sufficient degree of common interest to justify the establishment of relations between other countries on a basis of a reciprocal benefit and mutual respect. Further, the Americans and Filipinos will bring to these negotiations a spirit of much regard and accommodation, which perforce animates conferences between equals like Washington and Moscow, but which is extraordinarily difficult to generate in discussions between equals, like Washington and Manila.

For our part, we shall bring to the conference table the profound faith we have in the libertarian principles and democratic institutions which we share with the American people. We shall have full regard for the responsibilities of the United States in today’s world, and the uses to which American power may be put in the context of those responsibilities. But we shall also be animated by our awareness of our proper place and destiny in the world of Asia, and by our responsibility to make a contribution commensurate with our capabilities to the peace, freedom and happiness of the Asian peoples.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].