Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the AFP Testimonial Day

[Delivered on September 10, 1981]

Year after year, through all the years of my presidency, you have gathered here without fail on the 10th of September to give your testimonial salute to your Commander-in-Chief. Yet no matter how often the repetition, there is freshness and meaning in this occasion which time will never dim.

This ceremony embodies one of the truly elemental traditions of our Armed Forces, elemental because it speaks to the very soul and character of the whole of our nation’s soldiery.

There is honor here for the Office of the Presidency and the man who serves it, and for this I have ever been and am now deeply and personally grateful.

But there is also the enduring symbolism of this rite: that each time we gather here, we affirm anew that our Armed Forces are, first and always, a civil force. We maintain in our Armed Forces the high standards and ideals that a military establishment must live by in order to be effective and ever vigilant. We maintain high standards of discipline within the ranks and in our officer corps as highly as any other armed force in the experience of nations. Yet behind them all, we assign the highest authority in our Armed Forces not to a military commander but to a civilian. And to a civilian who also must be the leader of all our people and of our Republic.

This constitutes the fount of our Replublicanism.

Other nations, because of their historical experience, follow an entirely different tradition in the Constitution of their Armed Forces; we on our part fervently believe and observe this tradition of civilian supremacy in the profession of arms.

Other nations, in the midst of ferment and crisis, drift away from this Republican idea of the Armed Forces in order to cope and survive; we on our part, despite the many crises that time and again have visited our nation, have unerringly maintained this difficult ideal, and in maintaining it ensured the stability and safety of our Republic.

It surely must be said, especially here on this occasion, that this ideal lives because we have all kept faith with one another, and never for a moment lost, despite whatever trial and challenge, our belief in the Armed Forces as the loyal servant of the government.

It is sometimes asked how such an unbroken faith is maintained and kept secure. I would answer that it feeds in part on the vitality of national traditions and values, in part on the continued effort to make it meaningful and relevant to present times. On the one hand, we sustain our fidelity to this concept of our Armed Forces because our experience unfailingly tells us that it works. On the other, we sustain it, because it fitly serves the needs of our country in a new time, and because we make the effort to continually strengthen and develop our Armed Forces around this proud and glorious ideal.

More than any generation before us, we have reason today to be especially thankful and proud of our Armed Forces. Our nation’s defenses are secure, our homes are safe, and except for some problem areas, our cities and our towns are tranquil. There is confidence in the country and in the world that our nation is strong and moving forward. We know, in short, that our system is both strong and secure.

Nearly nine years ago, there was a moment of danger when our national life tottered on the edge of rupture and disintegration. But the crisis gathered us together, and we surmounted the test. Together, our people, our Government and our Armed Forces demonstrated the steadfastness of resolve and the strength of will to ensure the survival and growth of our Republic.

And we have seen during this period of struggle and building that our Armed Forces can be relied upon not only to keep vigil over the peace and security of the nation, but to undertake part of the tasks of social and economic development. To the soldiers who have had to face up to challenges in the battlefield, there have been soldiers too who faced up to the challenges in our farms and factories.

As we look toward the present and the future, these are the achievements upon which we must build.

The peace and security of our nation today is no occasion for the relaxation of our vigilance; it is rather the opportunity for self-strengthening and development, and for a more progressive view of the role of our Armed Forces in our national life.

If I may therefore review here what I believe must be the paramount concerns of our Armed Forces today, during this period of building for our New Republic, I would cite the following:

First and foremost, we must look to the health of our entire military organization, to the vitality of its leadership and to the morale of our entire soldiery.

Organizational reform and innovation must continue, so that our armed services will grow in efficiency and responsiveness to problems and challenges.

The promised promotion of company and field, grade personnel must now be implemented, in order to ensure the needed flow of deserving men into higher positions of responsibility in our armed services, and in order to motivate the men in the organization. I am told that the Board of Generals is already finalizing its recommendations, so this should take place soon.

Likewise, we must take care to attend to the welfare and morale of all our enlisted men, at the same time that we continue to maintain discipline and high standards within the ranks.

Secondly, I would stress the importance now of intensifying and expanding the AFP’s involvement in the National Development Effort.

This developmental thrust must naturally go hand in hand with the peacekeeping and security efforts, and expand as peace and order and security are ensured.

We have just launched, among others, the vital Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran Program. This is a massive, all-encompassing plan designed to generate livelihood opportunities for a great number of our people and to boost national productivity. Together with government and the private sector, the AFP must actively participate in this program and devote much of its energies to help insure its success.

I am pleased to learn that the AFP has already begun to mobilize itself for the program, building upon the already established Military Economic Development Activities Project under its Home Defense Program. I have every confidence that the AFP will show in this undertaking the same dedication to service, the same notable zeal and initiative that it has shown in the past.

Third, there is need for fresh attention to, and for acceleration of, the program for self-reliance in our Armed Forces.

We have already witnessed encouraging results in the joint effort being undertaken by the AFP and the private sector in the manufacture of various defense items and needs. Specifically, we can mention here local production of munitions, quarter-master items, mortar tubes, air force practice bombs, patrol sea craft, radio-communication sets, and mini-cruisers. And we are glad to note that this program has created some 4,000 job opportunities and generated foreign exchange through the export of some of these products such as the jeeps and radio-communication sets.

The specific projects within this broad program must be further intensified, so that we can progressively source locally more and more of our needs. It ought to be a sound principle to follow that our officers upon retirement move in this area which is of vital importance to the AFP.

In addition, we must now go into the development of repair facilities within the AFP. Too many of our military equipment and weapons today require foreign servicing whenever they break down, and this takes considerable sums from the AFP budget which could be more productively directed elsewhere.

In line with this new policy direction, I am now urging the AFP General Staff to plan and develop a program in this regard.

I have always believed that behind the principle of civilian supremacy, there is inherently a dynamic idea for the development of the Armed Forces. The civil authority basically seeks to render the national life more durable, more dynamic, and less susceptible to the momentum of divisiveness and disintegration inherent in every human society. While the object is to ensure civil dominance over the military, this does not mean that the Armed Forces should be shunted to one corner, ignored and alienated from the tasks and the opportunities on hand. On the contrary, such work can only be expedited with the participation of the Armed Forces. With its organizational talents and capabilities, the military in truth, is one of the most potent instruments for pursuing and attaining national goals.

This approach has of course been the subject of misinterpretation and in certain instances, intentional misinterpretation. The more rabid elements of the political opposition have the deplorable habit of describing our efforts at optimizing the Armed Forces’ participation in national development as evidence of growing militarization in our country.

All political systems of every ideological hue and persuasion agree that the primary right and responsibility of the state is to maintain and defend itself. It has this obligation not only to secure the stability of governmental institutions, but just as important to guarantee the physical security and well-being of the citizenry. What makes the more recent efforts to strengthen the Armed Forces so starkly noteworthy is the fact that for so long previous administrations had chosen to pass over the military for considerations that you and I can only speculate on. For an incredibly long period, the Armed Forces had been left to fend for itself, to subsist by the pittance that the old politicians had thrown their way. It was perhaps a manifestation of the fundamental subservience towards a foreign power that characterized past governments; so-called national leaders who viewed the issue of defense not from a national perspective, but through the obsequious eyes of a colonial who could feel safe only under what to them was the awe-inspiring aegis of a foreign superpower. This policy not only alienated the Philippines from the rest of the world who suspected us, and not without some reason, of being less than the independent nation that we claimed to be.

More insiduous was the effect that this same policy had on the Armed Forces. A national defense posture that positioned the country as a mere adjunct of the defense structure of a foreign power logically led to demoralization among the officers and men serving in our military establishment at the time. While they held the frontlines, our soldiers naturally felt resentful of the attention, or rather the lack of it, that was being extended to them. And now, the people who brand our efforts at enhancing our network of defense as militarization are the ideological successors of those same leaders who brought this nation to the brink of national disaster by virtually ignoring the need to upgrade our military capabilities

If our defense budgets therefore have grown over the past decade, this is also because the involvements of our Armed Forces have similarly increased.

For a country such as ours, the maintenance of an able Armed Forces, able to keep the peace and secure the nation, is a precondition we must fulfill if the work of development is to proceed unhindered attention to peace and security is a logical function of development in a changing society such as ours; and whether we like it or not, the cost must be borne by us. This is part of the price of independence, and of the cost of progress.

And I fervently hope that for such an Armed Forces as we have now—loyal, dedicated, vigilant, and progressive—this is a price that our people if willingly pays, and for which the nation is well-rewarded.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.