Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 18th National Convention of Manufacturers and Producers

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, May 28, 1971]

The Challenge of Reform

LONG AFTER MY second term is ended, I shall certainly cherish it as one of the major achievements of my two administrations the fact that I have never failed to accept your invitation to address your annual convention.

This is my sixth year, and I think this is my sixth appearance before the chamber. Knowing fully well that every year you have your crises and grievances, some fanciful and some valid, I come back every year, I keep coming back to absorb more blows from the chamber because I know that they are given with sincerity and given with the hope that they will help in attaining needed reforms. For reformation in government and society is not just a sudden discovery of the year 1970 or ’71, for government and society live upon change and reformation. Man himself started out with a compulsion for reformation, for if he had not reformed, like the other elements of his environment, he would have disappeared with them.

I am pleased to note the healthy and continuing pre-occupation of our private industry with social involvement in our task of nation building. Today, you reiterate in your 18th convention theme — “Philippine Industry and the Challenge of Reforms” — this responsible and sustained commitment to larger purposes than the profit motive and certainly nothing can encourage a government leader more than this. I feel that history shall long remember this timely harnessing of your entrepreneurial dynamism to candidly reappraise your role in our imperative drama of national reformation.

The challenge of reforms is not a monopoly of any segment of our society today. When we first called upon all our people to initiate the democratic revolution, it was precisely to underscore the universal application of an emerging mandate for national reforms. Leaders of government and captains of industry, the professional, the student, the housewife, and the ordinary citizen — all alike are confronted with the challenge to institute reforms in their own distinctive spheres of influence. But if we are truly to succeed in a rebirth of national purpose and achievement, it is imperative that whatever desired reforms are to be realized must be a common endeavor and not a partisan, selfish, private solution; must affect not only institutions but also the hearts of men; must not consist of words alone but of actions; must pervade all segments and levels of our society with unbiased prosecution and intent of purpose. The very soul of such a national reformation clearly dictates not only a political, but also a social as well as cultural, moral and economic renovation.

This indeed is the answer of an ordinary citizen, or of any man for that matter, to the cry we often hear from some of our desperate youths. They say, reform! And add, win reform by bloody revolution. Always, the ordinary citizen responds, reform yes; bloody revolution, no! For we can still attain reform by peaceful means. And, therefore, I am personally encouraged when I hear of the efforts of such organizations as the Philippine Chamber of Industries, to initiate reforms within its ranks, and to speak of social conscience as a part of business and, at least temporarily, superseding the profit motive.

That our political institutions need reform, there is hardly anyone who will deny. Indeed, a fundamental revision of these institutions is the very purpose of the coming Constitutional Convention. I was asked by the leaders of the House of Representatives and of the Senate, before the approval of the Constitution Act, whether it was timely to call the Constitutional Convention in view of the confusion and chaos apparently prevailing in our country. And my answer was an unmitigated and uncompromising, yes, it is timely for this is the answer to those who seek revolution, as it is the answer to our problems and the riddles of our epoch. The awakening expectations of our people express their best wishes and hopes for success in this historic endeavor to the members of the Constitutional Convention which I now reiterate and express here.

And yet, we must all realize that desired reforms in our political life need not wait for an amendment of our fundamental law. Indeed, it has been one of the priority objectives of my administration to complete the vital overhaul off our entire government structure before the end of this current fiscal year. The Reorganization Commission which I have directed to undertake this comprehensive renovation of our governmental machinery is even now finalizing its recommendation. And its recommendations, which have now leaked to the press are even now meeting with criticism from all quarters. I am sure that this recommendation will reflect a new and revitalized blueprint of governmental institutions more responsive to the socio-economic urgencies of our times, and the need for speedy dispensation of justice as well as of social welfare.

Because we firmly believe that justice delayed is justice denied, I have continuously tried my best not only to appoint men of unquestioned moral integrity, judicial competence, and human compassion to the judiciary, but also to fill every vacant bench with the least delay. And yet, we must confess that the task of instituting reforms can sometimes proceed at a pace to provoke everybody’s impatience and the pessimism of some. You will, for instance, recall our recent temporary financial difficulties and our effort to institute financial reforms. The pessimists started heralding the threat of financial chaos and the ultimate collapse of our economy. We can now smile back at such dire predictions. For our adoption of an exchange reform program that featured the floating rate, complemented by the passage of the Stabilization Act, not only restored equilibrium in our balance of payments but also established monetary stability in our domestic front. And, perhaps, it is timely too at this stage to remind ourselves of why we acquired the balance of payments problems. The encouragement of manufacturing and production from 1966 to 1969 resulted in the fact that in; 1969, 90 per cent or more of the dollar expenditures went to factories and raw materials, with raw materials constituting about 45 per cent. In short, in that year, 90 per cent of all the dollars that we spent abroad went to you; the manufacturers and the producers, and this resulted in the foreign exchange problem for that year.

The problem called for the adoption of the floating rate and other measures necessary to solve the said problem of balance of payments. The manufacturers and producers grudgingly agreed to the measures of self-restraint, and I say this because I heard objections from some quarters, but all in all you did agree voluntarily. The private economic sector by and large has cooperated with the Central Bank, the monetary authorities, and with the government. And so I have come tonight to congratulate you for it. I came here to say to you that we have cleared the hump. We ended the year 1970 with a comfortable surplus of $112million in stark contrast to the deficit of $68 million in 1969. But although we can now take pride in the continuing surplus position in our balance of payments—indeed for the month of April we enjoyed a net surplus of $27 million — this is however, no time to throw fiscal and financial caution to the winds. We shall, therefore, continue the strict adoption of the following financial policies: No new foreign borrowings shall be allowed in over-crowded areas of business activity. In contrast, preferences for new external debts shall be accorded to new ventures and/or expansion in (1) export-oriented industries; and (2) BOI approved priorities. Domestic savings shall be encouraged thru more effective monetary, credit, and fiscal instruments, even as continued vigilance in maintaining relatively stable prices will be increased.

I am glad to note that your responsible and resilient entrepreneurship has consistently supported my industrial strategy of promoting the development of intermediate and capital goods industries; of accelerating the economic chain of backward and forward linkages; of encouraging export-oriented industries which utilize indigenous raw materials, and generate greater employment opportunities; and lastly, of hastening the geographical dispersal of our industrial development. There was a question asked of me sometime ago as to why we were encouraging economic investment in the far south, in Mindanao. The answer is simple. It is because of the fact that Mindanao is below the typhoon belt, and we have suffered severely from typhoons in the last year-and-a-half. The record of your response to this industrial reformation is, heartening. For you have already registered with the Board of Investments some 171 enterprises with a total capitalization of P1.4 billion in peso counterpart. It is particularly noteworthy that 48 of these registered firms have accepted their socio-economic responsibility of pioneering in such risky areas as pulp and paper, nickel smelting, communications equipment, machinery and other industrial requirements. In terms of employment generation these registered firms created a total of 29,694 direct and new employment opportunities, of which 12,853 are in Mindanao, 1,586 in the Visayas, and 15,625 in Luzon outside of the Greater Manila area. I am told that the direct labor generation of these enterprises could very well add another 30,000.

These are the major reforms in our industrial development, which I propose to continue in joint collaboration with you. For I believe that the narrow, inward-looking and superficial economic strategy of our early days in import-substitution is no longer adequate to provide sufficient employment opportunities for our people, raise the nation’s standards of living, and bring about greater economic stability. I propose to continue and accelerate our national drive to awaken a sharp and intense export-consciousness among our businessmen. And to this end I propose to tear down the greenhouse atmosphere of excessive tariff protection within which many of our domestic enterprises have long continued to be infant industries; and make them competitive in the world market. However, don’t be shocked by this statement; this is a long range plan. The Export Incentives Act of 1970 shall be reexamined in order to better reflect the types of benefits our exporters need. And in order to insure the equitable distribution of the benefits of our economic development, I shall continue my fight against oligarchies, and insist that the ownership of our enterprises be open to equity participation by as wide a segment as possible of our people. And small business shall not be forgotten. The entire machinery of my administration shall be harnessed to promote the socially desirable and profitable interaction between industrial complexes and small-scale suppliers.

In agriculture, we shall persevere in our campaign to promote the green revolution. We shall not rest until a land reform program truly and justly restoring the farmer to his rightful dignity as a co-producer of, and a co-sharer in the nation’s prosperity will have been operational. However, there is a new strategy with respect to land reform. Land reform is not just conversion of the sharecropper into a leasehold farmer, or the distribution of land acquired by government, each farm lot chopped into small family units of 5 hectares. This is self-defeating because in the next or second generation the landholding will be so small that they would not be economical. And, therefore, we now attack the problem of land reform and tenancy reform through cooperatives. We are now busy in Magalang, Pampanga and in Llanera, Nueva Ecija, setting up this project. It is our hope that before any land is distributed, every farmer or tenant who intends to acquire his own property shall be obliged to participate in cooperatives, producers cooperatives, consumers cooperatives, irrigation cooperatives; for cooperatives have been the secret of many countries in the world. In Magalang and Llanera, we have adopted the Moshav style system of cooperatives from Israel. And I notice that the ambassador of Israel is here, and I would like to thank him on behalf of our government for the help that he has extended to us.

At the same time, we shall encourage further expenditures not only of the government but of the financial institutions of government on two premier areas. These areas are massive housing and electrification. On housing, we intend to spend or have available for expenditure in this year alone a total of P400 million. It is my hope that the private sector will come and participate by presenting proposals for private land developers in the construction of low cost housing. It is my policy to see to it that the P400 million, which shall come principally from bonds and from the GSIS and the SSS, will be utilized principally by the private sector and not by the government.

The second area of expenditures is electrification. We have a program of spending which entails P600 million in the next several years for a nationwide electrification program. This program shall include sources of funds like reparations, USAID, loans and the general fund of the government. The program is properly funded and it is proceeding very well.

Much as we desire to institute reforms, unless our citizenry and the private organizations participate in their crystallization, their formulation, their implementation, this monumental task facing our nation today will be as hollow as reeds by the riverside. This is why I find meaning and dignity in your role, as expressed in your resolution, in seeking reforms not only in your ranks but in government and in every segment of our society, reforms to be won peacefully. This is why I find meaning and dignity in the role our students and workers play as they peacefully demonstrate through the streets of our cities. For as long as they carry their placards peacefully and they cry out, their grievances within the limits set by the law, they truly form part of the vital, dynamic nation’s conscience. They awaken our people to their rights and their dignity as a human person; they remind the leaders of government and the private sector of their responsibilities transcending the private confines of self-interest; they set the pace and project the time constraint in this historic movement to satisfy pent-up urgencies and socio-economic expectations born of centuries of oppression. Understandably, the impatience of youth and the bitterness of long-suffering test, to its very limits, the law as an instrument of social change. But I continue to have faith that in the law is the only dignified instrument of social change, in the law is the true dynamism of national reformation.

In meeting the challenge of reforms facing the nation, today, lies the rebirth of our purposes and our dignity as a godly people. History is witness that our resilience and Oriental discipline have been more than a resourceful match against similar challenge in the past. But let us begin with reforms in our own hearts. Let us not cry out for political reform while intent upon concerning political favors at the expense of others. Let us not cry for social and economic reforms while not paying our workers even the old minimum wage. If we reform as individual citizens, this spirit of personal rebirth will be the momentum of a positive, national reformation. For have said repeatedly in the past that the secret of success in nation-building is that each and every citizen—child, man or woman — contributes, even a most modest share, to nation-building. I repeat, no matter how modest that share of each citizen may be, if it is given freely and from the heart, it shall participate in the great victories that we shall achieve.

And the challenge to begin is now!

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].