Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the launching of the Mabuhay ang Pilipino Movement

The Continuing Revolution

This is a special day, a unique day of tribute and celebration for our nation.

It happens that on this day we honor a hero to whom we owe much for giving vigor and glory to our race. On this day we refresh in our memory a past we are proud of and which we hold in high esteem throughout the world.

Therefore, it is only fitting on this special day that we launch a movement that should harness all the combined strength of our countrymen, so that it may serve as a bridge to a unified path towards the realization of our new society.

Our gathering today is a confluence of yesterday, today, and tomorrow.

In Bonifacio’s time, the cries of pain and protest brought together into fruitful union all the aspirations of Filipinos for nationhood and liberation. They brought together brothers, and for the first time in the history of our race. Filipinos recognized themselves as one people. That fateful union, led by the man we honor today, severed the ties of a subject people to their colonial master, and at the sacrifice of life and fortune planted the flag of a new nation before the eyes of the world.

In a later time their sons and grandsons were to fight similar battles and raised the flag of intransigents to rally a broken people back to health and back to aspiration. In the days of the second World War, another generation of Filipino were to give up their lives in order that the nation may continue free and independent.

Today, in our time, a new cry summons into convocation all the strength of our resources — for the building of a new society. Today, several scores removed from the historic revolution launched by Bonifacio, and several decades from the days of Bataan, Corregidor and the underground, we are asked to make a new covenant with one another, not a covenant of sweat and honest toil. It was such a summons that brought us to that fateful decision two months ago that began the transformation of the face and soul of the nation. It is the same summons that bids us to gather here now and begin this important movement to do what we can together to contribute to that transformation.

This is our unique opportunity today, of you, as members of many communities and sectors in society, of myself, as the leader of our government, and of each and every citizen of this nation. For it is axiomatic that no matter how strong and dedicated a leader may be, he must find root and strength amongst the people. He alone cannot save a nation. He may guide, he may set the tone, he may dedicate himself and risk his life, but only the people may save themselves.

Our mission is at once the oldest and the most basic task laid before generations and generations of Filipinos since the birth of this nation: to make a people live in fruitful union, to know our capacities for self-advancement, to distribute what is ours to share, to make this a living place for every citizen no matter how low. This mission underlies all that we are doing today and all that we are committed to do tomorrow.

As with all undertakings, the matter of whether it is to succeed or fail depends on the will and the unity of those who undertake it, and it demands of is not only the utmost in sacrifices and idealism. In the enterprise of nations, success cannot be the gift of a leader alone, however dedicated and gifted he may be. It derives from the unity and the will of a people, just as the collective efforts of the generations that came before us — of the generations of Bonifacio, Rizal and Mabini — unified into one national consciousness the aspiration of a fragmented race. From the darkness of centuries new light illumined an entire race and made them conscious of being one people.

If the revolution of 1896 achieved anything at all, this was its signal victory and it was just a matter of time when the Filipino people would find independence and sovereignty in their own land. For the orientation and the movement to liberation had been set and no accident after that could alter the will of our people. But independence is simply the basis for a people’s advancement. It is not itself the path of progress. That, we have discovered.

Leaders now say: It is easier to win a revolution and harder to run a government of a free and independent nation. Twenty-six years of independence have not fully brought us the fulfillment of the dreams of our heroes and the restitution the blood, the sweat, the tears that went into the making of this nation. Three quarters of a century have passed since the sacrifice was made in a revolution, and the promise of that revolution remains to be redeemed.

The time of redemption has now come.

This is the unique opportunity given this generation of Filipinos living day. This is the privilege given to all of us. For what I see when I look at our nation today is a people awakened to their capacities as much as their needs. I see a people responding to their conscience and their responsibilities. I see society that knows the true meaning of community and even in the brief that has passed since September we all see around us the progress we have made and the kind of society that is within the talents of our people to create.

This is the vision that gives birth to this movement, the Mabuhay ang Pilipino Movement. Here are gathered the nation’s civic organizations into one common effort, to serve people and country. Even now as we launch crusade, there are thousands all over the country similarly launching this movement to realize the greatest good for the greatest number of Filipinos. In every provincial capital and in every city, rallies of this nature calling upon the people to unite behind this movement are taking place. And it may be that this movement that began with a handful and now commands the allegiance of thousand will tomorrow enlist the dedication of millions.

At the heart of this movement are ideals so basic, so important that the ability to organize it in the past speaks of the paralysis that was our condition for decades.

What are these ideals?

There is, first of all, the ideal of social concience that animates this movement. Social conscience has always been a basic principle for social reconstruction and social justice in a free society; where there are men conscious only of their self-interest, there is also a society that will always be perilously imbalanced. Benjamin Disraeli wrote once of the two nations that exist in society the rich and the poor nations living together in every country, in every nation. So long, he said, as the materially wealthy, the fortunate and the gifted exercise their powers merely for their own benefit, so long will the other nations of the poor sink in discontent until such a time when revolution will swallow up both nations.

It is the task of government to redress this balance between the two nations. It is the moral obligation of the fortunate man to help his less fortunate brothers to share of his talents and his resources, to bring up the lesser in life to his own level.

There is, secondly, the idea of unity that animates this crusade. In the past civic organizations moved along their specialized areas of interest and though indeed, it may be said that each of your organizations met with success, that was more competition than cooperation among organizations. And in the final analysis there was less good achieved than might have been realized had you been one integrated organization.

I do not say this is disparagement of your work in the past. Your work has, indeed, been noble. It will always be an object of admiration by all. But what I would emphasize here are the tremendous possibilities that are opened by your will to organize yourselves now into one organization, into one movement. It comes, I believe, from the sense that has come upon us of being one people with one common burden and one common hope. As one great thinker has said, we are bound by the double ties of common origin and common destiny. What happens to one will happen to all and let no man forget this. For without unity we can only dissolve, as in the past, in a fruitless quibble over credit and self-importance. Today, it is possible for us to want community, to experience it and to make it viable.

For a nation is more than just the sum of citizens put together. In the final analysis, the life of a nation, its vitality, its reality, resides not in the boundaries of geography or race, but in the consciousness of every citizen in sharing a common identity and a common destiny with others. It is union that strengthens the most basic of social units in our society, the family. It is union that makes organizations effective. So also it is union that not only makes a nation strong, it is union that makes a nation.

The more we are able as individuals and as members of organizations or groups to conceive of our work in the larger scheme, the more shall we be able to fulfill our goals. It is precisely this sense of unity that I perceive in this movement we launch today and which I hope will continue to dominate it in the coming days.

Let us take care that this crusade will not be a mere niñgas kugon or that it will not remain as a mere repository of hopes and desires but a vehicle for the realization of such hopes.

Let it tell every Filipino that he belongs to this society whatever may be his origin, his race, his creed or his station in life.

Let it tell him that he shall share in the wealth of this nation and justly ask for the help of his neighbor, and more than this, let him be told by this organization and this movement that when he does desire and seek help, his neighbor will extend him help.

Let it tell him that he can contribute towards the building of the kind of society and community that he wants, not what other nations and races may want.

Above all, let us announce to him that in this great enterprise he has the opportunity to create rather than destroy.

There have been times in the past when the collective energies of all our people have been summoned together in one undertaking. There have been times of crises, times when we had to fight for our rights. Today, there is no war to fight. There is no foreign foe to evict from our shores. There are no Bagumbayans. There are no Bataans and there will be no Corregidors. There will be no medals to be pinned on the breasts of heroes. But in a certain sense, the calling today for fraternity is even louder and the cry of the native land is more poignant, more urgent. It is a call not for the valor of arms but the valor of honest, patient, dedicated toil.

We have begun this labor and I tell you that there is no force that can hold us back. There is no obstacle so large or so immovable that can deter us from finishing what we have begun.

It is no doubt a demand for long and arduous labor. But if we must live the perpetual sense of being faced by a Promethean task, then, so be it. Let it be the measure of our virtue that we seek no solace, no escape from this undertaking.

Dr. Rizal, reflecting on the difficulties to which his work had taken him wrote: “I seek no shade but light.” And so might we say in response to the challenge flung at us: We seek no solace, we will give no excuses. We seek no shade but light.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].