Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the 12th Biennial Convention of the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry

[Delivered on October 27, 1978]

A Vital Link to the Filipino-Chinese Community

I DON’T KNOW how you came here but you must have come here before the typhoon. Thank God the typhoon spared Metro Manila, or for that matter, the Philippines. From a super howler, a super typhoon as it has been called, with a wind of 270 kilometers per hour at the beginning, it slowed down to 150 kph., and later on, to 100 kilometers per hour. And the latest report indicate that it has veered north after slamming into Bicol. Providence has again smiled upon the Philippines and upon Metropolitan Manila, as well as the delegates to this conference.

I dare not imagine what could have happened if a 270-kilometer-per-hour typhoon hit Metropolitan Manila and Central Luzon, for that was its original course. Man has not yet acquired the capability to redirect or even moderate typhoons. So today, we can only fall back on our standard operating procedure. The moment the typhoon approaches, meaning, more than 120-kilometers per hour wind, we immediately declare what is called this “RRR SOP” or standard operating procedure, which means, all the teams for rescue, or relief, and rehabilitation are immediately organized and made operational. This was done immediately.

The latest reports on the path of the typhoon, north of Manila, seems to indicate that there has been some damage, but it has been minimal. The damage to public works like highways, irrigation, flood control, seems limited. The standing crops may have been affected, but because of the fact that we have had a good harvest in the last two years and a surplus — so much so that from an importer of rice, we have become an exporter — we no longer have a rice problem.

And so your 12th biennial conference with your theme, “A Rededication to the New Society”, is a happy augury of better times to come.

I am therefore impressed by the activities of the Federation, which I have watched with a keen eye since I was a member of the old Philippine Congress. If you will remember, I have appeared before you several times, many times.

I come today to again witness your recommitment to the New Society and your expanded support of its programs. Anyone who is acquainted with the works and deeds of the Federation during the last 24 years cannot fail to regard this commitment seriously, not only because of its interest in the business trading and manufacturing fields, but also because of the policy of assimilation liberalized under my administration as President, especially under the New Society. It is certainly of interest not only to the public sector but to the private sector as to what the federation does. This is why I have come here today, notwithstanding the fact that Malacañang is under water.

As you know, during high tide of the Pasig River rises to a level higher than that of Manila. Hence, the need for those retention canals along the Pasig. Some parts of Manila, and that includes Malacañang Palace, is very much lower than the high-tide level. The canals are fairly effective in coping with the normal, twice-a-day high tide levels but inadequate in containing the effects of heavy rains. And this is what happened today.

Laguna de Bay also has overflowed its banks. It is higher than normal level by three meters. For every meter that Laguna de Bay goes up, its waters encroach upon land by one kilometer for every meter of increase in its water level. It has increased its water level by three meters from normal. So in some places the waters encroach three kilometers around the periphery and the border of the lake. It is a big lake, probably the biggest fresh water lake in Asia, and there is only one small channel that drains it, the Napindan channel which is only about 80 to 90 meters wide. Perhaps you don’t know anything about it, but for the last several days I have been working on this, and so I think I should tell you.

In the last big flood in 1972, it took six months to drain Laguna de Bay of surplus water, because of that narrow channel, Napindan. And therefore, I have ordered that the channel be widened immediately. I have asked the suspension of the bidding for the construction of this $ 100-million hydraulic lock structure, which would allow the waters of Laguna de Bay to flow down to the Pasig river into Manila Bay.

I feel that the more important aspect of the problem is to drain Laguna de Bay now of its surplus water. So I have sent dredgers to Laguna de Bay to deepen the lake and widen the Napindan channel. Reports indicate too that the mouth of Pasig river has silted because of this strange confluence of tide and waves and wind and current. We have also ordered the dredging of the Pasig. I announce this because it is my hope that those who are now suffering from the floods will understand that we are trying to work on this immediately, within the short range and the long range basis of the plans that we have already initiated.

We are glad that in every disaster you have helped our disaster coordinating committee or center, because there is a center, as you know, in Fort Aguinaldo, where all communications are directed. It is the center that is run directly by the President and the Minister of National Defense, which coordinates all the efforts of both government and private sector. Some people sometimes think that the Red Cross is doing all the work. Well, the Red Cross advances all the funds and the government repays all such advances. So it is the government that actually spends for the operations even of such charitable institutions like the Red Cross. This is an understanding between the Philippine government and the Red Cross. Of course they have their own funds, and sometimes they spend this without replenishment from the government. The Social Service Ministry and the National Defense Ministry also help as well as all the other Ministries, including that of Industry and Trade.

I am happy to note that one of the most active volunteers in case of a disaster is the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chamber of Commerce.

During the entire period of my Presidency, which is now completing its thirteenth year, you and I have always cooperated and coordinated, a period which constitutes exactly one-half of the life-span of your organization. I should like to think that it has been the better half of your organization’s lifetime. In any case, it has certainly been the period when the federation established itself as the principal link between the government and the Filipino-Chinese community, and emerged as the active agent within that community for its integration into the national life and its mobilization in the national development effort.

During this period the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry accomplished much. It served as an effective and trustworthy outlet for the generous and humane impulses of your community, collecting and donating millions of pesos for charitable purposes.

The most important of the Federation’s social welfare projects has been the long-term program to augment the government’s efforts to provide school-houses particularly in the underprivileged communities.

Our population growth has been reduced from 3.01 to 2.6 or 2.5 or thereabout. It still is high. We still have about a million lives added every year. You know what that means in terms of schoolhouses. Every year, we have to add more schoolhouses, more teachers, more educational facilities, or anywhere from 500,000 to 900,000 every year. And this of course strains our resources.

We are indeed very happy to have the federation participating, as representatives of the private sector of your community in setting up the schoolbuildings, especially, in the outlying and distant barangays of our country.

I must acknowledge the fact that you are building a two-story building named after my late father, who was killed during the war. I must say that certainly the federation officials know how to come close to the heart of the President.

But whatever you are doing has certainly promoted brotherhood and the unity among our people. You are well aware that we are fighting an insurgency, an insurgency which seeks to divide our people and pit class against class. You are well aware that the various groups, the leftists and the rightists, have raised the issue of our New Society not exerting the utmost effort to spread wealth equitably. You are demonstrating in your activities the fact that even without government assistance you are there participating in the compassionate effort to uplift the underprivileged. And thus those who have more in law, are getting actually what the better and more affluent elements of our society can’t afford to part with.

I am also happy to note the happy relationship that exists between your federation and the various Ministries. You certainly know whom to invite anyway. You have invited here the Ministers of Industry, Minister Paterno; and of Trade, Minister Quiazon; and the Commissioner of the Securities and Exchange Commission. You also have a representative of the Solicitor-General and the Court of Appeals. Now that is quite a lot. Even without the participation of the President, you got a broad base of support. But you are entitled to it and this is what we have always emphasized.

In the past, in the old society, your federation was witness to the fact that government officials would take advantage of power and authority in order to extort not only political funds, but sometimes personal funds from your community. When I became President, I promised you that we would put a stop to all of this, and that there would be no second-class citizens in our country. And this is true not only with your community, it is also true with the hill tribes and other non-Christian tribes to the south: the tribes in my part of the country, the North; in the mountains; the tribes in the South, the Muslims; and the original natives and inhabitants of our country.

We have followed a policy unflaggingly, resolutely, not allowing any influence whatsoever to veer us from the original objective. That ours will be a nation united, because not only government but the people, the nation itself, have found a single identity — the identity of a Filipino, and that identity will be something of which we can be proud. That each and everyone of us, whatever be your beginning will be able to stand up proudly before anyone, whatever race, country, and clime, and say; I am a Filipino and I am proud of it.

I am indeed happy to see that your community is fast moving towards that day when there will no longer be a difference between those who belong to this federation and those who belong to other federations whether completely Filipino or not.

I notice that you have all kinds of liaison committees with all the Ministries, and other offices, and I am very happy about that. You should continue this liaison. The only office with which you don’t have a liaison committee is the Office of the President, and I know the reason for this. I know that your officers can see me any time, because I have ordered and directed that any time there is a problem of the federation the matter shall be brought to my attention personally so I can attend to it.

Now on the question of liberalized naturalization, I notice that the president of your organization is very diplomatic as usual. He said, many have applied and many are on the way to becoming citizens. He did not mention the fact that out of the 40,000 who have applied, about 20,000 have become citizens and the other 20,000 are still pending. I know that he wanted to say, how about hurrying this up. Well, I have the figures here. Under Letter of Instructions No. 170 in 1975, there were 19,334 applicants. I have issued various decrees one of them Decree No. 836, which included about 2,802 petitions approved. Under Presidential Decree No. 923 in 1976, 4,136 were granted citizenship. Under Presidential Decree No. 1055 of November 29, 1976, 4,165 were given Filipino citizenship. Then under Presidential Decree No. 1220 of October 17, 1977, last year, 5,295 or a total of 18,398 were given Filipino citizenship.

Now 2,936 applications are still pending action by the special committee on naturalization. Then I issued LOI No. 491 in which a total of 19,507 applications were filed. The interviews commenced September 1977 at the rate of about 50 applications per day. That’s all that the Solicitor General can handle. In the meantime, I have appointed additional assistant solicitors in order to attend to this backlog. And as of October 16, 1978, a total of 13,245 applications were attended to, or applicants interviewed. And 6,262 petitioners are awaiting interview. No applicant for Philippine citizenship under this latest LOI 491 has been granted Philippine citizenship.

I therefore take this occasion to issue a directive to the Solicitor General and to NISA, the NISA through Major-General Ver. I hereby order that the interviews and the recommendations to the President be now accelerated, so we can approve the applications of those who are cleared by the special committee, of which the Solicitor General is the active agent. Now we have one of the assistant solicitors here. I ask you with the obligation to carry this directive personally to the Solicitor-General, who I think is not yet back from abroad. He is supposed to attend some kind of a meeting in Washington and New York. But as soon as he is back, he will attend to this and we will accelerate the approval of these petitions.

Now we should not interpret the approval of an application as the end of the effort at assimilation and integration. This is just the beginning. The juridical act of naturalization, in the case of the new citizens as in the case of the old ones merely clears the way for actual assimilation and integration. It does not automatically accomplish them.

There remains the long, difficult and complex task of converting a legal commitment into a political, economic, social and cultural one. It is long, difficult, and complex because it requires, in the last analysis, a process of education; not just education in the narrow sense of formal schooling in an institution, although that too is important, but in the broad and permeating influence which our institutions and the entire society itself, with premeditation, can exert on the personal life and allegiances of an individual.

It is obviously not a task for your Federation alone. But I wish to put it in the high priority agenda of your Federation. For if we all fail in this long-term task, not all the good works of the Federation or the President would avail to make up in this essential and indispensable goal.

The last significant activity of the Federation which I wish to cite is the one it undertook as a chamber of commerce and industry and upon my personal appeal. I refer to the Federation’s effort that began in 1970 to promote among the overseas Chinese in Asia and America and all over the world, our export trade and the investment opportunities in our country. The Federation’s efforts, as you all know, resulted in a number of business missions sent to our country, and eventually in some increase in trade and investments, and in your sending of missions, some of which were headed by your own president and your honorary president.

To this, I would like to add now a request that the Federation participate in clarifying the image of the Philippines abroad. While we do not hold it against the media of the West, or the Western press, to print whatever they feel their perceptions may be of our New Society, you are well aware that there have been distortions of the reality of Philippine society. And the government, as well as our people, are concerned. I know that you are concerned because many of you have called my attention to the fact that the Western press apparently is not doing justice to our New Society and our country. They talk about human rights as if no one here had human rights, of our government as if it were an unpopular government, an undemocratic one, of constitutional authoritarianism, as if it were a tyranny and a dictatorship.

Well, you and I know that there are many deficiencies in our society, but certainly those are not the true faces of our country and our nation. I therefore ask you now to participate in an overall effort to clarify the image of our New Society. In view of your re-commitment today to that new society, I am certain and confident you will go a long way if you dedicate yourselves to this particular task.

Certainly this Federation can play a very crucial role in expanding our country’s economic relations increasing our country’s economic cooperation not only with our ASEAN member-states, but with other countries including the United States, Europe, England, Japan.

There are, of course, problems as well as opportunities which are immediately discernible in this possible field of endeavor. If the so-called Overseas Chinese communities in the ASEAN member-states constitute separately an extremely important sector in their respective national economies, and jointly a ready base for quickening intra-ASEAN economic relations, the history of the relations of these Overseas Chinese communities with their host and native populations urges us to take care not to exacerbate latent animosities or upset delicately balanced adjustments and accommodations arrived at with pain and patience.

I came here to assure you that as long as I am President, knowing as you do that I am aware of the great effort that has gone into the maintenance of such a balance in the establishment of such a partnership, you can rest assured that we will continue with this policy, and treat everyone, whether Filipino or not, with justice, fairness and equality.

There is of course the need of these communities under the umbrella of ASEAN, by reasons of numbers, to inevitably play a role which is so crucial and important, to promote cooperation within the regional economy as well as radical harmony within the national communities. This is a goal that cannot be attained without thought, premeditation, and planning. You and I must look into all of this with deep insight, sincerity in our hearts, and mutual trust, and discard all the suspicions that have sprung from the years of turmoil, and organize our efforts, because there is need, my friends, for unity.

This is the second long-term task which is not for the Federation alone to tackle but which nevertheless I wish to place on its permanent and high priority agenda.

In my brief review of your activities during the 12 years of our association and partnership, I have identified those activities where your success and recent developments in our foreign relations have provided this challenge and opportunity to pursue long-term and essential goals.

The record of your achievements assure me that you will be equal to your share of these tasks.

Your government assures you, too, that it will continue to extend to you the strong arm of protection, especially from the Office of the President.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].