Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On launching of Crops Insurance Program

[Delivered on May 7, 1981]

In several other speaking engagements I have had occasion to propound on the theory that typhoons may have helped develop the resiliency of the Filipino. A farmer sees his crops after months of backbreaking toil, destroyed by the single sweep of torrential rains; but when the storm passes, the farmer grim but uncomplaining picks up his tools to salvage what can be saved, and to plant once more to replace that which nature has unexplainedly taken away. Fishermen see their fishponds crumble under the awesome weight of raging floodwaters, washing away precious investments that are the sum of long years of labor and savings; but as soon as the deluge has ebbed, no time is wasted to fretting—the dikes must be rebuilt, new spawn planted without delay.

I said these in the context of a proposition which is as valid now as it was at the beginning of the human race: in the face of a challenge, human beings develop more rapidly. To the same effect, albeit on a larger plane, is Toynbee’s observation that civilization have usually flourished in the face of great challenges, but wilted and consequently declined when these challenges disappear.

The key however, is that these challenges must be met collectively especially when they originate from forces over which man has little or no control. The case of typhoons and other natural calamities is starkly descriptive of the risks that agricultural producers in our country face season after season against which individually they are helpless and without any effective recourse.

We have now begun to resolve this age-old predicament, and I would even dare say that changes that will follow in its wake will be nothing less than dramatic. Against the long history of our agricultural producers’ helplessness in the face of natural calamities, we have fashioned an instrument for collective protection; and this instrument is a crop insurance scheme—the first of its kind that our nation has ever seen. Crop insurance will cushion the devastating effects of erratic climatic conditions, even as it provides the sense of security conducive to sustaining the momentum of productive growth. Rather than succumb fatalistically to harsh meteorological vagaries, we have chosen to arm ourselves with a potent mechanism that can blunt the capriciousness of nature.

Crop insurance has taken some time in coming, this is true; but schemes such as this one are not born overnight. They are important stages in the lengthy continuum of long-range social engineering that is an essential prerequisite if our total agenda of reforms is to be carried out, and carried out effectively.

Up till the early 70’s, our agricultural development programs were an interesting, if tragic, study in contrasts. Well-meaning policies for agricultural growth stood in stark contrast to lacklustre implementation and performance. Against a long recognized and oft-articulated need for an integrated approach is the record of dispersed, irrational and, ultimately, wasteful utilization of resources. There have been sincere attempts to increase production that almost immediately are bedeviled by the absence of provisions for marketing and related supports; a drive to develop production technology without building up the capability of farmers to utilize this technology; pricing incentives meant to prevail throughout the country but with limited actual outreach; and all this against the backdrop of a feudalistic land tenure system.

I have tried to telescope the past in this manner in order to better depict the circumstances under which we vowed early in my administration not merely to neutralize a rebellion but, more radically, to extirpate its causes—the basic inequality and injustices in our social system. A good three-fourths of our people are rural-based and rely on agriculture for both their sustenance and their livelihood. Two-thirds of our exports are agricultural products, the fruits of the toil of our farmers.

Nonetheless we have had to adopt a two-pronged approach aimed at actual human development and increased agricultural production. You will recall that our very first act under the crisis government was to liberate our farmers from their centuries-long bondage to the soil where before they were only exploited as tillers. Yet we coupled this social vision with the launching of a package of services and technology that pragmatically addressed themselves to the issues of actual material growth. We have extended to the newly liberated farmers massive production credit which went along with production knowhow and vital production inputs; feeder roads and other infrastructure to make farms more accessible to market centers; irrigation that substantially increased cultivable land; and rural electrification that not only made possible the acquisition of a greater range of creature comforts by rural populations, but perhaps more importantly made more feasible the dispersal of industries to the countrysides.

The last eight years of these efforts have been an outstanding period of drastic changes, the most spectacular of which has been the very welcome shift from a deficit production economy to a surplus, net-exporting one. Extensive and meaningful as these changes have been in upgrading the livelihood and living conditions in the rural areas, the task that we have taken upon ourselves is far from completed; much has yet to be done. And one of these is the program of crop insurance that we are now launching.

Agricultural producers in the typhoon-prone regions time and again face the prospect of bankruptcy every time destructive winds devastate their crops. Monsoon rains trigger off floods that inundate and destroy vast tracts of farmlands, while prolonged dry spells in other areas give way to drought, not to mention the all too regular outbreak of plant disease and pest infestation.

We have of course, managed to control by some degree a number of these threats; unfortunately we have not yet learned how to master our climate. The yearly toll these disasters take in terms of investments lost is staggering, and available data covering the last 10 years show that these losses have amounted to billions of pesos, all told representing a substantial drain in our economy. It is relatively easy to rattle off the statistics: P2.45 billion lost from 1968 to 1975, and the figure—staggering as it already is—may have increased by 1980. It must be noted that 63 percent of these losses can be traced to the effects of typhoons and floods, while the remainder to drought, plant disease and pest infestation. But statistics and percentages have a queer way of fostering a detached and impersonal perspective which is the least of our intentions. You have only to watch the face of a farmer whose crop has been ravaged by floodwaters to feel a growing sense of despair as his tomorrow becomes uncertain. Removing that uncertainty is the aim and function of crop insurance.

At the outset we shall limit the scheme’s coverage to rice farmers and only to the extent of their production inputs—which, however, include even the cost of labor and therefore, when loss occurs makes the recovery of all investments possible. If and when we are able to feel our way better in the implementation of this new concept, we shall widen the insurance coverage, and even expand to other crops. To make this type of social insurance available to all who need it, government is assuming a major portion of the premium. Of the total premium of 11 percent—which is rather sizeable, our government pays 7.5 percent.

Where the insured is a farmer borrowing under the government’s supervised credit program, the participating lending agency becomes a twin beneficiary. The fact that all farmers borrowing production loans are automatically covered means that in case of loss from a risk insured against, the individual farmer’s loan is repaid by crop insurance to the lending institution. The farmers’ credit standing is protected, the risk of the lending institution secured. For this coverage the farmer pays a two percent premium; the lending institution, a mere 1.5 percent. Lest we be misunderstood, protection is available not only to the borrowing farmer but also to the self-financed farmer provided he comes under the supervised production program. Crop insurance is not only meant to extend a mantle of protection from losses, it is also a complementary component of the supervised credit program the main targets of which are increased food production and the maximization of land use by encouraging modern farm practices

The risks insured against are nearly comprehensive: typhoon, flood, earthquake, volcanic eruption and the like; all diseases endemic to plants; as well as all pest, rodent and insect infestations. Available data indicate that a major percentage of the delinquencies—from which many institutions are now suffering—can be traced to losses resulting from these risks. Crop insurance may well be the answer to the liquidity problems lending institutions face everytime crop failures occur.

It is hardly necessary to state that crop insurance is no panacea for all the ills and problems of agriculture. On the other hand, there is no denying the fact that when properly implemented its impact will be felt not only in the farming sector and lending institutions; it will, I am confident, serve as a springboard for faster paced rural development; it will act as a catalyst for greater economic and social change in the countrysides; and over time, it should translate itself into a worthy, and meaningful investment in human resource development.

For the individual farmer himself, toiling as he does under all the uncertainties inherent in agriculture, crop insurance will in all likelihood function as the touchstone of faith to which he can anchor his hopes for a better and more secure future.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.