Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the third anniversary of the Philippine Association of Defense Contractors

[Delivered on June 30, 1978]

Self Reliance in National Defense

THE OPPORTUNITY TO participate in this national symposium on the Self-Reliance Defense Program of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and to join the Philippine Association of Defense Contractors in the observance of its third anniversary, is a very welcome honor for me, and I would like first of all to express here my personal appreciation for your very kind invitation.

There is no national issue today that is more urgent or more important than the subject of national self-reliance in the sphere of national defense. Over the last five years, development within the country and developments in the region and in the world have overwhelmingly compelled national concern and attention about the status of national defense capabilities. And it was in response to the currents of contemporary events that we have sought to adjust the national posture in regard to national security, and sought to build up our defense capabilities to such a point where the nation can be fully self-reliant.

The subject of your symposium therefore cannot fail to touch the very center of national leadership today.

When four years ago, we issued the landmark decree, Presidential Decree No. 415, which launched the Self-Reliance Defense Program of the AFP, we set the fundamental guideposts of the program. And these were, specifically, first, the development and acquisition of the material requirements of the AFP; second, the maximum utilization of indigenous materials for such defense buildup; and third, the overall development of national production capability with respect to defense material and weaponry.

Now four years after, those guideposts remain as the essential pillars of the program. It cannot be the least of our concerns today to consider how in fact we have fulfilled the spirit of the landmark decree, and how our objectives in national security have been advanced.

With respect to the acquisition of new material and equipment by our Armed Forces, it will perhaps be readily seen that our defense capabilities have markedly improved over this four-year period. We will note that there has been a substantial improvement in the quality of our arms, with respect to vital defense items which we can secure only through foreign sources.

Yet, it is a fact that we have never pinned our hopes for self-reliance solely on our ability to acquire arms and munitions from abroad. For our very limitations as a nation, the vital struggle for resources by many sectors of national life, had always decreed that we be prudent in the use of our resources. Thus, as a matter of national necessity, we recognized that defense self-reliance must be based as far as possible on the production within the country of our defense needs, and only in a limited way should it depend on the procurement from foreign sources of defense items which we cannot as yet produce.

Viewed in this respect, the health and vigor of our self-reliance defense program rests finally on how far and how well we are succeeding in promoting indigenous production capability, and in erecting a creative partnership between the military establishment and the industry sector.

This is the reason why a major part of the enabling decree sought to provide for incentives and support to the growth of civilian defense industries. This is the spirit of all that has transpired with respect to government assistance to those who contract projects related to our Self-Reliance Defense Program.

In the awarding of SRDP projects, for instance, we give specific preference to government corporations, Filipino-owned corporations, and to multi-national corporations with majority Filipino ownership.

Second, it is a matter of policy to contract SRDP projects with private corporation, in preference over the option of in-house manufacture by the Armed Forces. The AFP as a rule engage only in the manufacture of those items which cannot be produced by the civilian sector.

Finally, it is a matter of policy for the AFP to farm out the manufacture of components and parts of weapons to different contractors, in order to spread the economic benefits of the SRDP program and achieve precision through specialization.

Our overall vision was the development of civilian defense industries, which over the long term, can meet the defense requirements of the country. Only with respect to defense items that cannot be produced at home, would we resort to importation. And the same goes with the importation of technology, whenever local technology is not feasible.

Alongside this conscious effort to encourage private sector initiative in production for defense needs, we have formulated a comprehensive research and development program. In the Research and Development Center, we have now a fully working agency designed for meeting the requirements of our ground forces and for conducting research on material needs common to the AFP.

In liaison and in cooperation with civilian organizations, this stress on research and development has advanced the level of national capability for defense production.

When we consider the results, we have reason to be happy about the progress of SRDP. For what was but a dream four years ago now thrives and lives in the production activities of both the private sector and the AFP today.

Overall, there can be no question now that we have a viable framework for the achievement of the goals of national defense self-reliance. Our goals are feasible. Our program is workable. Our resources, military and civilian alike, are sufficient to meet targets.

The more delicate aspects of the program in here in the problems of management, in the maintenance of momentum and initiative, and in the fine interaction between the military establishment and the private sector.

And it is my belief that it is to those various aspects of the program that this symposium must look and inquire deeply. Our supreme objective now must be to increase the overall level of efficiency, sufficient to meet the growing targets of the program.

If in the past, our targets were smaller, today they are considerably larger. If in the past, there were only a few contractors and a few projects, today there are many. If in the past, we were striving to grip the handle on the SRDP program, today it is our utmost concern to steer it towards its proper direction and proper role in the national defense system.

The problems that must engage you here are those that come with growth. That is your achievement, but that is also your challenge now. And it is true both for those who command the leadership of our Armed Forces and those among you in the Philippine Association of Defense Contractors.

It is my hope that you will be equal to this challenge, and that your discussions here will result in new ideas and new initiatives that will advance the Self-Reliance Defense Program of our Armed Forces.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].