Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Fourth Regular Course of the AFP Command and General Staff College

[Delivered at Fort Bonifacio, June 1, 1972]

A Core of Leadership

IT IS, OF course, a great pleasure for me to be able to attend this graduation. As you are well aware, I have given special importance to this course of the AFP Command and General Staff College, at one time requiring it as a prerequisite to promotions to higher rank.

I am happy to be here with the officers who have proven themselves many times over before and today as we now add to their impressive credentials this graduation from this exclusive college.

I congratulate the administration and the academic staff of this college under the Commandant, Col. Gidaya.

In the immediate future, I look forward to the augmentation of the leadership in our Armed Forces, not to mention other areas of government and activity, through such advanced training courses as this which you have successfully hurdled, because in the tumultuous years of this decade and the next, our country will have great need of competent, inspired and imaginative leadership.

I am also happy to note the presence in these graduation ceremonies of three foreign students: one from the Republic of Korea, another from the Republic of China, and another from Thailand. To them, I extend special congratulations. They are here in accordance with the program of cooperation between their countries and our country in preparing not only for the defense of our respective countries but for the development of this region to which we belong.

The world is taking definite new directions today, directions away from old, the usual and the certain, away from the conventional and the tested, and onward to still undiscovered areas of living, of social and economic experimentation, and perhaps of fundamental political and ideological reforms. A tremendous change in our world is already indicated by events. And this change will raise a new and increasing challenge to nations and their leaders.

Already, we can appreciate the vast changes which have occurred in our lives. On the political front, fresh policies are evolving toward more restraint on the use of power, as for example in the desire of the United States to withdraw from wide involvement in power bloc alliances; in the emergence of the People’s Republic of China from its long isolation to mend its international relationships; and in the problem of the existence of the small nations, including that of the Republic of China; the efforts of Soviet Russia to project a new image even as a peace seeker. On the economic front, nations are already exploring new ways to carry on international trade on a novel basis, that is, no longer the basis of the dollar but by means of a more flexible system, which would obviate the wrenching fluctuations of foreign exchange rates when speculation in gold gets out of hand. On the social scene, we are witness to new cultures and subcultures; we are concerned with problems of ecology and the environment, things we had not even given a thought to only ten years ago.

Thus, if we must cope with the emerging world of tomorrow, in many ways a strange and alien world, we must evolve a new breed of leaders.

Today, even as we sit here in comparative equanimity, our country is faced with an inescapable problem—the problem of self-reliance. Events and the promise of greater change summon us to face up to this problem. No longer must we depend on the old certainty of powerful friends coming to our aid in a time of peril. It is not that we do not trust these friends, it is just that the world is changing in a way that they may not be able to come to our aid. No longer can we trust our destiny to the magnanimity of allies, nor to the concerted action of a family of nations aligned on one side. There may never be a gathering of allies anymore for that matter, as when the free world rallied to save an occupied France, or an embattled England; nor would the United Nations rise up in arms again, as when South Korea was invaded. Anyone who has studied the indications of current history will come to the same conclusion. With the war in Vietnam indelibly inscribed on the conscience of the world, there may never again be a spontaneous response to a country in distress by its friends. In every crisis in the future, a country must stand or fall alone. This seems to be the stark reality of our day and age.

That is why self-reliance is central and current to our problems today, and in confronting this problem, again we come to the imperative of leadership.

It is not enough that we find the material means to build a shield of indigenous forces. It is not enough that we somehow must amass an arsenal for defense. Contemporary experience shows other requirements, and for that matter history itself dictates the need for such requirements. Chief among these requirements is that we must have the leadership to use our resources well, whether these are economic goods, or formidable weaponry, or a strong army of citizens, or a viable industrial community. We must have men to show the way to the attainment of these goals. Whether it is in the military, or in the civilian sector, whether it is in politics or in business, the cry is for a new kind of leadership, a leadership not only adept, but dedicated, a leadership well trained. I repeat, even in politics there is a crying need for a new breed of leaders. The old class of political leaders that my generation still knows will no longer be able to bring about the kind of world that we want.

Today, those among us who wield leadership, or who have the makings of a leader, have a particular and special task to perform. This is the task of rallying our people, so that they will come together in essential unity to grapple with the most urgent of our problems.

I am convinced that our gravest problems would be easier to solve if we could generate enough unity among our people to consider together the directions and the means we should choose in overcoming the various problems that beset us. I am convinced that we have not achieved this unity, not since we all went underground together in the years of the Occupation, out of a deep and moving realization that the only way to survive, to defeat a superior enemy, was to fight together. Since then, we have reverted as a people to the old ways, or rather we have gone our separate ways, each, it would seem, looking out only for himself. The secret of strength in a nation, that of oneness of a brotherhood, has been lost somewhere along the way.

We therefore need leaders to awaken our people to the new aggressors that assail us; we need leaders to enlighten our people on the danger from the enemy within our country and within ourselves. We need leaders to forge a unity arising from a sense of common destiny. We need leaders to bring about the kind of living conditions which would inspire our people to stand together in defense of that way of life.

This is the special task reserved for the leaders that we must train and field all over the nation, whether in the military or in the civil sector.

I like to think that you, and others like you who have gone through this, course, are the leaders who shall form the hard core of this national leadership that I speak of. I like to think that in the difficult days to come, when we shall be charting new ways to meet old and new problems, when we shall be actively and deeply engaged by predictable and unpredictable crises, mere will be this hard core of leaders to stand fast, to work quietly and cooly, to remain unruffled and steadfast above the storm, to make the right and binding decisions.

If indeed we succeed in creating this body of leadership, then we can be certain that we shall attain our most urgent goal, that of self-reliance in a nation, whether it is in putting up a defense against external aggressors, or it is perfecting a stance of economic independence, or it is in elevating the social and cultural standards of our people.

I regard all of you who are graduating today as early components, the core, of the leadership we need. May you prove true to your trust, and may you continually post achievements in service to your country, now and in the years to come.

God be with you.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].