Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the annual induction of officers of the Naga Press and Radio Club

[Delivered on February 26, 1972]

The Press and Its Tasks Today

I MUST BEGIN by denying a rumor, which threatens to develop into a popular belief, that the Manila press is superior to its provincial counterpart.

I do not seek to flatter when I say that the Manila press may enjoy some; built-in advantages, it may have more of everything, but it is by no means: superior to the provincial press in the strict sense of the word.

The Manila press does not rank higher than the provincial press in dedication to a very demanding and nationally vital calling. In a general way, both. may have their own failings, but both are not without their respective achievements. On a good number of occasions, both have confronted those in government with some anxiety and concern; still, both have my personal goodwill and my fondest hopes that they will intensify the role that they now play in the common effort to improve the national life.

There are some in the media body today who accuse me of being allegedly partial to the provincial press. If this is so, it is perhaps because I know that the provincial press is pitted against terrible odds, and in many instances the provincial newspaperman does not have much of a chance.

The difficulties of provincial journalism are well known. In your countless seminars, conferences and conventions you have discussed these problems exhaustively. The provincial press cannot foster the professional growth of its personnel, nor improve its facilities and equipment until it gains the effective support of the advertising industry. On the other hand, this support can only be justified and induced through your growth as an effective advertising medium.

That you have not solved your problems merits our understanding, but that you are functioning as you are today and reaching out to your audiences as best as you can, merits admiration.

It is no easy thing to say what the press should do at this time, and how it should go about it, for this always invites grumbling and criticism, if not resentment. But there are few ideas which we may share along this line.

The press, let us understand, is indeed a major catalyst for meaningful change. As such, the press should be the most erudite of the radical sectors who advocate revolutionary change. In spite of passing appearances, however, it is not yet that.

We do not mean to deprecate the role that the press plays today in the social education of our people. There is no denying that it has sought to check the abusive, that it has championed noble causes; and that, to a certain degree, it has managed to broaden our people’s awareness of the changing circumstances and orientations of our national life.

And yet that is not enough. The broadening of the people’s awareness to national events, for instance, may be dimmed by the failure of the instruments of media to render that awareness more profound.

For the day is past when all that is required of the would-be journalist is the capability to write in the inverted pyramid. The profession has acquired more than a sense of craftsmanship, more than a community of interest. It has acquired a revered place in the integral self of the nation. Great then are the expectations of our people from the men and women who compose the journalistic corps. To betray these expectations is to betray the profession, perhaps, even the essential humanity of the practitioner.

Judge Charles Wyzanski, Jr. once said that “no society will ever be made by a mere collection of professionals. He who is only an editor and not a citizen . . . cannot by being merely added to the heap of other men similarly narrow in their professionalism give the foundation from which will grow a cohesive and meaningful structure.”

Consider with me then, the following tasks which I think lie upon the shoulders of newspapermen as citizens of our country today:

I believe that journalism in die Philippines could assume the initiative of taking a steadfast position on such fundamental issues as the manner in which the right to private property is to be recognized in the good society we are trying to evolve. This, for instance, would be one way by which the press can strike at the roots of the present social system.

I also believe that the Philippine press can and should lead a concerted attack against conservatism. Here, I would like to refer to two kinds of conservatism that have, in my view, obstructed the progress of a truly democratic revolution in this country. The first is the conservatism of the destitute who are so awed by the centuries-old grip of feudalism that they feel resigned to the helplessness of their circumstances. The other is the conservatism of the oligarchy who feel that they have little future in a reformed Philippine society.

This means that the press should both arouse and censure — arouse the conservative destitute by showing them the just possibilities of the times and censure the conservative rich in every instance that they stand in the way of democratization of our national life.

This, of course, is easier said than done. We can understand that the press has very little audience with the conservative destitute. We also know that much of the press is under the control of the conservative rich, that a good portion of the press is formed in the first place as a primary line of defense against any possible onslaught on the privileges that they currently enjoy a id jealously guard.

I believe, too, that insofar as the press wields a real influence on public opinion in this country, it can substantially assist in the proper and efficient functioning of the machinery of government.

For it is commonly perceived that public opinion today feeds much upon rumors which, in turn, are fostered by either our desires, our fears, or — on occasion — by an unbridled sense of mischief. We can only lament that often times the press has, wittingly or unwittingly, abetted such rumors in the name of the right to print what it wishes to print.

As to public interest, die press bears the grave responsibility of interpreting to, and distinguishing for its readers, a special interest that has been varnished with platitudes from the genuine public interest. This is a tedious task, for the fact is that public interest is virtually amorphous. It includes the interest of infants yet in their cradles, whose view of the world when they face it, we do not know. It includes the interest of our children yet to be born, and our own interest we hold today. No opinion survey, therefore, can serve as the touchstone of the concept of public interest. In the press, there is only the newspaperman’s conscience, and his God-given lights to guide him in this lonely task.

By the same token, the press can exert a regulatory influence on the pressure of public opinion upon the government. I submit that the working press can help render the pressure of public opinion on the government in the latter’s task selecting policies and making decisions, more selective, more reasoned aid therefore, more effective.

The paradox of democracy is that the sources of its strength are also the sources of its weaknesses. One of them is this: that since the elected authorities are accountable to the people, manipulators of public opinion use every stratagem and device to create upon government the impression that the opinion of a few is indeed the opinion of the entire populace. This is what the student of the science of politics perceives when he sees policies being dictated by the minority for their own ends—a minority who control certain editorial directions in the press.

It would be most convenient if there was a way of effectively excluding the term “people” the spokesmen of vested interests. But because they are favorably situated, they can present their demands more forcefully than the rest of us. They can even obstruct or paralyze government, particularly in areas where the political personnel are weak.

It is in such an eventuality that the press should bring to the arena of candid debate the real thinking and attitude of what represents the predominant number, and therefore, the predominant interest. Again, this is easier said than done, for it is only too facile to mistake one’s attitudes for the prevalent public opinion. It is only too convenient to mistake the directions of one’s prejudice for the public interest.

And yet the press must try and attempt the difficult. It must defy the dangers strewn in its way. For if the press fails to speak and take an audacious stand, it becomes, in effect, a reactionary force in a society that seeks revolutionary change so painfully. Failing to speak for a democratic and peaceful revolution, the press could well help deliver our people into the clutches of that monster that speaks the language of the gunpowder.

I trust that no one among you will be merely simplistic and say: “My only interest is to have the truth and once I have it, that is all.”

“Truth” is a word often abused by various elements of our society. No journalist, no public personality, and no man can rightly claim to have tucked the jewel of truth in some private pocket of his soul. The most that we can do is to catch some of its glimmer and hope that it will lead us to wisdom.

As the seventeenth-century Malebranch put it, “if God held in one hand truth, and in the other the pursuit of truth, I would say ‘Lord, the truth is for You alone, give me the pursuit.”

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].