Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Sugarcane Planters Convention

[Delivered in Bacolod City, February 24, 1971]

Sugar and Reform

OUR NATION IS faced with grave challenges. The adequacy of our political system is being questioned. The viability of our economy is undergoing a severe test. Authority is being asked to justify itself all over again at almost all levels of our national life. Our society is under siege on many fronts.

The quality of our response to these challenges will determine whether our nation shall survive or perish, whether freedom in our land shall endure or vanish, whether our future is one of unity and progress or disunity and perdition

As President, I have already made my choice. We shall fight, no matter what the cost, for the survival of our nation in freedom, in unity, in progress.

But your government needs the cooperation of all our people, including you, the sugarcane planters. In fact, in determining the quality of our response to the challenges facing us, you in the sugar industry are in a privileged position to contribute decisively. For you have been and still are among the privileged few in our society. You have the ability and certainly the duty to respond to the challenges of our time — challenges which are deeply felt in your particular industry.

At bottom, the problems confronting us are not new. They have been with us over the years. What is new is the demand — a deep and compelling demand — to confront and liquidate these problems in our time. What is new is the impatience of our people to act on these problems right here and now.

Therefore, we, who are under a sovereign mandate to lead our people at this time, are called upon to act. The days of procrastination are over. We cannot evade the challenges.

We have to act — now.

You in the sugar industry have no problems with the government. Under my administration, you shall continue to enjoy government support and protection. We shall maintain and even try to improve our existing market for sugar in the United States.

At the same time, guided solely by our national interest, we shall explore the possibility of opening up new markets for our sugar anywhere else it may be needed. Also, we shall continue to support industry plants to improve efficiency and raise productivity. Our policy is to accelerate the growth of the sugar industry.

Henceforth, however, growth in the sugar industry shall serve to narrow rather than widen the gap between the many who are poor and the few who are rich. Instead of enriching further the few who are rich, let us improve the quality of life of the many who are poor, the many who are ignorant and the many who are sick.

This is the new direction — the new goal. From now on, we shall measure progress in the sugar industry no longer in terms of new millionaires, but in terms of the number of people rescued from poverty, ignorance and disease.

How do we bring about this transforming redirection in the sugar industry?

The answer, as I said in my State of the Nation message, is a democratic revolution designed to integrate the working masses into the mainstream of wealth and power in the sugar industry.

The main agents of this revolution — a peaceful revolution for progress and social justice — are the trade union movement and the cooperative system.

Of course, there have been, as there still are, trade unions and cooperatives fin the sugar industry. Like our age old problems, trade unions and cooperatives have been with us all these years. However, they have not been allowed to function as fully and effectively as they should. They have not been allowed to fulfill their democratizing mission. Our task today in the sugar industry is to give them a chance to operate fully in the interest of real, democratic partnership between employer and employees.

In this spirit, I ask labor management representatives in the sugar industry to work out immediately practical schemes of cooperation in the field of housing. These housing schemes should be designed to provide, as soon as possible, a decent house and lot for every worker and his family in the industry. The government is prepared to provide technical and other forms of assistance in working out these schemes. In fact, I will ask the National Housing Corporation at the proper time to consider these housing schemes for sugar workers a part of the massive low-cost housing program of the government.

The housing schemes I have in mind should take care immediately of the regular workers in sugar plantations and sugar centrals. Eventually, however, the schemes should be expanded to cover the sacadas or migrant workers who constitute an explosive element of instability in the sugar industry.

If possible, in keeping with the spirit of the democratic revolution, I suggest that the housing elements be made an integral part of collective bargaining agreements. In this way, the housing schemes will become truly an act of partnership between labor and capital.

At the same time, I ask representatives of labor and management in the sugar industry to explore other practical areas of cooperation, including the setting up of consumers, producers and marketing cooperatives. Through labor-management negotiations, arrangements may be made through which management may provide seed capital for these cooperatives. The possibility of flushing the social amelioration fund for this purpose should be explored.

In short, I want to see, as soon as possible, positive and creative acts of partnership between labor and management in the sugar industry — acts of partnership designed, as I said earlier, to integrate the masses into the system of wealth and power in the industry.

Lessons on cooperatives from Scandinavia and other countries point to only one thing: cooperatives are our only workable compromise between free enterprise and socialism because while they preserve private ownership they restrain an otherwise unbridled desire for profits. Moreover, cooperatives result not only in a fairer distribution of capital and profit, but also distribute as fairly genius, skills and technology.

It is to your credit that more than any other group of farmers you are pioneers in cooperative endeavor. The Sugar Planters Cooperative Marketing Association, for example, was organized even before the war. You can, therefore, pioneer all over again in a new age of cooperatives in our country.

These are some starting points for a democratic revolution in the sugar industry. They are modest initial steps. Let us set to work on them as soon as possible — in the interest of a just, free and progressively sugar industry.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].