Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 5th Anniversary Program of “Let’s Talk Business”

Let's Talk Progress

I CONGRATULATE THOSE who have initiated “Let’s Talk Business.” I have always regarded your group as a brave little company because, like all those who deal with prognostications and projections you must think and act with courage. In an unpredictable and unstable area like economics, there is constant need for such boldness, matched of course by pan equal measure of knowledge and expertise.

I think it especially propitious that I should have this opportunity to discuss our economic prospects and the remaining problems we must face. Many salient phases and problems of our economic development you have already discussed on your various programs, and if instant solutions were not actually perfected here, at least we gained some perspective by examining our problems and our directions, our initiatives and our present situation. I hope that tonight, we have been able to do this and that I shall be able to provide further light by way of this short talk.

Perhaps the question that should be asked is, where is the Philippines today? Where are we in this first year of the new decade of the 70’s?

While it is too early to evaluate fully the efficacy of the measures we have taken to counteract the balance of payments pressures which had been mounting through the years since even before I became President, a comparison of the country’s external debt structure as of June 30 this year and that of a year ago gives some favorable indications. For whereas last year, of a total loan outstanding of $1,480 million, short-term borrowings accounted for 42 per cent, this year, of a total outstanding loan of $1,880 million, short-term obligations accounted for only 17 per cent. We hope to be able to attend to this 17 per cent.

This indicates the soundness of our new attitudes to the development process. For one thing, in the first half of the sixties, from 1960 to 1965, the government chose to retire the debt that it had previously contracted, instead of contracting long-term obligations. As a result, the trade deficit in some years was even compounded by net outflows in the capital account. This was an impossible situation. No country in the world has an infinite supply of international reserves; yet we had to finance not only the excess of imports over exports but also the net outflows of capital.

In contrast, today we accept as a matter of principle that trade deficits are inevitable during the development process. This is true not only in the Philippines, it is true in every developing country. These trade deficits, however, need to be financed. And since these deficits generally represent investments on projects which have a long gestation period, their financing is normally achieved through the inflow of long-term capital.

You are of course familiar with the exchange reform and stabilization program which have impressed the monetary authorities outside of our country. We shall not talk of them tonight therefore.

But let me say, however, that the resulting foreign trade picture for the first half of 1970 is quite satisfactory. International reserves, $165 million at mid-year 1969 and $126 million at year’s end, were up to $210 million in 3 mid-year 1970. This was largely due to the favorable developments in merchandise trade. While import payments fell from $575 million in the first half of 1969 to $534 million in the first half of this year, export receipts increased from $441 million to $515 million.

Consequently, the trade gap, $134 million last year, was reduced to only $19 million this year. And as I have already stated we have projected, and we expect on the basis of performance in the past several months, a surplus of $35 million at the end of December this year.

Now, on credit restrictions. We have been talking here of money in circulation. What has been the effect on the money supply, by credit restrictions?

The net effect of the measures we adopted was a contraction of money supply by P122.5 million from the end of 1969 to the middle of 1970 for the period of six months. I repeat we contracted the money supply by P122.5 million. Now, this may not be acceptable to Mr. Cabarruz and the rest of the big money group, but this is what has happened.

The first semester of this year was similarly characterized by fiscal restraint, so that while government cash operations for the first semester of FY 1969 yielded a deficit of P89 million, transactions during the first half of this year, the first half of 1970, did not end in a deficit but with surplus of P92 million. This reversion resulted not only from the moderation in expenditures but also from the increase in revenues derived from new taxes and better tax administration.

At this point, I wish to call your attention to an important empirical truth it our economic life. This is, that as the development process gets under way, the demand for infrastructure facilities is greatly intensified. At the same time, higher incomes, the increasing complexity of the economic and social environment, and the spread of popular education bring to bear increased demands for government expenditures.

Now, if all of these demands by the times should be financed, there would be a need to increase the proportion of government revenue to total national incomes. It is in recognition of this need that, in recent years, serious efforts were made not only to broaden the tax base through new tax measures but also to improve the efficiency of the tax collection machinery. Consequently, while in FY 1969 the ratio of government revenue to GNP was 8.4 per cent, the ratio, in FY 1969 was up 9.4 per cent.

Now, we still are not contented with this; we hope to be able to increase this. We have been thinking in terms of 12 per cent, as in other countries, but we are still a little way to go.

For this reason, this Administration has opted for the alternative of rapid growth through a budget deficit against the alternative of stagnation under a sterile but allegedly balanced budget, a budget that may consist of nothing but salaries for government employees. We feel that the government should borrow, but it should borrow principally for such, capital expenditures like irrigation systems, hydro-electric projects, roads, piers, airfields, warehouses, factories, ships and the like; otherwise the country will stagnate. In the past four years, capital expenditures grew at an average rate of 34 per cent per year. Current expenditures, in the meantime that we have been holding back, grew by 14.5 per cent per year. Furthermore, under the capital account, expenditures for economic development predominated throughout, maintaining an average ratio of 0.64. Under the current account, on the other hand, economic development expenditures recorded the biggest increases, running at an annual average rate of 23.6 per cent.

There is a current feeling that I am spending or we are spending too much on the Armed Forces. I would like to inform you that according to the records, we have been able to reduce expenditures of our Armed Forces from 17 per cent to 14 per cent of the budget.

In FY 1969, had we chosen to move sluggishly towards the already long delayed fulfillment of our growth aspirations, we would have continued to live in the false comfort of excessive caution and timidity. Instead, we faced up to the realities of our economic situation and acted accordingly. Those who would pot sympathize with our aims or who could not bear to see the government succeed for whatever reason have sought to sketch a dark picture of the deficit spending that a full-size development program has made inevitable in the meantime that adequate sources of revenue do not exist. But this was a decision which government had to make as soon as I became President and I hope that on your part you will comprehend the requirements that we have had to fulfill.

In 1969, as you probably know, our economic goals necessitated a recourse to borrowing to bridge the financial gap. What was this gap? This gap amounted to P750 million, which was occasioned by expenditures for projects of a most needful and indispensable nature. Here in Manila and in other centers of population the question is often asked, “My God what deficit spending! Where did it all go?” I wish some of our people here in Manila would go around the country, would travel on the roads we have built, count the school houses, the hospitals, the irrigation systems, the hydroelectric systems for these are where we have spent this money.

When I was still a Congressman I used to make very interesting studies on how much a president averages in expenditure per province. I discovered that most presidents averaged 5 million per province during their entire four-yet terms. Five million per province. Now, let us go to Bulacan or Rizal, and let us start with Bulacan, the smaller province. Do you know how much we spent in Bulacan in four years? We spent P400 million, and yet so many people here in Manila ask me, where did the money go? As if the public officers were running away with the money box of the treasury.

No, we have been spending this for what we feel are priority projects. Now, we may differ about what our priority projects should be, but certainly we all agree that we have to start spending on economic projects or we will stagnate. I agree with you though that we must spend on productive enterprises. Now, even that term productive enterprises has been the subject of long and serious and intense debate not only in the planning group but also in Congress.

These projects, for instance, that we have been talking about may include the Philippine-Japan Friendship Highway and the establishment and maintenance of more schools. I need not repeat here that we were, able to put up about 90,000 school rooms in four years. And that project does not amount to just small money. Also we spent on the construction of bridges, such as the one we built across the Cagayan River. Did you know that before I became President, there was not a single bridge across the entire length of the Cagayan River? And that whenever there was shortage of rice on the eastern side of the Cagayan River, there was a surplus of rice on the western side of the same river? This was so because rice could not be transported across to the other side since there was no bridge. We are now building several bridges over and across the Cagayan River, and across many rivers of our country.

We have also financed more power and irrigation projects and flood control facilities, but at the same time we have provided the necessary peso counterpart for necessary dollar borrowings. Calamities got their own share of our [increased expenditures.

Oh, yes, I have been asked, how has the series of typhoons affected the projections? The sugar people tell me that the projection for the industry should probably decrease by not more than 5 per cent, but the copra people in some provinces are worried. Catanduanes industry is completely wiped out so far as copra production is concerned. And abaca in the Bicol provinces, they say, has been greatly affected, but the other provinces were not as seriously affected as we had thought. So, this is our situation.

What of the years ahead?

In order to generate further investment activity, the bulk of public capital expenditures shall be concentrated on the continued provision of infrastructure and other social overhead facilities. We cannot lose the momentum now.

In this respect, the rural electrification program has high priority. At present, only 7.5 million of our entire population variously estimated from 37 million to 39 million, enjoy the benefits of electricity. Of this number, four million live in Manila, two million in other urban areas, and only 1.5 million in rural areas. This means that in the farms and barrios only one out of every 16 families enjoys the benefits of electricity.

The importance of electrification and our competence to provide it have been recognized even abroad. Only recently, favorable endorsement of our rural electrification program was secured from English and American bankers and financiers. Of course, some people have asked why the First Lady intervened in this offer. Now, let us see what her intervention was. She was asked what the Philippines needed, and you know she and I keep conversing about these things, and she is pretty well versed on the needs of our country, as well as I am. And so she pointed out frankly that one of the primary requirements and needs of our economy was electrification, and that is why she was asked to all these conferences on projects on electrification.

What are the other areas where we should undertake greater effort? Of course, these areas will include, and you have brought this out here, export encouragement, industrialization, population control, and control of our environment which includes such things as conservation and anti-pollution measures.

In earlier days the higher rate of population growth was perfectly consistent with economic progress. However, times have changed. Resources have in general become scarce relative to population and must now be efficiently allocated. And that is why more and more we refer to the planning group all the request for allocation of resources. This is galling in a way, yes, we admit that, and sometimes it may be prejudicial to specific areas of economic activity. But there is no other way of working out the development of our country.

We shall also devote increased effort to the formation and support of agricultural cooperatives. The remaining requirements of the land reform program must be met with increased means and energy. The program to distribute free medicines in areas where they are most needed will be intensified. The manpower program; the upgrading and expansion of education where we would like to see our high school graduates capable of entering industry with the skills to earn a living, the increase in the salaries of teachers, the resumption of the infrastructure development — these and more will call for great public investments. We cannot, where we are now, ignore these requirements without sliding back to the poverty and frustrations, and what is more, the tyranny of inaction that characterized our past. We broke away from these more than five years ago. We cannot go back to them.

Private investment, on the other hand, shall continue to be induced into those areas that are considered economically desirable, as set out in the Priorities Plan of the Board of Investments, considering employment generated, foreign exchange earned or saved, the extent of the use of domestic resources, and the existence of forward and backward linkages.

I think it is now fairly well established that the prospects of growth and progress in our country are considerable, even — or perhaps especially — in the eyes of foreign observers. As one New York banker informed the monetary authorities, perhaps foreigners have even greater confidence and trust in our future than we have ourselves. You are probably aware of the favorable reaction of the international community that met in Paris earlier this month as well as the meeting in Manila under the sponsorship of UNIDO/ECAFE investors with Filipino entrepreneurs in need of capital, to the efforts of our government in economic development. Taking due recognition of the impressive progress that has already been made by us, the consultative group came to the agreement that the present financial difficulties, and I quote verbatim, the present financial difficulties could be overcome within a short period. As a token of confidence in the capacity of our economy for accelerated growth, most of the countries represented in Paris expressed support of the World Bank whether on the proposal to form a consultative group for the Philippines or on a bilateral basis with the Philippines.

This is an opportunity for me to say that most of the credit for our progress and for the confidence we have developed abroad in our economy belongs not to any special group but to our own people. Their understanding and cooperation, their willingness to think in terms of our large goals and to forego small immediate comforts, and their trust in the competence and dedication of their chosen leaders — all these have been essential, and will continue to be essential in the years ahead.

I have no doubt that the application of these moral and spiritual qualities upon a vast potential of our country, itself already partly fulfilled, will produce that degree of national transformation that is the highest aim of all our thoughts and deeds. And I am certain that the discussions in the programs of “Let’s Talk Business” have aided in establishing this confidence and this trust.

I congratulate again all those who had had anything to do with and have participated in “Let’s Talk Business” on the program’s 5th anniversary.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].