Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 33rd Foundation Day of the Presidential Guard Battalion

[Delivered at the P. G. B. Parade Ground, May 28, 1971]

Restraint with Firmness

I FEEL THAT I join you here today, on this the 33rd anniversary of the Malacañang Presidential Guard, not as one more guest in your celebration but as one who comes to pay tribute to all that those years represented for our Republic and for those of us who have known your steadfast loyalty and affection in their years of service to the Presidency of our country.

In short, I come here today not only as President but as a citizen chosen to represent other Presidents in the past, and to come to offer full appreciation, indeed an accolade, for all the services not only of the men presently constituting the Presidential Guard Battalion but of all the officers and men who have served in this unit.

With every passing year, this occasion increasingly becomes for me a deeps personal encounter with friends and supporters, where words often fail to express one’s gratitude and admiration. Though sometimes failing to express such words of appreciation and gratitude, I console myself with the fact that between soldiers, and I consider myself still a soldier, there need not much be said. In our relationship, let it be known that whether I am here or not to express gratitude for myself and for my family and for the country, that gratitude is implicit and accords to each and everyone of you. Let me say simply that in the nearly six years that I have served in the Presidency, it has to be served by this elite corps of soldiers and I am truly beholden to all of you.

When 38 years ago, the Presidential Guard was founded, we were in the midst of a transition towards being a fully sovereign and independent nation. With its founding began this long tradition of service and dedication to the national leadership in our country which is well-known to many of us. It is as much your pride as mine that the Presidency and the government we serve are sovereign in this land.

The import of this occasion would be altogether lost if we failed to recognize the sense of tradition that animates your work and relates it to the work of your predecessors and the whole of our democratic tradition. For it seems to me that you embody the nation’s hopes to keep our democratic institutions intact and strong.

In an earlier time the idea of safeguarding our way of life from subversion and aggression was readily recognized by everyone, and our response to the dangers was swift and resolute.

We live now in different times, in times of great anxiety and expectation of confusion in which the dangers posed before the nation are complex and various. For the enemy now utilizes more sophisticated weapons and more devious means to wreck our democracy and to destroy our freedom. It is less easy to see today the dangers that threaten our democracy as it was two or three decades ago. There are those among our people who, hungry for advancement and progress, find it more and more difficult to understand that to find our way to the future does not require cursing and repudiating the past and destruction and killing and bloodshed. The killing of brother by brother.

The unsettled character of our times poses dangers to our democracy, in forms we never anticipated. This present crisis will require of each of us, specially of you and me, to keep events from getting ahead of us and to keep the ship of state from sinking in the eye of the typhoon.

This is a difficult task, for our response, if it is to be truly reflective of the democracy we are sworn to uphold, must never trample on the bedrock of freedom and civil liberties, which our constitution guarantees to every citizen and president of this country.

Our response must be tempered with caution even in dealing with those who are sworn to bring down the government. And you in the Presidential Guard Battalion as well as in the Presidential Security Unit have succeeded in demonstrating to everyone here and abroad that indeed the man in uniform is a statesman capable of recognizing me threats against his democratic government but at the same time so free and capable of appreciating freedom that he allows the exercise of that same freedom by the very enemies he fights.

I have watched you on guard duty, I have watched you standing firm against riots and demonstrations, from January of 1970 to the present, and I have admired your statesmanship, the diplomatic manner in which you have handled angry young children who, thinking that it is in their power to wreck not only Malacañang but also the presidency, over extend themselves; and I have seen the same young men and women throw lies at your face and you just smile; insult and your families and you just stand firm, silent and forebearing, and I have admired you for all this. And so, today, I salute each and everyone of you for your statesmanship and for your professional conduct as the guardian of the President and his family.

Let us never forget that while this may be a time of confusion and a time of chaos, this too is a time of opportunity. This is a time when each and every man is offered the opportunity to demonstrate once again his capability to utilize to the utmost the time that passes by and to demonstrate the strength and character of our nation and of our race.

Let me remind each and everyone of you that as we meet the enemy and face up to the dangers inherent in such a confrontation, we must meet this challenge with strength, with courage, and with patience — and by so demonstrating this courage, this patience, this understanding and breadth of mind, we establish for all time that the Filipino people are capable of freedom, are capable of greatness.

In a way, therefore, you in the Presidential Guard Battalion have demonstrated by your behavior what we ask of every Filipino, be he in government or in the private sector, that he should be a true, a new and enlightened Filipino, a man who understands the basis of his freedom and understands the weaknesses of the enemy. A man who, realizing all of this still stands firm on his principles and on his beliefs, while at the same time granting to everyone the same rights that he values.

So, my friends, members and officers of the Presidential Guard Battalion, I, as Commander-in-Chief, again commend you, and I express to you the personal thanks of the President and his family, as well as, I am certain, the; thanks of the entire Filipino people.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].