Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 11th inaugural ceremonies of the Federation of Provincial Press Clubs

The Press and Development

I AM INDEED delighted to be able to come here. There was a little conflict of appointments as your President, Mr. Roman, will tell you. I am supposed to be with the Fiscal and Financial Policy committee this evening because tomorrow is the beginning of the hearings on the budget and the Commissions of the Budget, the Secretary of Finance, as well as the other members of this committee are still waiting for me.

However, I thought that perhaps they can wait but I don’t believe the provincial press clubs federation should wait and so I came here first. And this is not only because I agree with you in the reelection of your President. I believe in reelection, as you probably know.

The President of this organization, Sid Roman, has not been exactly uncritical of my administration, that is why I was taken aback when he said that he was charged with being a “tuta” of the President in the last election. I guess, they had nothing to say against Sid and so it is standard in our society nowwhen you have nothing to say against anybody and you want to criticize him, to just call him a “tuta” of the President. That does it.

However, I note too that the Federation of Provincial Press Clubs hasindeed come of age. I note the respect and admiration which you now can feel in the atmosphere. I have been looking around, watching, and in the past the provincial press clubs, as well as the federation itself, have been looked down upon. No matter what you say, this was true. This was true a few years back, so much so that I remember provincial reporters were treated as poor relatives whenever they came over to Manila. This is the reason for my concern, for thisconcern that I have shown for the provincial press clubs, the members thereof and for the federation.

The provincial press has direct and immediate contact with our people. I have watched the growth of our provincial press and I am deeply impressed by the straight scribes. We can now rightfully say that the provincial press has matured and it will go beyond this point with its increasing involvement in national affairs, as your President has announced, and perhaps leave behind what was once its narrowly parochial and local point of view.

And I would like to say that this is all to the good. The provincial press has been an able and concerned partner of the government in the struggle to transform our countryside. Incidentally, before I go any further, I suggest to President Isidro Roman that we change the format of this program. I am supposed to deliver some kind of a speech. Well, I’ll make an opening statement but I have suggested that we then open the table to an open forum, and anybody can ask any question. I would suggest that this be monitored by the President of the federation himself and that the questions be submitted in writing, and if you have any questions now I suggest that you put them down in writing. I thought that somebody would make an announcement of this before I stood up but since nobody did I might just as well do my own presentation.

If I can engage in a dialogue with business and political leaders I don’t see why I should not engage in a dialogue with the leaders of the provincial press. And so, please prepare your questions because I am not going to speak long.

Now, I know the services rendered by the provincial press. I was concerned sometime ago about the fact that some of our radio and television stations in Manila did not fully give what was required in their franchise of public service, especially to the small people in the barrios.

The rural broadcasters of whom there are many among you have been instrumental in tutoring our farmers in the new and more effective methods of producing crops, scientific approaches to farming and raising livestock, poultry, fish and the like, in their backyards. In many cases, provincial newspapers have provided similar instruction in behalf of the government as well as in behalf of the private sector and with the laudable purpose of continuing the education of farmers.

May I now extend to you the gratitude of the public sector. I am certain that I express the sentiments of all our people in expressing the congratulations and thanks of the entire Filipino people to the rural broadcasters of whom there are many among you, and the provincial press for establishing this channel for the dissemination of information in the farms through the radio and through the printed word.

The provincial press also has been a dynamic force in fostering public s opinion and that is why tonight I would like to emphasize again this new program of government in relation to cooperatives, of multi-purpose cooperatives, that we are trying to establish all over the country. I gather from some comments that the opposition party seems to have taken a stand against the establishment of cooperatives, or what I have referred to as the bayanihan sa nayon or bayanihang pambansa. You know, we keep talking about cooperatives, and we have been talking about the Moshav. Actually, the Philippine has had a cooperative tradition long, long before we even heard of the Moshav or before we even heard of the present-day cooperatives. The bayanihan concept in the barrio among the farmers is a concept that was in force, a habit, acustom and a tradition, not only in Northern Luzon, in Central Luzon or Bicolandia, but all over the Philippines, long ago, before the Spaniards or my namesake, Fernando de Magallanes, discovered the Philippines. And thus, it has been said that we are just reverting back to what came naturally to us.

Now, what is this multi-purpose cooperative that now seems to be the subject of controversy? We have included in the appropriation act, in the budget, about a hundred and fifty million pesos for the establishment of the rural cooperatives. The model was initiated not only in Magalang. Magalang is a costly model. It is supported by the Filipinas Foundation, which is the foundation of Ayala y Compania and of the Zobels, but we have a cheaper version in General Ricarte, Llanera, Nueva Ecija. I just came from there. I was there last Thursday, and this project is going very well, is going apace.

Exactly, what is this cooperative? Everybody knows what a cooperative is. But you go to a barrio and every family is moving along on its own. It establishes its own production organization, meaning, the family members farm the land and raise hogs and chicken. Then, they market these products on their own without the help of anyone. They bring the products all the way to town and if not to the town, all the way to the city, and sell without the help either of government or of the private sector unless the middleman intervenes. If the middleman does, then he becomes the marketing aid.

Now, the problem is, first of all, the poor farmer or the man in the barrio doesn’t know exactly what product is in demand, say, in Manila. What product t is in demand in Cebu. What product is in demand in Baguio. And the reason for this is there is no organization. He doesn’t know what the costs are, and the reason for this is nobody is helping him. We will not go into the various reasons.

Now, let me give you the concept as a whole and the cost and expenses of this program of the Bayanihan sa Nayon. This Bayanihan sa Nayon would organize the farmers within a barrio or even within a town. There are 1,400 municipalities all over the country. There are 33,000 barrios and estimate that the cost per barrio would be about P5,000 as seed capital for cooperative. What would this cooperative, this bayanihan, this buklod of farmers do? You have noted that we are now encouraging the farmers of construct their own irrigation system. We have models all over the Philippines now, and I am certain that the provincial newspapermen know, for instance, the models that we set up in Zamboanga del Norte, in Cotabato del Sur and to the north, in Cagayan and elsewhere.

Now, the average cost for an irrigation system of the gravity type where you put up the dam and you construct the canals for the water to flow down is P1,000per hectare. If you irrigate 10,000 hectares you must spend P10 million. This is the average cost. In many instances, it will be much more and in order therefore to finance an irrigation system in a municipality with about 10,000 hectares of farm land you need P10 million. If you add to it such infrastructure as roads and perhaps a pier in the river or on the beach, then you have something fantastic, beyond the reach of our government as well as of the local government or the barrio people.

However, our experience indicates that if you organize a group within the barrio and this group agrees to utilize the materials from the PACD or from the Irrigation Administration, you can cut down the expenses a hundred-fold.

Let me give you an example. There were 6,000 hectares which we were supposed to irrigate in Zamboanga del Norte. And they told me I needed to release P6 million. We went into this area. I visited the area with the First Lady and I suggested that we start working on the irrigation system. We brought in the cement. We brought in all kinds of materials. The people of course were very doubtful about the viability of such a project. But when nobody wanted to start the project we got a few young men together and we started working on this project. I, myself, helped in going into the area and believe it or not, with P50,000 we put up an irrigation system that now irrigates 6,000 hectares. Fifty thousand pesos plus free labor. You see, 90 to 95 per cent of the cost really is labor.

Now, this is one example. Then, we have the problem of farmers in the North, farmers engaged in truck gardening. The middlemen have come in. You who are from the North, you know the problem there. The aliens came in, they advanced money to the farmers and before you knew it the middlemen were dictating the prices — the purchasing price and the selling price — of vegetables not only in Baguio but also in Manila. And so in some instances we organized cooperatives and these cooperatives sent their products to the Greater Manila Terminal Food Market. They were able to get good prices and enough information to tell the growers exactly what was in demand in the market. We can have cooperatives for irrigation, for marketing, even for electricity. We can also organize cooperatives for intensive farming.

The land reform program is a program which envisions the distribution of land to the tenants. Do we have enough land for all the tenants all over the Philippines in the next several generations? The answer is no. If we were to subdivide all the lands in Luzon, for instance, for all the farm tenants the lands would prove adequate only for this one single generation. But the next generation will face the same problem. Example: We have for instance 1,000 hectares in one hacienda. The government buys this after the farmers are transformed into leaseholders and after they have been taught how to plant. Then the government is supposed to subdivide this land. And every family, every tenant family, is supposed to receive five hectares, which is known as the family size farm. Five hectares given to this one family, and this family tills this land. This is good for this generation. How about the next generation? The average number of children would be five. Five children would then subdivide the five hectares in the next generation. How about the third generation? The fourth generation? Of course, I believe in the land reform program. But the problem here is fragmentation. What is the answer to this?

The answer is to start now with cooperatives, with the Bayanihan sa Nayon. The answer now is intensive fanning. It’s not extensive farming meaning bigger farms; it’s not enlarging your farm from five hectares, but utilizing what you have in such a mariner that you will produce per hectare.

Some people refer to Moshav or the Israeli-type of farming. Actually, we have adopted some aspects of Moshav but we were surprised, and pleasantly so, to find out that these practices and these traditions, these customs were already known to our farmers. In the North, for instance, when you build an irrigation system, a communal irrigation system, let’s say in the town of Bacarra, Ilocos Norte, every farmer within the area is duty bound traditionally to put in several days of work every week until the irrigation system is finished. And you know what the bayanihan concept is. Whenever there is a house to be moved, everybody in the barrio comes to help the house owner. This is actually in part the concept of Moshav.

But, of course, now we need to put in seed capital for the cooperatives. For every organization, we will keep this money available but we will not put this money into the cooperative, this amount of P5,000, until the cooperative is organized and actually working. Cottage industry will also be brought into the; barrios. Cottage industry, fisheries, handicraft, manpower training. Now, you go into any barrio. You ask some of the young men, what would you like to do? Especially the out-of-school youth. We have conducted a survey, a formal survey and you know the answers are almost unanimous.

Oh, we would like to work but we don’t know how, they said. We don’t know what to do and we don’t know exactly what to produce. And yet we cannot fill up the orders of the big houses, the big mail order houses and the big department stores in the United States for such simple things as abaca bags, abaca slippers and the like. Because, as you know, those department stores are used to ordering by the gross and they ask, can you deliver a hundred thousand slippers every week? And of course the answer is no, we cannot. Why not?

Because we don’t have the production capability. Now, if we organized production under the Cottage Industry Development Authority, and under small-scale industries associations or organizations, we would be supporting the work of the cooperatives.

I spoke of manpower training. Everybody wants to go to the manpower training schools which are being financed by the national government now. And everybody, every Provincial Governor or Municipal Mayor demands that manpower training facilities be made available in his province or municipality. Why can we not have manpower training run by the barrio or the municipality itself? This is going to be one of the purposes of this cooperative movement. It must be self-sustaining. Instructors and trainers must also come from such cooperatives.

We must tie all these up. The producers will organize producers cooperatives, then have tie ups with the consumers cooperatives — the employees of government here in Manila through perhaps the Greater Manila Terminal Food Market, and thus, cut out the middlemen who always manage to bring up prices. This is one of the answers to the perennial and nagging problem of prices.

I believe that the cooperative movement can be one of your projects. I hope it is something which will interest the provincial press. The press clubs can be one of me most effective instruments in bringing to the people the need for reviving the old concept of bayanihan sa nayon.

Now, we are moving into this area in a low profile manner. We have not talked too much about this. We would like to actually start before we talk about it. But we are compelled to speak out now because of the criticisms. Actually, we have started in several provinces, in Mindanao, the Bicol region and in the Visayas.

But rest assured that wherever you come from, the *bayanihan sa nayon* concept will reach your place, and I would like the provincial press clubs to cooperate with us in spreading the gospel of the *bayanihan sa nayon*.

Talking about cooperatives, perhaps the provincial press could adopt this system of cooperation in establishing their own printing presses. I understand that one of the dangers to the independence of me provincial press is the high cost of printing. I was just talking to some of our friends here. I understand that the cost now for printing four pages of the tabloid size of provincial paper is about P240, and if you have an eight-page newspaper mat will mean about P500 every week, and I know the difficulty of raising funds. I would suggest that, first, we encourage the cooperatives system because if we generate affluence among your readership in no time at all they will be your sources of financing and advertising and you can establish the independence of the provincial press within a year or two.

At the same time, I believe that you will also be able to increase your circulation. Right now, unfortunately, in the barrios according to our surveys, priority is still given to printed materials coming from Manila. Thus, the national magazines are still widespread throughout the barrio. In the North, for instance, Bannawag is still bought, Liwayway is going up. I understand the national magazines under the Liwayway publications have reached a circulation of about 550,000 a week. This indicates, I repeat, the truth of the result of the survey that priority is still given to printed material coming from Manila. I think that it’s about time that it should be reversed. It’s about time that the provincial press print material of equal quality but of direct relevance to the problems of the people in the barrio.

Now, I would like to close by saying your government and your President are interested in an independent provincial press. The reason for this is that the provincial press is very sensitive to the opinions of those who are in the barrios. I can understand the prejudice against any attempt to control the provincial press. I have always maintained that even criticism which is not constructive has its own value. The employees of the national government who are distant from the regional office, from the national office, often fall into the inertia of provincial life; very often that fervor and that fire that you may find in the center of government is lacking in the provincial sector, or the employees on provincial assignments. The provincial press is the means by which the critics and those who have grievances against government can propel such inactive units or elements in government into more efficient service. For instance, the national government has been shocked to learn of the inefficiency if not corruption of some of those who are in such crucial offices as the Bureau of Forestry the Bureau of Lands and the Bureau of Internal Revenue, and in many instances, these cases of inefficiency and corruption have been brought to our attention by the provincial press clubs.

And, therefore, as President, I would like to publicly acknowledge the indebtedness of the national government to the crusading work of the provincial press clubs, the reporters, the publishers and editors, and it is my hope you will continue to perform this task. It is my hope that some kind of a subsidy should be given not by government directly, but from a fund for the provincial press. A form of a subsidy that would come, perhaps, from the National Press Club or from a similar organization. Don’t you agree with me?

Well, I do not know exactly what the finances of the National Press Club are. Doroy Valencia here has not told me yet but I suppose there may be need for an advance for their building, but I was wondering if we could not raise funds that would go to support patriotic, sincere and dedicated provincial newspapers. And to keep this out of the hands of politicians it should be held hi the hands of a national press organization, perhaps, the Manila Overseas Press Club, or the National Press Club. But it is about time, I repeat, that some kind of support comes not from the government because it would immediately be suspect, but from the private sector.

I plant this idea amongst you. I think that you could pursue it and if there is any way by which we can be of help to you in raising such funds for the provincial press I assure that you have my complete support both as President and as citizen. But please keep it out of the hands of the politicians, whether Nacionalista or Liberal.

Now, my friends, I close with congratulations to the President, the reelected President, and the members of the Board of Directors. I notice that they are a little bit older than last year. I did not make this observation alone. I gathered this from some other people. I suppose that this means that the positions have become more important. But, any way, let me repeat. I do hope that the provincial press will continue to flourish and I do hope that your organization will succeed in its objective of participating in national development through change.

And to each and everyone of you, again congratulations.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].