Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 5th Philippine Business Conference

[Delivered at the PICC, November 16, 1979]

The Imperatives and Challenges of Our National Industrialization Program

WE HAVE JUST heard the recommendations of your study groups. I have just received this voluminous report which reads more like a reorganization of government than anything else. As usual the chamber, now with the cooperation of the Federation of the Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce, has the answers to all the problems of government.

You know, sometimes I think we should allow them to run government for a while. The solutions are quite simple if you read the recommendations. They don’t however consider the complications arising from such simple solutions. And there is the rub.

I am always inspired whenever I come to this gathering. I don’t know of any other country where one can gather all the experts of the private sector; they come voluntarily and work on the problems of the economy, by the corresponding departments and ministries, agencies and offices of government. They work out these problems and actually act as consultants and advisers of the President, as well as of the Cabinet.

You know, you are actually an adjunct of the Batasang Pambansa and the Cabinet. This however is a manifestation of the close cooperation between the private sector and the public sector. It also speaks of the dynamism, the dedication and the individual initiative of our entrepreneurs, our exporters, our producers, our businessmen and our traders.

I can only say that it is also a manifestation of the fact that there is really nothing that can test the effectivity, validity and the wisdom of the various government policies than to have them worked out by the private sector, diagnosed, analyzed and looked into in a very intensive manner as you have done — to the minutest detail.

Somehow I have the feeling that whenever you meet, you think mote of the problems than, let us say, the achievements. And yet, at the same time, you work under an aura, an atmosphere of optimism, of hope, of confidence and of great expectations.

I have no doubt that the forum which you have here is slowly being institutionalized into an effective instrument of cooperation between the private and the public sector. I am certain that no leader in the future will be able to do away with this forum.

For five years now we have been meeting. For five years now you have analyzed all the government operations. You have been free to present recommendations and to criticize both the policy as well as the implementation of government.

This review of government policies, business problems and economic opportunities is to me one of the reasons why I have great confidence that while today we are confronted with a serious crisis all over the world and in the Philippines, this period will be remembered in our history as the period of explosion, of initiative, of talent, of the growth and progress of our economy.

It is indeed strange how the Filipino operates. Unless he is pressed hard and becomes almost desperate, he sort of moves along, floats with the current. But once pressed with difficulties and confronted by danger, he unites with everybody and confronts the common enemy. And this is happening today.

Who could ever have imagined that at this very dark period of our history and of the world’s economy the Philippines is planning to move into the development of industry, the explosion of big industries.

There are many who would look at this with serious misgivings, with skepticism. But knowing the psychology of the Filipino, I am almost certain that it is precisely because of this crisis, because of this danger that the Filipino will utilize all his talents, all his time, and all his God-given gifts in order to attain this laudable objective. And in this effort, of course, the two chambers — the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of the Philippines and the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce — must be congratulated.

The presence here of these two chambers does remind me that there is really nothing lost in bringing together all elements. Of course this may not be true in politics, but there is nothing wrong with this cooperation coming in and working with us in government, including those who do not see eye to eye with our policies, or who don’t think very much of Marcos, anyway. But for the present, since we are confronted with common enemies, common problems, common dangers, I think it is time that we unite and overcome our difficulties And then after we have overcome them, let us quarrel all over again about the division of party. Right now, I don’t think there is very much to quarrel about.

You know, my critics are really smart. They criticize me, but they don t want to assume the responsibility of solving the problems, so that in case of failure they can take over. But when they do take over they will compound and complicate all the problems. So I don’t think we will give them a chance to do that. I mean, on the basis of past performance, we, you businessmen — talk of track record — I am not campaigning now, but compare the track record of all these vociferous individuals who seem to know all the answers but are living in a dream world. And find out what they did when they were in power. What solutions did they have? They have nothing but timidity. They have nothing but pessimism. They have nothing but quarrels, stalemate between factions in Congress. You even had a burgeoning subversive problem, anarchy and all these.

Now, against that, you present the track record of the present administration and there is really basis for comparison. So I guess — I am just thinking aloud — I guess I have reason to say as I said when I was asked yesterday during the press conference: What do you think of this plan to call a national election, discard the Constitution and throw away the laws that have been approved from 1972 to 1979? And naturally, I said, that must have been said with tongue in cheek. Meaning, it was told as a joke, so we should treat it as a joke because these guys are a big joke. They cannot seriously consider the fact that we are meeting with reality. Reality is here and now. Heaven and hell is here and now. It is not in the afterlife. It is here. And I have a feeling that this period, starting with 1979 and on from there, will see the explosion of such initiative, of such development, of such progress in the Philippines that we may even surprise ourselves. I don’t know, but this is gut feeling. It is an instinct which I have within me.

And I repeat, if I know the Filipino — he has been pushed hard enough, he has been made desperate enough, and today he has made up his mind, well, he is not going to be left behind. And we are going to develop the country on those lines that we have set in order to attain our dreams and objectives.

I can only say that those recommendations that were presented by the conference had taken into account even LOI 942. However, there are certain aspects of the problem which, I think, we should look into. And I intend to do this now.

This conference occurs at the end of a decade. We have just finished let us say, the decade where we attended to agriculture, to such programs as land reform. We divided the big landed estates, and the tenants, who were the source of subversion, revolution and rebellion, were given their shares of land. Labor was rationalized, given a better share of the income and the fruits of progress and modernization. The educational system is slowly being made relevant to the requirements not of the political system but of the economic system. And the political organizations also have been reorganized, so drastically, in order that our people may participate in the various levels of decision-making We slowly built up the barangay, which is, historically and traditionally the smallest political unit, to the sanggunians or councils, municipal and provincial. In two regions, Region 9 and 12, two regional legislatures are operational in accordance with our international agreements for the settlement of the secessionist movement in the South.

Once, we were a rice-importing country. Over the last several years, we succeeded in converting our country into a rice-exporting country. Now we are also exporting corn. And if anybody thinks that was easy to do, I can point out to you the number of countries who perhaps by a miscalculation or failure in decision-making, have not attained that objective. Whatever is said, we attended to agriculture. And the reason for this was the first emphasis on the great majority of our population. Anywhere from 60 to 70 percent of our population were dependent upon agriculture. So we went in and uplifted this depressed part of our population by increasing their income.

I am of course rather disappointed over the ignorance of Western observers about the results of the radical restructuring of our society. I was just reading a book about Manila written by a supposedly outstanding correspondent from the United States. He says that all the streets in Manila are dusty and that we have not laid any cement roads, that we are still living in shanties similar to those in Tondo. How can anybody say this, this outright fabrication? I am surprised. Of course, I know that they are writing all these fabrications to sell the book, to sell their story. That’s quite all right. But certainly to come here, claiming to be our friend, then going back to make a fast buck by lying and insulting us. That’s a bit too much.

So yesterday, I limited the press conference to local correspondents only. I refused to meet with any more foreign correspondents. Whatever you tell them, they have got predetermined stories. And they want to sell their stories. They don’t care what you feel. They think that they have all the answers. And so look, what do they have? They have Iran and the United States. That’s a classic instance of guys who know too much.

But I have no feeling of spite or anger. I’m just a little sad. I’m just a little sad because it indicates the kind of world that we live in.

The Philippines, however, will progress irrespective of what the Western correspondents write about it. Because we have people who know the truth. For instance, the head of the Dutch delegation, the trade mission that came here -they know what is happening here. No matter what anybody writes, they come here and offer to invest. We have on the respective tables m our various ministries and in the Office of the President, in the Board of Investments and in the Central Bank, so many offers of investment. Now we have to prioritize everything.

The fear now is that we will exceed our self-imposed limits of indebtedness as well as the limits imposed by IMF. And that is wise, you know, the 20 percent limit on the earnings in the previous year as the limit to the amortization that we must pay on our indebtedness. And therefore, we are dependent on our fiscal and monetary experts — the new Minister of Trade and the Minister of Industry.

We have with us in the Cabinet today men who can actually make government operate, perhaps, even without the intervention of the President. Of course, the job of the President is simple. All he does is kick a few butts every now and then, especially when I saw what happened at the BIR. I suppose that is necessary. You need some kind of parent who will not spare the rod and spoil the child.

I am happy to note the reorganization efforts in that part of our administration, the effort to kick out all the corrupt elements in government. The threat to send them all to jail and remove them, eliminate them. And we are removing the corrupt in all offices, not just at the BIR or Customs, Transportation, or the board of examiners, but all offices. We are looking into all the corrupt elements and kicking them out. And to me, this is going to be one of the best foundations for this great explosion of industrial progress which I anticipate in the decade of the 80s.

I speak of this because whatever our plans, whatever these solutions that we shall work out, you and I know very well that these policies, these decisions often break down at the bureaucratic level, among the clerks and even, at the assistant minister level where some have a clerical mentality.

One of my biggest disappointments is the regionalization of offices. What did we intend to do when we regionalized our offices?

We wanted to appoint a regional director in each region who would have the powers of a Cabinet member and who could make decisions right there and then. What do we discover? Some of these regional directors are such clerks that they won’t make any decision. They are so afraid of making a decision, they send it up to the Cabinet, and the poor people who are involved have to come to Manila.

And so I speak of clerk mentality whenever somebody passes the buck to the higher officer. This is the usual work of subordinates. I don’t think you see it very much in the private sector because it involves not only the success of your enterprise. And you see to it that the men who are assigned to each respective office duty is somebody who can be depended upon, who obligates himself to make a decision.

I do wish I could pirate many of you into the government, because we have too many men in government with this clerical mentality. This is one of the things that we have to review, reassess, and work out solutions for.

You speak of many of these problems which are either procedural, institutional or policy. But they will all break down at the levels of the bureaucracy unless I reorganize the government and eliminate those ineffective, corrupt elements in the government, and I intend to.

The last decade has tested the resiliency of the Filipino and of our institutions. We have had to meet a host of problems which I need not review here. But we face a new decade and, undoubtedly, there are many problems. The oil problem is just one of them. And these problems are actually the symptoms of an international economy that is ailing. Very soon, some of these problems will become intractable unless we do something about them.

We shall continue to contend probably with some of the same problems during much of the coming decade. We can only take courage from our demonstrated ability, from the track record of our economy, to surmount these problems and to boldly press on with our development program.

And it is to this — the substance of our economic policies and directions — that I wish to direct my remarks this afternoon. I would like to elaborate on the topic that has dominated so much of your discussions — the imperatives and challenges of our national industrialization program — and its implications on our on-going exports expansion program.

In the previous staging of this conference in December 1978, export also was the dominant theme of the discussions. But there is the difference that this year we convene in the wake of government’s recent announcement of an aggressive industrialization policy beamed towards the greater expansion of our foreign trade.

Industrialization for exports — that is what we in government and you in business and industry proclaim and I think, by and large, we accept this as the fundamental thrust of our national economy today.

There is natural and necessary correlation between our new industrialization program and our export expansion program which stands at the forefront of our national economic goals today. And it bears noting that this important thrust represents in itself a new policy direction in our country, both in the scale of conception and in the high priority we attach to it today.

Since the day we regained our national independence in 1946 and began our march to modern statehood, we have been repeatedly cautioned by economists of various persuasions against adopting over-ambitious industrialization programs. Our attention was frequently invited to the fact that heavy industries which are capital-intensive are inappropriate to our developing economy. It was pointed out, time and again, that full industrialization would create a balance of payments problem for us which would be beyond our capacity to bear. And we hear some of these admonitions still being bandied about even up to this day.

I believe such words of caution have lost their validity for us today, if indeed they had any validity at all in the past.

In 1976, the World Bank released a report which, among others, stated that since 1946 our national economy has grown by six percent in real terms. The report states, and I quote: “This would be a satisfactory achievement except that it provided no basis for self-sustained, long-term development; distribution of the benefits of growth has been unequal; and the rate of growth cannot be maintained without changes in the pattern of growth.”

This insight of course is not new. It is not unfamiliar to us. We have been saying this for quite a long time. We had been gearing our efforts towards the attainment of a well designed system of distributive justice something which is very sensitive to the Filipino, which culminated after the proclamation of martial law in 1972, in the emancipation of our tenant-farmers and the adoption of laws intended to assure equal opportunity for all sectors and levels of our society.

We have provided a ladder which any one is free to use to ascend whatever heights his ability and determination may enable him to seek. The task at hand is to provide the prize at the end of the ladder. And we intend to provide that prize for each and everyone of us.

I believe this task cannot be achieved without a full national industrialization program. And that is what we are talking about.

To shrink from the risks of installing full industrial capacity at this time will result in the perpetuation of an essentially import-substitution economy in this country.

And we are well aware of the implications of the failure to industrialize. The result will be that it will penalize domestic consumers, to whom the high cost of raw material inputs to production of consumer items will have to be passed.

Continued importation of intermediate goods will strain our national capacity to generate foreign exchange.

Worse, while our foreign exchange requirements will continue to grow, our capacity to earn foreign currency to pay for them through our exports will be limited by our inability to transform import-substitution industries into export-oriented enterprises and to expand facilities for existing export products, and install capacity for new ones.

I consider these implications unacceptable.

It’s true we are hostage today to a global crisis, which is likely to worsen before it yields to solution or control. And the ransom it demands from us is determination and boldness. The determination to surmount the crisis and the boldness to adopt and pursue policies that befit the times. These are not the times for timid leadership.

There are considerations which have impelled me to announce a new industrialization program, the principal components of which are 11 major projects designed to achieve three specific objectives, namely:

First, to minimize imports of certain basic raw materials, which we need in the domestic economy, by producing them locally, thereby limiting foreign exchange outflows;

Second, to optimize existing productive capacities of established enterprises to improve volume, quality and competitive price for export purposes through modernization of plant facilities and the rationalization of operations industry-wide; and

Third, to undertake backward or downstream projects in order that we can produce raw materials for export manufactures, rather than merely depend upon second stage processing facilities that make third and fourth processing phases uncompetitive.

This new industrialization program is the first cornerstone of the new economic structure we seek to build.

The second cornerstone of that structure is an aggressive export program.

Our export program will perform three essential functions in support of our industrialization projects.

First, it will generate the foreign exchange required to finance the importation of capital-intensive equipment and technology for heavy industries during their gestation period.

This function of the export industry will be critical in the years ahead. In the same report I earlier quoted, the World Bank, predicted that our import expenditures will increase to $6.9 billion by 1980 to $13.4 billion by 1985. Evidently, this projection did not take into account both the sharp escalation of oil prices which recently occurred and the cost of a full industrialization program we presently envision. These statistics bring home to us the magnitude of the problems our export sector must deal with in the years ahead and the extent to which it must expand its capacity to generate foreign exchange inflows.

Second, even before the by-products of our full industrialization program are turned out in quantities required for export, we must gain secure footholds in the international market as reliable exporters even of products, the raw materials of which we do not presently produce, in order that once our industrialization program succeeds there will be definite channels of distribution for the products of our industries.

Third, and most important, once our new industries reach full production capacity/and the limits of domestic consumption is reached, our export program must be capable of expanding the international markets for Philippine goods to the extent required to absorb the overflow.

This is our answer to all those critics who admonish us that our economy is not large enough to support heavy industrialization. And it is an answer which finds support in the economic experience of other countries such as Hong Kong, Taiwan and Korea, whose internal markets are very much smaller than ours, and which yet were able to develop export-oriented industries.

One can only wonder where these three economies would be now had they failed to marshal the will to industrialize and had been content with import substitution. Very likely they would be in the same difficult straits as most developing countries today.

The demands of full industrialization and aggressive export expansion are not of course to be met simply by policy adjustments or announcements. They exact tremendous commitment of will and resources of dedication.

Specifically, in line with our export expansion program, we must learn to meet desired targets, and once attained, hold fast to them. Among these priorities are:

1) While we must continue to support and promote our traditional exports, we must expand our export inventory by developing new products. It can be easily foreseen that the expansion of our export volume in garments, electronics, leatherware, and furniture, to mention a few, will be inadequate to our anticipated needs although these products are proving to have high export potential. Diversification now must plainly be the focus of concern.

In line with this policy I have directed the Ministry of Trade to initiate an extensive market research program. What is the objective of such a market research program? To identify at least 100 new products in which we can develop comparative advantage. I expect the results of this program to be forthcoming by the end of this year. On the basis of these results, we can work back from specific and accurate market data to product development and promotion.

2) We must bear in mind that in developing new export items, we should not be limited by our existing resource base. This is the secret of the success of resource-poor economies, such as Japan for one, Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong which have managed to become formidable international market competitors in spite of their relative disadvantage insofar as natural resources are concerned.

We are a labor-surplus economy. Increased agricultural productivity has released a substantial part of our labor force from agriculture and made it available for industry. This, according to Heilbroner, is an essential condition for full industrialization. If so, we have succeeded in creating that condition in our economy. We must therefore use it to the fullest extent, by importing, if necessary, the raw materials which our relatively low-cost labor can turn into finished export products through an effective import-reexport program similar to that developed in Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong, while concurrently developing the downstream projects that will ultimately produce the raw materials that we, maybe for the meantime, are importing.

If we can manage such a program, I think we can, by following one clear line of approach, provide a partial solution not only to our trade deficit problem but to our unemployment problem as well.

3) Another useful approach to the problem of identifying new export opportunities is the intensive study of the products being imported by other countries. What these countries import constitute our potential exports. Accordingly, I am directing the Ministry of Trade to field roving teams of experts and analysts to key importing countries in order to undertake such a market study and to gain insight into the shopping lists of these countries.

4) In our search for new markets and in our attempt to attain deeper penetration of the markets in which we have established footholds, we must necessarily contend with the new wave of protectionism brought about by a worldwide recessionary trend. For this reason, our new export program must contain a component designed to study and analyze the regulatory framework governing the entry of exports into world markets. We must broaden and intensify our knowledge of and insight into the existing tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade, as well as the emerging pattern of multilateral, arrangements on the flow of goods through international channels. Where we can, we must make serious attempts to influence the pattern of these arrangements, and where we cannot, we must anticipate and solve the difficulties we may be confronted with.

5) We must also develop a sophisticated mechanism for market planning, capable of dealing with the increasing complexities of international trading activities. Side by side with the existing facilities for data gathering which was designed for monetary control and macro-economic planning purposes, we must install a mechanism for collecting, processing, and analyzing market information in micro-economic terms suitable for market planning and export promotion. Such a system must be capable of monitoring the complex and volatile conditions of the international market and anticipating shifts in product preference brought about by cultural social economic ecological or technological factors.

6) Since success in the international market hinges on comparative advantage, our new export program must provide for continuing review and analysis of the factors that influence our competitive position. Accordingly, cost of labor, shipping terms, raw material resources, technology, production efficiency, and other similar factors affecting cost of exports must be continuously monitored and definite trends anticipated in order to forestall unforeseen developments and fashion solutions ahead of difficulties.

7) In formulating our national export strategy, the focus of concern must be in developing operational content in more detail than heretofore achieved in terms of specific marketing tools to be employed, the timing and phasing of market promotion initiatives, and the elements to be assembled in gaining entry and the necessary leverage in specific world markets.

8) Finally, in fashioning an export program in response to our present circumstances and the changes we seek to achieve in these circumstances, we must, above all, be reminded that we are planning changes in a world of change. In this world the idea with the least to recommend it to our attention is the one presented to us with no qualification other than that it worked well in the past, or that it looked workable on first impression. We are building a structure which we hope shall endure on shifting foundations. We must therefore fashion its lines of support in anticipation of future stress, according to a dynamic and flexible design which will absorb drastic alterations in the conditions prevailing in the international market.

In accordance with this principle, I have recently effected changes in the regulatory framework governing exports and the system of incentives available to exporters. I note that some of your recommendations refer to this. Now, let me outline to you what is included in the latest Letter of Instructions 942, which I signed last October. I remember that this was signed at the meeting with many of the exporters. Two to three hundred exporters met with me in Malacañang on that day, October 4th. Let me outline what we did then in accordance with our agreements in that meeting in the Palace. I have ordered the following changes:

1) Importations of raw materials inputs to production of export goods shall be exempt from margin deposit requirements.

2) The Philippine Export and Foreign Loan Guarantee Corporation shall allocate more resources to export-oriented small- and medium-scale industries.

3) The Central Bank of the Philippines shall study the feasibility of providing rediscounting facilities for long- and medium-term credits for the acquisition of capital assets.

4) Venture capital operations, particularly for small- and medium-scale

5) The consular invoice requirement will be abolished. Now, I understand that this has not been implemented by the bureaucracy. I suppose this merely requires my asking the Ministries of Trade, of Finance, and Industry to follow this up. I so order today in your presence that we check these particular aspects.

6) Immediate payment of duty drawback and tax credits due to indirect export producers upon the delivery of export goods to a bonded manufacturing warehouse can now be authorized without waiting for the final settlement of determination of value.

7) The presentation of tax clearances per shipment basis prior to securing export permits shall no longer be required; and the report on foreign sales required by the Central Bank shall now be made quarterly instead of, as I understand, on every shipment.

8) Commodity clearances shall now be issued on a yearly basis subject to actual periodic examination for quality control purposes. I note that there are some recommendations in your resolution which I refer to the executive committee of the Cabinet to work on, headed by Minister Virata

9) The registration function of the Philippine Export Council under PD 1469 will now be transferred to the BOI which has been directed to further simplify the registration process and limit registration requirements.

10) The four percent export tax on shrimps and prawns is now abolished.

11) The export and premium duties on metallurgical chromite are suspended until market prices for the item improves.

12) Bonafide exporters duly certified by the Ministry of Trade are exempted from travel tax.

Now, let me bring the process of re-fashioning the operating environment of the export industry just one step further.

Recognizing that private sector participation in export planning must be reoriented for greater effectiveness I have determined that the functions of the Philippine Export Council shall be transferred to the Ministry of Trade and a new Philippine Export Advisory Council, composed principally of private representatives must be created. I therefore sign in your presence a new decree creating that council and providing for the transfer of the functions of the present PEC to the trade ministry. This is no reflection on the incumbent Philippine Export Council; I think this has been the request of many of you from so long ago. You know, my staff is a little over-efficient. They gave about a hundred papers. Anyway, I consider this particular order, I sign this in your presence.

And let us go a little further and refashion some of the tools that we have at our disposal on exports. The need to provide the export program with a more effective mechanism for implementation and coordination is very obvious. To fill this requirement, I now direct the reorganization of the Ministry of Trade and charge it with the responsibility not merely to contribute to the export effort but to take the lead and to initiate. I would like to sign in your presence a new decree restructuring the entire Ministry of Trade which I now direct to be immediately implemented.

The basic amendments of this decree are as follows: We increase the number of deputy ministers to two; one for international and the other for domestic matters.

I note the recommendation to create a new Ministry of International Trade, something like the MIT in Japan. I think we can face this movement instead of creating a new department, and thus waiting for another three, four months before the new department can really operate. It would be best if we instead saved time by creating a new deputy minister under the present Ministry of Trade who will do nothing but attend to international trade – that s exactly an answer to your recommendation.

I have also created in this new decree three assistant ministers, and they are the Assistant Ministers for International Trade Relations, Domestic Trade Promotion and Regulations, and for Administration and Manpower Development. Incidentally, the Ministry of Trade is possibly one of the few if not the only one of the ministers with two deputy ministers and now three assistant ministers.

Then, we create in this new decree, the new bureaus of exports promotion, trade relations, domestic trade promotion and consumer affairs.

At the same time, we realign the Philippine International Trading Corporation as the corporate arm of the ministry. Incidentally, for the information of the Ministry of Trade, I remove your power to appoint commercial attaches and keep it in the Office of the President. There are some legal questions as to the appointment of foreign representatives, because they are given certain privileges under international law and, therefore, should be appointed by the highest possible officer, since they may be considered a representative of the highest officer to a foreign land.

Now, in your presence therefore I sign this Executive Order.

It is my hope that with these substantial changes not only in national policies and priorities, and equally important adjustments in the regulatory framework of our trade, we shall truly spur national export expansion and economic development.

We are fully convinced that we have the policies and the leadership and the people with talent, dedication and application that will avail; and so we dare to hope that these will also serve to rally our entire business community behind our national export program — awakening your sense of enterprise and emboldening you to venture into new labors.

Above all, we dare to hope that in these times of difficulty for almost all nations, we shall indeed pray for our deliverance from crisis, and achieve our full modernization as a nation.

I repeat, my instinct tells me that we are faced with a new period of development, which shall change the entire landscape of the Philippines and the entire economy. It will depend, however, as usual upon the private sector in view of our adoption of an economic system, which depends upon the private sector as the driving wedge and the sharp point and edge which shall cut forward towards our ultimate objective.

I therefore commend to you all of these policies and assure you that while I am President, and while this administration is in power, priority shall be given to this program of industrialization and export expansion.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].