Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the National Export Marketing Conference

[Delivered on May 26, 1971]

Successful Export Marketing: A Joint Responsibility of Government and Business

AFTER WHAT I would call an overdose of comments voiced by quarters both well-meaning and otherwise, in criticism of government action, or in-action, it is cause for great relief and deep gratification to see a gathering of responsible citizens here this morning manfully facing their share of a chosen challenge. This challenge, in the words of your conference theme, is “successful export marketing,” a challenge that you — unlike so many of our fellow citizens who excel in less productive endeavors — have accepted as “a joint responsibility of government and business.”

I hope, however, that this conference will distinguish itself from number-less other conferences by going beyond the mere production of expert advice. I hope that this conference will lead to the generation of an actual resolve to move, to act, to do.

For the competitive position of our exports in world markets will not be enhanced by passively waiting for results after a diligent exchange of sparkling views. No share in the growth of world markets will come without our actively bidding for that share. And, admittedly, neither business nor government can undertake this effort apart from each other.

The government, as you know, has not been idle. Before exports became accepted by our leadership as the new wave of our future, there was the Investment Incentives Act which had started stimulating greater interest in this field of business. This encouragement was fashioned more concretely in the Export Incentives Act that came a little later. Priorities have likewise been offered to exports by the Central Bank and other government agencies, and export equipments and procedures have continually been simplified. The National Export Trading Corporation was organized, a foreign trade zone has been established in Bataan and an exports institute has just been set up by the Board of Investments.

The private sector, for its part, has moved with more measured pace. Rather; timidly, which is not surprising up to a point, the private sector has — to a limited extent — pioneered into new markets, developed new products, and grappled with the new sophistication required in world trade.

A look at our balance of payments, however, will show that we have yet to take maximum advantage of the array of opportunities available from our international trade.

For instance, for much longer than they should have, our exports have continued to be generally in the raw material form that is so vulnerable to wide price fluctuations. On the whole, these exports have been sold to the same traditional foreign markets. These facts are so well known that I repeat them here only for one reason. And that is, that our export methods have compounded the natural drawbacks arising from the type and limited marketing of our exports thus depriving us of the full potential returns even from the exportation of primary goods alone.

Nor have we been more imaginative or assiduous in consolidating our import requirements and securing the best terms in their procurement.

Small wonder then if, as was the case last year, we did labor like a mountain and brought forth no more than a mouse of a surplus in our balance of payments. We managed to raise our export volume by one-seventh but we had to cut our imports by nearly one-fifth. This severe drop in import volume gave rise to the dislocations that we see now in our economy. And all this for nearly naught because, while our export prices went up, the average prices of our imports rose by almost four times as much.

Clearly we are getting the short end in our terms of trade. And if we are to correct this situation and maximize the benefits possible from expanding and diversifying our foreign trade, we must get organized— not just on the government’s side of it, nor the private sector’s separately, but together. The private sector, as indicated by your conference theme, has accepted this joint, responsibility. The government and business then must marshall both their forces so that we may be able not only to sell but also to buy in world’s markets, wherever these may turn out to be for us, at terms that can best promote our, national development.

To begin to succeed in our joint export marketing effort, business must weed out of its ranks the dishonest and the inefficient. It must avoid at all cost such malpractices as substandard shipments. It should coordinate and synchronize for greater economy, therefore more savings and higher earnings. It must be more willing and better prepared to take risks and venture into new products and markets.

Our businessmen should rethink their positions, their attitudes that prevent them from joining to their greater advantage larger units or associations, sharing technical information, and indeed ownership and management.

Even as we are alert to the competition around us, let us learn from our competitors. These multi-purpose organizations protect Japan’s terms of trade, integrate domestic production, transport and distribution where these are required to maintain national competitiveness. Even as they earn healthy profits for their own operations, these trading companies — in the national interest — push their country’ s exports relentlessly in every market, getting them the best prices and largest market penetration possible. These same companies are responsible for securing again at the best terms obtainable, the materials, technology and capital that Japan’s industries must have.

In meeting its responsibilities as helper, protector, and regulator, our government has recently actively promoted what I hope will eventually be the Philippine application of Japan’s eminently successful trading company concept.

In support of this effort, I believe the government must consider certain undertakings promptly. For one thing, government financial institutions should coordinate their allocation programs for the various financial requirements for imports, exports and capital goods procurement. Special tariff benefits for the use of Philippine transport vessels should be in order, along with other forms of fiscal exports assistance. The benefits from the Export Incentives Act could be so refined that they would provide better encouragement to exports. Export credit insurance should complement this effort, as should the coordinated export promotion and market penetration work of our commercial attaches.

In addition, government must keep trying to allocate resources where they are most needed by the economy and in which they can be most efficiently utilized, withholding such resources from inefficient or useless undertakings. It should step up the development of our shipping industry, of waterways, harbors and ports. It would have to be even more selective for exports, as well as for smaller and newer industries. Finally government should consider concluding agreements that would be conducive to trading with other and more countries.

For its part, our private sector must consider giving its maximum cooperation in the organization and cooperation, particularly at its initial stage, of an international trading corporation patterned after Japan’s “shoji kaisha.” Assistance will be especially vital from certain industries which are in a position to lend substantial help. Considering these industries have been the beneficiaries of special support from the economy service whose profits are not confined to themselves.

Specifically, such industries could set the example for the private sector. They might course their trade as much as possible, if not exclusively, through the country’s own trading company, at least for a reasonable trial period. This cooperation should enable the trading company to prove whether it can indeed perform better for both the economy and the industries that trade through it.

The cooperation from such industries would involve synchronizing their production as well as their materials handling and distribution in order to minimize idle time in loading operations. It would also entail scheduling backhaul shipments that would utilize the return voyages of vessels, which would be on time charter for greater economy.

Commercial banks could help too by enlarging their participation in the area of export financing. This help, I am glad to note, is increasingly becoming evident.

It is my sincere hope that the private sector, by itself and without wasting the nation’s time, will find it both right and rewarding to identify public welfare with its own gain.

In that event, government need not try to use its persuasive abilities on business. It could then concentrate on doing its share of the joint responsibility in successful export marketing, instead of having to convince business that a good part of the cost of doing business in this country is the national interest.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].