Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the commemoration of the Battle of Bessang Pass

[Released on June 14, 1982]

On this day of homage and remembrance, we come together once again to perpetuate in the memory of the nation a day of valor in the annals of the last war.

This is a day of remembrance that symbolically and literally completes all our recollections of the war—of the agony and sacrifice that marked Bataan and Corregidor, the years of torment during the Japanese Occupation, of the rising of hope that came with the landing of allied forces in Red Beach, Leyte, and of the final climacteric of the war when at last the Japanese forces laid down their arms in surrender and defeat.

For the Battle of Bessang Pass was truly the culmination of the war in our country, the moment which signified the victory of our arms in battle. In the capture of the pass and in the surrender of General Yamashita, the war in the Philippines for all intents and purposes ended, and then would follow the progressive retreat of the enemy of the enemy to their native soil, where finally the whole global war would be brought to an end.

It is only fitting therefore that we should consecrate one day of every year to the commemoration of the Battle of Bessang Pass.

In our commemorations of the war, it is sometimes said that we as a people seem to exhibit a national fondness for tragedy, that it is defeat not victory which we fervently remember. As proof of this, some cite our national attachment to our “defeats” in Bataan and Corregidor.

Those of us who survived the battles of the last war—in Bataan, in Corregidor, in Bessang Pass, and in many other theaters of conflict—and who are here today can only view with regret this narrowness of hindsight and understanding. For if indeed Bataan and Corregidor represented agony and defeat, Bessang Pass and the later theaters of the war represented the irrevocably victory of our cause. And what was fought for in Bataan and Corregidor was the same cause we fought for in Bessang Pass. And those who survived the battles of Bataan and Corregidor and the infamous Death March lived on to carry the fight in Bessang Pass.

There is a continuity to all these battles that constitutes a testament of our resolute rise as a people from defeat to victory. And so I say, on behalf of all who died and all who have survived the battles, it is not defeat which we venerate, but victory, which we won by valor of arms.

Yet there was an anxious moment—in the climacteric of the war in the Philippines—when the war threatened to last longer than envisioned, and when Japanese forces threatened to mount a long resistance and wreak further havoc on the country. With nearly all of the country already pacified, there remained in the summer of 1945, a large Japanese army of 20,000 nestled in the fastnesses of the Banawe Mountains and under the command of the Tiger of Malaya, Gen. Tomoyoki Yamashita.

In that fateful summer, when the rest of the country was already celebrating victory and liberation, Yamashita’s forces continued to command the mountain passes and surrounding regions of what we know today as Bontoc and Mountain Province.

It was in these circumstances that the Battle of Bessang Pass began.

To the lasting glory of our people it will be said and ought to be remembered that it was our Filipino forces which led the siege on historic Bessang Pass, our forces which won the day in what is now called “the Battle of the Flanking Movements”, and it was to our forces that General Yamashita laid down his sword of command. For nearly a month the battle raged, exacting much from both sides, but in the end the Japanese yielded control of Bessang Pass, and with it their cause in the Philippine Islands.

It has been said of those of us who bore the brunt of the Battle of Bessang Pass, that this was a case of winning back “the manhood they had lost in Bataan”, a struggle to restore “their personal pride and that of the nation,” perhaps.

But this much we can surely say: in this climactic battle of the last war we who fought in Bessang Pass felt some deep connection with all those who had died in Bataan. We felt some living bond with all those who had carried on the fight, and all who would follow in our wake. And if at times, there was a soldier here or an officer there who, facing the prospects of death, wondered if people would ever remember them, that was not from any desire for glory, but simply the natural concern of anyone who hopes that his sacrifice is not being made in vain.

We who have been fortunate to survive the battles can surely say now that the sacrifices here not made in vain. Our links to our country’s war dead endure, and so also our links to those who are yet unborn.

And if indeed sometimes we see today the dimming of our people’s memory of the war, and the occasional weakening of those ideals we fought for, that we say is only the passing forgetfulness of a nation at peace and a generation that has not known war. For whenever crisis and challenge come again, so will flame again the same fervor and love of freedom that carried us inexorably to victory.

This I see in the nation we are today—strong, stable, and united.

And this, more than all laurels and tributes, perpetuates for us all the sacrifices during the last war.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.