Speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Independence Day

In accordance with the tradition of free peoples, we gather here today, in the people's palace, and in the hundreds of capitals and towns of our country, to once again celebrate the birth of our nation.

Of all the legacies cherished by free peoples, there is perhaps none greater than the independence inherited by a race.

This is a legacy that must be cared for and guarded at all times. And it must be earned through sacrifice by all those who inherit it.

And we, more than anyone, are the race that knows the magnitude of the capital that must be invested for the sake of independence. We all know that our freedom proclaimed in Kawit, Cavite, eighty-six years ago, was a freedom that quickly vanished in an instant and we were enslaved by another country.

We also know how long and how much sacrifice we invested before our National Freedom was restored on July 4, 1946.

We also know what we have shouldered for many years since then to maintain our right as an independent nation, and to give meaning and substance to this freedom for each of our citizens.

Because of this, the celebration of Independence Day in our country is not merely a commemoration of a program in memory of the birth of our republic; rather, it is a special day of renewing our race's vow to sacrifice again and again for the freedom we enjoy today.

We are a race of fifty-two million citizens, twenty-six times larger than when our republic was born eighty-six years ago.

The growth of our numbers is written in every trial we have gone through, and every lesson we have learned from these experiences has shaped our free nation.

We have learned that independence is not obtained merely by demonstrating courage in the midst of battle. We have faced many other kinds of struggles and endured many trials. That is why it has become the responsibility of every generation of ours to show through deeds how to truly care for, defend, and give life and meaning to that freedom.

The past fifteen years have been the most difficult test for our country. It was a time when we had to face the trials of the freedom gained since 1946. It was also a time when our Republic faced a severe test that almost destroyed it.

The steps we took to remedy these problems are not always fully understood by many. Therefore, it is appropriate for us to carefully examine this difficult stage that our free nation went through today on this day of independence.

First of all, we must understand that this stage of our history was the most stringent test and defense of our Republic. There may be those who no longer remember because the time of great danger to our country has passed, but it was only then that our country experienced the simultaneous danger of sedition and secession by people with modern weapons.

On one hand, we faced the danger of the communists who had long been sowing unrest in our villages. We occasionally suppress the people when we catch the leaders, but they sprout up again and again. And in 1972, they gathered strength to overthrow the government with the help of Rightist Elements of our society, due to our serious problems in politics and livelihood at that time.

We faced that danger with heads held high, employing extraordinary measures of the Crisis Government, and with the help of our Armed Forces, we confronted this danger, while simultaneously undertaking national reforms that uprooted the source of the insurgency in our villages and cities. In 1976, we arrested the high-ranking leaders of the New People’s Army and the Communist Party of the Philippines. Many rebels also surrendered to us, such as the 39 members of the Politburo, 401 members, and 6,057 personnel of the PKP on September 23, 1974, in the town of Aliaga, Nueva Ecija.

Our efforts, unbeknownst to us, were greatly aided by our non-involvement in the Vietnam conflict. The leaders of Russia told us, when the First Lady visited Moscow, that if we had sent troops to Vietnam, instead of the Civic Action Group that we dispatched, the war would surely reach our shores.

The unrest in our country became an internal disturbance, although the rebels had weapons from abroad, while we could only rely on our own strength to fight and suppress communist disruption to the fullest extent.

A different kind of problem was brought about by the secessionist unrest in the south. In this unrest, the aim of the agitators was not merely to overthrow the government. Their desire was to create a separate nation in Mindanao, Palawan, and Sulu to divide our country. This unrest involved 20,000 armed personnel, some from outside the Philippines, and clashed with our police and constabulary in the south, while we here in Luzon were busy eradicating the communists.

This was not merely a measure of military strength. The matter was further aggravated by the fact that from 1972 to 1974, the Philippines was refused oil by the Muslims, which was the source of 95 percent of our oil needs, because they sympathized with the principle of the Muslims who wanted to establish a separate nation. At that time, they did not know what was really happening in our country.

Simultaneously with our efforts to pacify the South, we launched a campaign to prove to the Islamic nations that our view of our Muslim brothers was just. Instead of pouring the full force of our armed forces against the group causing unrest in the South, we worked diligently to resolve this unrest peacefully.

This is why the Tripoli Agreement was born from the talks between the First Lady and Colonel Khadaffi of Libya and signed on December 23, 1976. This is why the unrest subsided and two autonomous regions emerged in the south, Region 9 and Region 12. When the unrest subsided, we granted amnesty to 37,000 personnel of the Moro National Liberation Front, and others were included among the leaders of their autonomous governments, but there is no doubt that the problem of a separate government in the south is now resolved.

As we recall the serious problem of sedition and secession in our country, it is vitally important that we remember that our republic solved these major problems and dangers without relying on the help of other races. We took sole responsibility for finding a solution to this serious problem. In fact, we were not even sold weapons by our American counterpart, and we were not even slightly helped in our struggle. We bought weapons from other countries that our meager money could afford. With the help of the Almighty, we did not fail.

Secondly, we demonstrated the true independence of our country when we abolished the Parity Rights.

Now, we can admit that when the removal of the Parity Rights by the Americans was being discussed, the United States insisted on granting us ‘National Rights’ to Americans in our country in exchange for our continued enjoyment of Preferential Trade with America, but we firmly stood our ground that the Parity Rights must be removed.

Thirdly, we must know that it was during this time that the agreement on the United States Military Bases in our country began and ended. The previous agreement stipulated that they would enjoy it for 99 years and there was nothing stated as to when it would end.

It was only on December 7, 1975, after the Ford-Marcos Communique, that a clear written discussion of the base agreement was made and discussions would be held with recognition of the Philippines’ power over these Military Bases.

Representatives of the two countries will meet to discuss the Military Base Agreement. And in 1979, the agreement was amended and stipulated that every five years, discussions about the Military Base would still be held and Philippine power over these bases would be fully recognized.

In 1983, the agreement was reviewed and changes were made.

At this stage, when it is difficult to amend and change the entire agreement, it can be seen that the power of our country was asserted to the United States. We got what we wanted in our negotiations with America. And only the belief that these bases are vitally important to the peace of our region is why we continue to allow them to use the Military Bases in our country.

Fourth, in this stage we endeavored to achieve the true independence of our nation in our foreign relations. For a long time, our policy conformed to the principles and interests dictated to us by other countries. This was the reason why the doors of our nation were once closed to socialist countries. We opened these doors in 1975. We visited China in 1975 and the Soviet Union in 1976. Our dealings with other countries of the world have been greatly changed. And now, we can say that our foreign policy prioritizes the welfare of our country above all else.

In past times, our political destiny was shaped according to the perspective of indebtedness to other races. But now, we have a constitution and a government that are truly our own.

Above all, in this stage we also launched the important step that will give true meaning to our freedom and to the economic redemption of our race.

This is the time when we bravely faced the heavy problems and dangers in our important changes made in the country. This was the time when we launched land reform, changes in the armed forces, and in the country's economy so that we, more than anyone else, would steer the ship of our national destiny and strive to improve the lives of millions of our countrymen. Never have we undertaken such a comprehensive effort to bring about change, and never before has there been a change like this in our country: only now have we had such great progress and change, even if all the efforts made in other times were combined.

This is the life of our national policy and effort at present to give meaning to our freedom and independent race, this is the foundation of our confidence in ourselves and in the fate and future of our race.

As we celebrate today the eighty-sixth year of our independence, a new era of problems and trials faces our country and race. However, we have faced and overcome even greater dangers and problems. Because of this, there is no reason to lose heart.

The great danger to a country in times of trouble is not only facing the problem. But above all, it is none other than striving to take the appropriate steps and protect national interests. We possess freedom and capabilities that have been tested by time. With the help of the Almighty, and with the tireless efforts of our race, coupled with determination and unity, we will undoubtedly overcome the most difficult problems and lead this race to the peak of success we desire.

On this great day of our independence, let us renew our vows towards giving true meaning to this freedom by offering our full capabilities to contribute to the altar of the greatness of our country and race.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.