Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Armed Forces Day

The Road to Normality

I AM PROUD to stand once more on Armed Forces Day with the Filipino soldier, to whom the Republic owes an invaluable debt.

If our Republic now stands firm before the world, if our land is not divided and fragmented, if we now see peace in all provinces and cities, this is due to the Filipino soldiers.

If today the Republic stands, its territory intact, its countryside secure from dissidence, and its urban centers freed from the grip of anarchy and terrorism, it is because of the Filipino soldier.

Future generations will remember that at a time of the greatest peril to our nation, the greatest test of our Armed Forces since the end of the Second World War, the Filipino soldier rallied to the banners of the duly constituted government to save the Republic and to make possible the reform of our society.

In saluting the Filipino soldier today, I salute his loyalty, his courage and his discipline, the qualities which decisively tipped the scales towards political stability and national unity when the fate of the Republic hung in fearful imbalance.

It adds significance to our celebration of Armed Forces Day today that we are about to take what may be the penultimate step to the full restoration of our normal political process. For on January 30th, it is now definite, we shall hold nationwide local elections.

Memories of the organization of the Armed Forces of the Philippines cannot but return to our minds, on this 44th anniversary of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the beginning of the Commonwealth in 1935 and Commonwealth Act No. 1 under which the Armed Forces of the Philippines was organized.

It is proper, therefore, that some of the officers and men who served at the beginning of that period, receive medals for courage and daring like the two generals, General Vargas and General Bondad; the first, for the Asedillo campaign in 1935, and the second for the Sakdalista campaign in Santa Rosa in the same year.

It makes me smile to think that they were 3rd lieutenants at the time. Yes, indeed, that was 44 years ago. And I am glad that they could still receive the medals standing up.

Although late, it is a fitting recognition to some of the acts of courage performed in Bataan that we have honored two other officers whom I personally recommended for the Gold Cross, Colonel Salvador Villa, G-2 of the 31st Infantry Division, and Colonel, now Ambassador Nicanor Jimenez, Batallion commander of the same division, for action against the enemy in the Abu-Abu-Salian junction in January 1942.

Other decorations were given to young men who fought during our present crisis; to the men who, for instance, maintained their detachments and their forces in Balut Islands in Sulu and in the various NPA-infested areas in 1975, 1977, 1978 and 1979.

Yes, we have come a long way during the last 44 years. Since that time, we fought a world war beside our allies and gained our political emancipation in 1946.

The decision to hold the elections on January 30th is therefore something of great significance to all of us. For the Armed Forces of the Philippines and your Commander-in-Chief is committed to the normalization process, and the calling of elections is a tangible symbol of such a process.

This decision was not an easy one to make. You will recall that in the old society local elections constituted the most turbulent part of our political process. More than the national elections, local elections were contested more bitterly, more expensively, more fraudulently, and more violently. That we have decided to hold them now, with the reasonable expectation that the excesses of the past will not recur, is a measure of how successfully we think our crisis government, with the full support of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, has altered the conditions prevailing throughout the country. Indeed the holding of these elections constitutes a measure of our common achievement.

Yet, as I said, it was not an easy decision to make. As late as yesterday, I received from a group of distinguished citizens a petition against the holding of elections at this time. In their opinion, which I believe is shared by many of our countrymen, what we need now is to conserve our energies and our resources; not to squander them on these elections, but to employ them in coping with the difficulties which the new year is expected to bring to our shores from abroad in the wake of the deepening world inflation, world recession and energy crisis.

These anxieties are certainly well founded. I wish to assure all who belong to this persuasion and therefore fear the consequences of holding elections at his time, that their point is well taken.

It was in deference to this important point that I decided to recommend that the Batasang Pambansa limit to only 30 days the duration of the campaign allowed for these elections. It is in consideration of the same point that the rules limiting campaign expenditures will be strictly and uniformly enforced.

I call upon the Armed Forces of the Philippines to play its role as the guardians of this law squarely and fairly, and not to take sides with any political party in this campaign.

It is my intention to lift the effects of martial law throughout the entire country during the 30-day campaign period. Despite these measures, or perhaps because of these measures, the holding of these elections will constitute a hard test of the political maturity we have achieved since the demise of the old, unlamented society. It is a test that we must pass before the full restoration of normal political processes.

I have observed that since martial law was promulgated in this country, certain quarters here and abroad have not stopped calling for the immediate lifting of martial law. What these quarters fail to fully appreciate is that prudence dictates that the lifting of martial law cannot be accomplished by a simple act without inviting disastrous consequences. If we wish to avoid falling into the same pit we found ourselves in before the imposition of martial law, we must first of all take steps to remove it.

The course that we adopted from the beginning was to lift martial law not by any single act but through a series of acts; or better yet, phase the normalization process so that it can be advanced quickly or slowly as actual conditions warrant. In this context we have, during the last seven years, concentrated on changing the real conditions in our country — economic, social and political.

As a result of these changes, and dictated only by our perception of these changes, we lifted by degrees the effects of martial law and progressively restored popular consultations, popular elections and representative institutions. By this method, we have advanced not as abruptly as some quarters have been hectoring us to do, nor as slowly as other quarters might have wished us to do. But we have made great advances on a broad front, with developments in our political, social and economic sectors keeping abreast of one another.

This to me is the only acceptable process, the prudent process. Through this, we have been able to maintain stability even as we reach this penultimate step to the full restoration of normal political processes. We have done all these without either endangering the gains we achieved in the new society or hazarding a retrogression to the old society.

We intend, in the forthcoming elections, more than the hastening of political normalization. We expect the duly elected local executives to exercise greater responsibility for the peace and order situation in their respective localities

These past few years, the military has borne almost single-handedly and with great fortitude the burden of maintaining peace and order in the various localities We believe it is time and in keeping with the whole normalization process, for the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Defense Ministry to study the transfer of such responsibility to the local governments, particularly the local chief executive. They must now bear a greater share of this burden.

We now shift from what has been critically called military responsibility to political responsibility. The calling of the local elections marks the shift from one period into the other.

For this reason, I have ordered that in combat zones the local police shall be placed under the operational control of the local chief executives, the mayors. In addition, effective today, in areas where there is a marked increase in criminality, especially by syndicated crimes, operational control over all police units shall immediately be transferred to the local chief executive.

Normalization is a broad process; it encompasses too the normalization of military functions. But this is a process to which you are no stranger, you who have already experienced, among others, the normalization of the extraordinary judicial functions formerly granted to the military at the height of the crisis.

As it has been your glory to have come to the fore to help save the Republic, so shall it be to your lasting credit to make possible and to actively seek the return of the Republic to normal political processes.

All this is not to say that the crisis, in its many aspects, is over. We face in fact a new year which does not promise us a complete relief from that crisis. We face in fact the more complex task of subduing the continuing crisis which has now become worldwide and which, in certain respects because of external factors, is threatening not to recede but to intensify, while at the same time accelerating our normalization process in those areas where actual gains permit it.

In facing this complex task, I feel happy, privileged and reassured to know that our nation, the political leadership of our country and the entire citizenry can rely on the loyalty, the courage and the discipline of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in whose honor we have especially set aside this day.

On your 44th anniversary therefore, I stand before you and salute every officer and enlisted man of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and say, “Well done, carry on”.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].