Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 9th National Conference-Workshop of PACTAA

I consider it a privilege and a welcome opportunity to join my fellow workers in government for this National Conference-Workshop of your association.

Your association stands high in the consciousness of the public and the government as an organization representing the interests and the concerns of local treasurers and assessors. It is also I feel an organization that underlines the vital importance of your work as civil servants: which is the bedrock of sound fiscal administration in local government.

A vital strategy in our social and economic development plan to upgrade the standard of living and the quality of life of our people is to enlist the active participation of local government units in the attainment of that goal. This means that we have to enhance the capability of local governments in the delivery of essential public services, which implies the need to provide local government units with a sound fiscal system which will effectively rationalize and optimize local resource allocation and utilization.

The series of Decrees on local government finance and fiscal administration which I have promulgated during the last eight years of the new society were precisely intended to fill that need. I am sure that as local treasurers and assessors, you are all very familiar with these decrees. So perhaps, what you would like to know is the rationale of each in relation to their role or function as integral parts of the national masterplan for social progress and economic development.

In looking at these measures, it is important first to bear in mind they are interrelated components of a total system. For one, the decrees on local taxation, the allotment system and those granting national aid to local governments will be more meaningful and logical if studied in relation to the revenue sources and budgetary requirements of the national government. In our desire to give local governments more taxing and revenue-raising powers, we must take care that we do not deplete the resources of the national government and unduly impair its capacity to discharge its mandated functions, even as we subscribe to the strategy of program implementation that when certain functions or services can be performed more effectively by local governments, the same should be decentralized and funds for their prosecution transferred accordingly. On the other hand, we must also consider the taxpayers situation and prevailing economic conditions and thus avoid multiple and competitive local impositions which will overburden taxpayers or create de-stabilizing effects on the economy. Indeed, the ideal state of equilibrium in this particular area of public finance is quite elusive. We have however endeavored to preserve this type of delicate balance throughout the whole range of the fiscal reforms and innovations that we have introduced to improve, update and modernize local government finance and fiscal administration.

Let us briefly review these fiscal reforms and innovation.

REVENUE GENERATION

The following Decrees may be classified under the category of measures designed to directly increase the income of local governments, broaden and expand their revenue-base, and induce them to exercise their taxing and other revenue-raising powers, namely:

A. P.D. 144, revising the internal revenue allotment system effective July 1, 1973, recently amended by P.D. 1741, entitled “governing the computation of national internal revenue allotments to local government units” issued on October 31, 1980;

B. P.D. 320, amending R.A. 917, the revised Philippine Highway Act, which provided, among others, road maintenance funds for national, provincial, city and municipal roads;

C. P.D. 701, further amending R.A. 917 by providing adequate funds for the maintenance of existing and unabandoned feeder or farm-to-market roads, which took effect on march 16, 1975;

D. P.D. 436, which took effect on April 16, 1974, granting to local governments a share in certain specific taxes on petroleum and other products which shall accrue to their respective infrastructure funds;

E. P.D. 558, which took effect on September 21, 1974, amending P.D. 436 by allocating a share of the specific tax allotment for apportionment to the barangays for the construction, improvement and maintenance of barangay roads and bridges;

F. P.D. 231, the local tax code, which took effect on July 1, 1973, as amended by P.D. 426 dated March 30, 1974, P. D. 796 dated September 4, 1975 and P.D. 863 dated December 29, 1975;

G. P.D. 464, the real property tax code, which took effect on June 1, 1974, as amended by P.D. 523 dated July 30, 1974, P.D. 675 dated March 20, 1975, P. D. 794 dated September 4, 1975, P. D. 853 dated December 19, 1975, P. D. 888 dated February 4, 1976, P. D. 939 dated May 29, 1976, P. D. 976 dated August 10, 1976, P.D. 1002 dated September 22, 1976, P. D. 1230 dated November 4, 1977, P. D. 1383 dated May 25, 1978, P. D. 1384 dated May 25, 1978, P. D. 1446 dated June 11, 1978, and P.D. 1621 dated April 19, 1979; and

H.  P.D. 752, the decree of local credit financing, which took effect on July 25, 1975.

ON FISCAL ADMINISTRATION, INCLUDING BUDGETING AND LOCAL SUPPLY MANAGEMENT

There are two presidential decrees which basically govern local fiscal administration, including budgeting and local supply management, namely:

A. P.D. 477, the Decree on local fiscal administration, which took effect on June 3, 1974; and

B. P.D. 526, “providing for an improved system of acquisition, utilization, care, custody and disposition of supplies in the local government x x x” which took effect on August 2, 1974;

It goes without saying, of course, that these Presidential Decrees have their respective implementing rules and regulations and, in some cases, letters of instructions to supplement or enforce them effectively.

Our long-range primary objective for enacting the decrees on local taxation was to develop financially viable and self-reliant local government units which will have the actual experience and responsibility of levying and collecting local taxes and generating other forms of revenue for their current operating and developmental expenses. Gradually, these local units of government are expected to become less and less dependent upon national aid or financial assistance. In 1973, however, what was urgently needed was a simple and more equitable allotment or grants-in-aid system. Our answer was P. D. 144, promulgated on March 31, 1973, to take effect on July 1 of the same year. Statistics show that the internal revenue allotment and other national aids have grown from a level of P725-million in 1970 to an estimated P1,856-billion in 1980; yet, in terms of relative percentage to revenue from purely local sources, said allotments have registered a decelerating trend. This is indicative of the gradual attainment of the long-range objective i have mentioned earlier.

To augment local funds and to finance the maintenance, repair and improvement of existing roads and bridges as well as the construction of infrastructure projects, P.D. 436 was issued on April 30, 1974 increasing the specific tax imposed on certain petroleum products with the differential proceeds being distributed to the local units in the form of specific tax allotments, which are released to them simultaneously with their regular internal revenue allotments.

P.D. 320 was promulgated to adjust the system of putting up local counterpart and enable financially depressed local units to avail of their national aids without putting up the usual local counterpart for the maintenance of existing and unabandoned roads and bridges. P.D. 558 allocated a share of the specific tax allotments for apportionment to the barangays for the construction, improvement and maintenance of barangay roads and bridges.

P.D. 701, further amending R.A. 917, provided adequate funds for the maintenance of existing and unabandoned feeder or farm-to-market roads.

LOCAL TAXATION

P.D. 231 as amended, otherwise known as the local tax code, was promulgated on July 1, 1977, pursuant to the 1973 constitution which grants local governments the power to create their own sources of revenue and to levy taxes, subject only to such limitations as may be provided by law.

The Local Tax Code is such a law. It delineated the respective taxing powers of the provinces, cities, municipalities and the barangays. It also specified the extent and limitations of the taxing and other revenue-raising powers of local governments in two ways:

A) Specific Limitations – those that apply to a particular level of local government; and

B) Common Limitations – those that apply to all levels of local governments.

Local taxes imposed under the provisions of the Local Tax Code show a dramatic trend of increases. After the first year of implementation the collections from local taxes increased from P196-M in F.Y. 1973 to P343-M in F.Y. 1974, or an increase of P147-M equivalent to 75%. Local tax collections recorded a progressive yearly increase reaching a high of P504-M at the end of 1977, which is equivalent to an increase of P308-M or 15% from the time the local tax code was implemented in July, 1973. Collections from business taxes for C.Y. 1980 are estimated at P886-M.

The Real Property Tax Code (P.D. 464, as amended), was promulgated in answer to the need of a comprehensive measure that will solve the multifarious problems that beset real property tax administration. These are the major problems then:

1. The widespread practice of underdeclaration of the true and full value of real property in spite of the requirements under C.A. 470 and the various applicable provisions of city charters, for owners to declare the true and full value of their property for purpose of taxation.

2. Inability of provincial and city assessors to undertake an effective revision of real property values as required of them by C.A. No. 470 and the various city charters. While the values of real properties have considerably increased, particularly in urban areas, the schedule of values have not been correspondingly revised or modified.

3. Lack of competent assessment staff and inadequacy of basic assessment tools, particularly tax maps.

4. Low effficiency in the collection of the real property tax.

5. Lack of funds for assessment operations.

Collections from the basic real property taxes which accrue in their entirety to the local governments were more than doubled from P290-M at the end of C.Y. 1974, the year the Real Property Tax Code was enacted, to P586-M at the end of C.Y. 1977. The C.Y. 1980 estimated collection from the realty tax is P1,152-billion.

FINANCIAL AUTONOMY

I understand that the ministry of finance in collaboration with the national tax research center and the University of the Philippines is conducting a research project which includes the study of the effects of the revenue-generation decrees which i have mentioned. I may be second guessing the result of the study, but I think I can reasonably anticipate that the findings will show that one of the factors identified as responsible for more equitable real property tax assessments is the return of the assessment service to the supervisory jurisdiction of the ministry of finance.

Under P.D. 464, provincial and city assessors were once again presidential appointees and the supervisory line of authority from the ministry of finance was clearly re-established. P.D. 464 has thus ensured a strong career and professionalized assessment service.

Another reason that I may also identify is the promulgation of P.D. 1383, amending P.D. 464, where I decided to make mandatory the appointment of deputy provincial and municipal assessors in every municipality in the country. The incumbents of these positions are supposed to be with us today. I am sure they are not falling behind the high expectations that we have, in faithfully enforcing the provisions of the real property tax code especially those pertaining to the principles of uniformity and equity in taxation.

The issuance of P.D. 752 further enhanced the financial autonomy of local governments. This Decree consolidated all credit financial schemes previously available to local governments under separate laws. Aside from domestic loans from local financial institutions, local governments are now allowed to borrow from funds secured by the national government from foreign sources. They may enter into financing contracts with private entities for turn-key projects. Deferred payment financing schemes are also available to them.

P.D. 526 and its implementing regulations Joint Department Order No. 1-75, which by express provisions of the Decree has been adopted as an integral part thereof, has systematized the acquisition, utilization, care, custody and disposition of supplies in local governments. This Decree provides for a built-in mechanism for check and balance in the composition of the committee on awards. Such management tools as the annual procurement program and a handy annualized set of rules and regulations make the system facilitative and expeditious, while protecting the integrity of the supply acquisition and disposal process.

FISCAL ADMINISTRATION

Consequent to the expansion of the resource base of local governments, a set of basic rules was formulated to govern the conduct and management of their financial affairs. P.D. 477 was promulgated on June 3, 1974 to strengthen the internal financial control system of local governments. This included provisions reiterating and reinforcing the supervisory powers of the ministry of finance over treasury personnel and the financial affairs of local units. A mechanism to insure fidelity in the collection, handling and custody of public funds was established. The performance budget system adopted by the national government since 1954 was introduced in simplified form and with modifications to suit the specific, if unique requirements, of local governments. Fundamental principles and ground rules for the expenditure, disbursement and accounting of government funds were prescribed, together with a more defined system of accountability.

Auditors and experts in the installation of internal financial control systems will readily agree with me that the system and network of preventive measures consisting of control records and cross-checks installed pursuant to P.D. 477 and later, P. D. 1445, the government Auditing Code of the Philippines, are practically failsafe or virtually impossible for one to violate and remain undiscovered and unpunished.

I am sometimes jolted, therefore, when i read in the papers something like the Mandaluyong case where millions of local funds are lost through defalcation and at first blush attributable to a failure of the internal fiscal control system. Of course, man is really an ingenious creature and when the element of conspiracy is present, especially if it involves those who are in charge of the check and balance function, then most systems will be rendered ineffective. I am still hoping however that such defalcation cases are not really because of the inherent weakness or a breakdown of the internal fiscal control system but that, on the contrary, the strength of the system accounts for the discovery and punishment of the culprits.

In this connection I am glad to note that Minister Virata has been relentless and uncompromising in his campaign to eliminate graft and corruption and that since 1971 to 1980, 1,137 from the local treasury and assessment services have been administratively punished, most of whom by separation from the service. I feel comfortably assured, therefore, that Minister Virata will be able to preserve the integrity of the local treasury and assessment service.

I also urge you, individually and collectively, through your association, The PACTAA, to police your own ranks and to reduce to the barest minimum, if not entirely eliminate, instances of defalcation and dishonesty. Although confined to a few, such cases can besmirch the integrity and honor of the many who are innocent and faithful to their oaths of office.

In P.D. 477, we have institutionalized and strengthened the local treasury career service and made provisions for professionalism. Under P.D. 1266, regional offices for local government finance have been created in order that the ministry of finance may be able to exercise closer supervision over field personnel and provide support and technical services closer to the people who need them. Minister Virata will thus be able to cut reaction time and significantly improve the delivery of ministry services.

On the subject of careerism and professionalism, I distinctly recall the occasion when you sought my help and intercession against the inclusion of certain provisions in the draft local government code tending to weaken the local treasury service, primarily by transfering the power to appoint provincial, city and municipal treasurers and assessors to their respective local chief executives. I did not hesitate then to take up the cudgels for you, even at the risk of displeasing the proponents, because i believed that your petition was meritorious. Experience has shown that political interference is inimical to sound fiscal management, and local treasurers and assessors should be protected from the pernicious incursions of partisan politics. It behooves each and every member of the PACTAA, therefore, to preserve the integrity, the honor and prestige of the local treasury and assessment services. On my part I shall continue to be resolute in my drive against graft and corruption, against dishonesty, against defalcation and the misapplication of public funds, but be assured that I shall likewise remain equally stead fast in maintaining strong, effective, professional local treasury and assessment career services. The records show that since 1972 I have appointed 124 provincial treasurers, 102 city treasurers, 69 provincial assessors and 71 city assessors and I have consistently observed the career ladder of promotion. Minister Virata assures me that mainly because of the career system where appointments and promotions are made through merit and fitness, we have in the country today an efficient, effective and highly qualified corp of career officials and employees manning our more than 3,000 local assessment offices and treasuries throughout the country.

This is a distinction for which you may very well feel pride I would trust therefore that in the course of this workshop, you will be able to evolve appropriate recommendations for further improvement of local treasury and assessment operations. Fiscal administration while legalistic in origin and orientation, is also dynamic and there is always room for improvement in response to change.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.