Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 28th Annual Convention Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines

I am pleased and happy to be with the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines again on this grand occasion. I have great trust and high regard for the members of your organization because, for a long time of our efforts to achieve development, it is clear that the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines has continuously been a strong and reliable partner of the government. In all the long years of our collective struggle, to achieve progress, the Rural Bankers both individually and as a group have commendably acquitted themselves as dependable and steadfast partners of our government in the pursuit of countryside development.

By extending your credit facilities to the most crucial areas of productive endeavor, you have made it possible for us to gain substantial headway in our twin programs of food production and agrarian reform. Your response to the needs of the farmers during the devastating floods of 1972 and 1974, your enthusiastic support for our successful Masagana 99 Rice Production Program, among others, deserve the highest praise and abiding gratitude of the government.

The tribute to agricultural credit originates from a number of directions. In several conferences of the United Nations’ Food and Agricultural Organization, international experts have agreed that the key to the success of our food production program was the massive channeling of credit to the countryside. Perennially starved of capital, agriculture in our country had previously stagnated and even retrogressed. With the recent infusion of credit resources, however, our farming communities have been transformed into vast fertile grounds for positive change.

This new approach to development planning has added a new dimension to the role of rural banks in development. The initial success of our food production program is a mere foretaste of a continually evolving challenge, even as it opens up opportunities for expanded financial intervention in the rural sector. Today, more than ever, I am certain that credit is a force that we must patiently nurture and sustain in our long-term thrust toward the future.

I fully appreciate the wisdom of your choice of theme for your 23th annual convention, namely, “the future of rural banking in the Philippines,” in view of recent events that have the potential of exerting a critical influence on the course that national development will take in the years to come. The initial effects of these events are already upon us.

First, there is the waning spirit of international detente and the accompanying growth of militarism among the superpowers.

Second, there is the festering issue of Kampuchea which directly confronts the five nations comprising the ASEAN.

Third, there is the energy crisis that continues to fuel inflation, recession and protectionism among nations, big and small. And last — and perhaps more ominous — there is the persistent warning of the F.A.O. on declining food supply, which serves to make more real the prospects of worldwide food shortages and hunger. Taken together all these factors only emphasize the vital importance of agriculture — particularly food production — for the continued survival and sustained growth of our nation.

It would therefore be prudent for us to emulate the strategy of the biblical Joseph by producing and accumulating ample buffer stocks of foodstuffs during periods of plenty as a hedge against the period of scarcity that will surely come. Ample production of basic needs will insulate our economy and our people from the adverse impact of inflation, recession and protectionism coming from abroad, not to mention the debilitating effects of a volatile international market. Adequate supply of basic food items will help moderate any increase in prices, thus keeping these commodities within the reach of the masses.

Perhaps more than any other sector, it is agriculture that is most reassuring and crucial to the attainment of progress and well-being of the nation. The majority of our people live in the countryside; their principal occupation is agriculture. It is in those areas where the problems that agrarian reform seeks to solve are most pronounced, and where the living conditions of many of our countrymen deserve immediate, meaningful and enduring change.

Those of us who inhabit the cities, where the pace of business is frenzied and where expansion is highly visible, are likely to assume that the major source of growth is the urban industrial sector. Yet, the real foundation of the economy is agriculture, which we so often take for granted. The fact is that it was the new productivity of our farms which made agriculture for the first time in many years the acknowledged growth sector of the national economy. It was the rise of rural incomes and consequently the increase of rural purchasing power that enabled city-based manufacturing to continue production despite the declining demand in the urban centers as a result of inflation. In this dramatic transformation of the Philippine countryside, our rural banking system has been a major stimulus for growth.

In partnership with government you have more than contributed your share in changing the face of our rural communities. This partnership is deeply rooted in the basic philosophy, in the socio-economic objectives, in the scope of operations, in the clientele and in the funding of the rural banking system. With the ever widening role that agriculture is expected to play in our thrust towards overall development and modernization, as well as the provision of adequate food security in case of future adversity, we turn to the rural banking system for continued cooperation and support for current and future government-assisted special financing programs. Your strategic location and your extensive network of head offices that are easily accessible to farmers make you the backbone of the rural credit system.

The broad range of agricultural programs — such as Masagana 99, Masaganang Maisan, Gulayan sa Kalusugan, Bakahang Barangay and Biyayang Dagat — are not mere slogans for obtaining agricultural credit. They symbolize, in fact, the totality of the effort required. They represent the means for creating jobs in the rural areas, for increasing production and income, thereby improving the standard of living of all Filipinos. We have come to realize that the participation of rural banks in these government-sponsored financing programs involves great risks, high costs and a relatively low return on investments, due largely to the vagaries of weather and the marginal status of agrarian borrowers. It is also a fact that the rural banks are virtually the only private banking institutions which participate in these costly and high risk credit operations. In view of their singular cooperation and unstinted support to national priority programs, it is but fitting that government should reciprocate their patriotic gesture by sustaining and even enlarging the provision of adequate incentives to rural banks. In addition, these incentives are designed to strengthen the capabilities of the rural banking system.

We are all aware that farmers whose crops are successively destroyed by floods and other natural calamities are unable to repay their loans. As one consequence, a number of rural banks are also unable to meet their obligations with the central bank. I have been made to understand that the central bank, in close coordination with rural bankers, has recently issued a circular implementing an earlier presidential directive to provide a just and lasting solution to the problem of rural bank arrearages. This is possibly a happy medium for compromise between what rural bankers have been asking for and what the central bank is prepared to give. On top of this, I will now direct the ministry of finance to explore the possibility of adopting a cost-sharing scheme whereby the national government, by floating long-term capital bonds, would be able to absorb a portion of rural bank arrearages.

It has also reached my attention that a great number of rural banks declare cash dividends and incur extraneous and unnecessary expenses just to maintain their common paid-in capital at amounts below the tax-exempt ceilings of P1 million to P3 million. It is obvious that the low tax exemption ceilings, instead of serving the intended purpose, have become a great disincentive to a desirable equity capital expansion among rural banks. In resolving this paradox, I again order the ministry of finance to prepare a Batasang Pambansa Bill or a cabinet bill that will align the tax exemption privileges of. Rural banks with those of private development banks in order that they will continue to enjoy up to 1985 higher exemption ceilings of P10 million to P30 million, depending on their respective classifications.

The other development affecting the rural banking system, which I deliberately reserved for emphasis at this juncture, is the set of banking reforms and innovations introduced into the country’s banking system. Basically, these reforms which introduced the concept of universal banking, are designed to remove enforced legal specializations, encourage healthy competition, enhance economies of scale and promote long term investments. It has become a truism that in business, particularly in banking, one has to expand one’s capital base to become more competitive. This is because capital is the basis and the yardstick for a bank’s overall borrowing and lending capacity. It is also the standard measure for accommodating the credit requirements of individual borrowers.

It has also been the policy of the state to extend government counterpart capital assistance to all rural banks that will match private paid-in capital on a peso-for-peso basis, with the sole condition that government equity capital shall be exclusively utilized in government-assisted special financing programs. In order to make the rural banks more competitive in the rural financing market, I direct the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of the Budget and the Central Bank to collectively find ways and means of increasing the annual appropriation for capital assistance to rural banks from sources authorized under the general appropriations act to fully match their common paid-in capital.

I understand there are still some vestiges of enforced legal specialization in rediscounting policies which place limits on amounts — about P40,000 — and on the percentage — 40 percent — which rural banks may obtain from the central bank. The Rural Bank Act has been so amended as to expand the range of functions and provide greater flexibility in the scope of activities in which rural banks may engage themselves.

One of these changes is to allow rural banks to accommodate bigger borrowers not only to enable them to determine their optimum portfolio mix but, more important, to provide them with additional profit centers which would compensate for their cost and risk centers.

It may, therefore, be necessary for the Central Bank to review its rediscounting policies for the purpose of eliminating enforced legal specializations that could hinder the growth and constrict the profitability of rural banks.

I have been informed that one enducement for long-term lending is the extension by the development bank of the Philippines of rediscounting facility for eligible long-term papers. This will not only strengthen the liquity position of rural banks and provide them greater flexibility and accuracy in managing their funds, but it will moreover afford them better opportunity for granting term loans most of which will go to priority projects like the acquisition of machinery and equipment, build-up of breeding stocks, transportation, financing of livelihood projects of the ministry of human settlements and perhaps even low-cost housing. It is thus imperative that the DBP set aside and allocate sufficient funds for purposes of rediscounting eligible long-term papers of rural banks.

The National Development Plan is intimately linked to the countryside. Our national policy supports the pursuit of a balanced agro-industrial development, aimed at achieving self-sufficiency in food for both a rapidly growing population and surplus for exports to meet investment requirements of increased growth. To complement the various on-going agricultural projects, we have launched the cottage industry guarantee and loan fund. This mechanism is primarily intended to generate employment and income in the rural areas, specially during the slack period between planting and harvesting. Financing of cottage industries will also encourage the profitable use of local raw materials. More than this the export of cottage industry products will significantly augment our foreign exchange earnings.

Agriculture alone cannot hope to create the new jobs needed to cope with growing rural populations. Agricultural improvement must be accompanied by the development of labor-intensive rural industries engaged in such activities as the fabrication of tools and farm implements, the establishment of maintenance shops for agricultural machinery, and the manufacture of agricultural inputs in the countryside. It is important that more rural banks be allowed to participate in the C. I. G. L. F. program wherein they have experienced a 100 percent collection rate. Considering, however, that the aggregate ceiling on loans that may be granted under the C. I. G. L. F. program will be determined and limited by the total amount of the available guarantee fund, I hereby direct the ministry of the budget to release P7.7 million to the central bank as administrator of the cottage industry guarantee and loan fund.

This is truly a propitious time for all rural bankers to pursue their quest for greater professionalism and excellence. There is order in the land, the country is at peace, within itself and with its neighbors. Our economy has been exhibiting a respectable measure of health, speculations to the contrary notwithstanding. We have just concluded an orderly plebiscite that has now given us the mandate to launch a new political system with the coming presidential elections. Our people’s political maturity has stood the tests of current crises, even as we now feel with greater fervor a sense of national purpose.

Once again allow me to convey my warmest greetings to all the participants of this convention. It is my belief that as long as the rural bankers of our nation remain aware of their responsibility to our people, the effort to move forward in the countrysides towards a well-balanced agro-industrial growth, will by all indications succeed. With your help, we have managed to create a miracle in our rural areas; our self-sufficiency in staples is just one of its many manifestations. That we have done so is principally due to the prodigious efforts of the farmers themselves; but without your contributions, without the support of our rural bankers, the fruits of such efforts may have been less spectacular.

I therefore extend to you all my sincere congratulations, and in that same spirit, I express the hope that you will continue the good work.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.