Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 58th Conference of the International Law Association

[Delivered at the Philippine International Cultural Center, August 28, 1978]

The Integrated Approach to Human Rights

I WOULD HAVE preferred to have remained in languor listening to the witticisms of, say, Justice Fernando, who is so wise that he can violate Francis Bacon’s dictum that the jurist must be more wise than witty, and whose introduction of the First Lady I consider a concurring opinion that binds him to the New Society. For, of course, he has been the most objective of the jurists, rational and scholarly. He has not always agreed with the decisions of the President. And so I consider his statements as binding, not as coming from a hostile witness, but as a statement against interests like Newsweek and Time magazines, which he quoted.

Or I would have inclined to remain the soul, the dream and the vision that the governor of Metropolitan Manila so poignantly painted with the brush of a romanticist. But being a tough-minded lawyer, and you can ascribe that to my ill-spent youth in the pursuit of the law, I am afraid that I have acquired the uncomfortable or uncomforting habit of measuring visions against reality and rationality.

This is my role today. Actually the term “keynote speech” is some kind of an anomaly. I have never yet felt that I have fulfilled the role of delivering a keynote speech properly especially when I have such great speakers before me, who apparently saw the text of my speech beforehand.

Much as I would have preferred to join the First Lady in the pursuit of the will of the wisp — our will of the wisp, no matter to what ends of the world she may bring me, for that too is my dedication and aberration — it is part of man’s despair that while it is the woman’s role to dream and to live fondly in hope, man must keep his feet on the ground, cling to Mother Earth, and sharpen his wits and weapons around him for the mundane, the grim task of survival. This I must therefore undertake in today’s ceremonies.

Allow me therefore to formally extend welcome to each and everyone of you Our country, of course, is honored to be the host of the 58th conference of the International Law Association. This conference the first to be held in Manila in your association’s 105 years of existence, calls to mind vividly two other meetings of luminaries in the law – the World Peace through Law Conference and the International Conference of Appellate Magistrates.

Our present circumstances, which among others permit us to host another conference, do remind me of the cynic’s assertion that any gathering of lawyers is a danger to mankind. As you can see, we have survived several gatherings of lawyers.

The gentle cynicism aside, it remains true that the lawyers of the world, by and large, continue to be committed to the laws with the memorial objective of bringing to bear the rule of reason and sanity — in a word, rationality — to the conduct of human affairs. One may indeed characterize the mission of the law as the ceaseless struggle for rationality in a world of conflict and confusion. This struggle, let me add, achieves a special urgency in our day and in our world. The acceleration of change in which the future overtakes the present in a world grown smaller and yet more complex finds the lawyer’s universe of precedence continually challenged by the unprecedented.

Indeed, it has been asked whether the law is still able to keep pace with reality.

This observation has a peculiar relevance to the law among nations, or international law, which we note is not as pervasive in both vitality and effectiveness as perhaps, say, domestic law. The primary reason of course is that domestic law is enacted and imposed by accepted authority. But when it comes to the law among nations, we have yet to progress, it appears, from the Athenian view, that justice is to the interest of the stronger. International law is largely governed up to now by coercive calculation among sovereign nations.

Thus the vision and the dream among men of the law of a supernational authority governing the affairs of nations fills many of us with both hope as well as despair. At the same time, however, the legal mind as I said is a tough-minded one in, perhaps, some kind of a Jamesian way. Its objective is not the Utopian one of completely eliminating conflict but of finding rational and acceptable means of resolving such conflicts. This is the spirit which animates, I am sure, the labors of the legal minds individually and collectively as in the International Law Association.

In this respect, I daresay that we can only be strengthened by the fortitude and the perseverance of men like you. For there have since been added many new issues and problems peculiar to our times — the problems of peace and security, the tremendous growth in number of the human family, the new problems of scarcity in critical resources, the widening gulf between the rich and the poor nations, the new dangers to human environment, and perhaps the most important of all, the new problem of cooperation and understanding between the developing and developed countries with regard to these problems. All of these have manifestly extended the parameters of our quest for law and morality in the world we live in, and in a sense, they have made ever more difficult an already demanding enterprise.

This altogether new and unprecedented situation may justify a certain scholasticism. It may well be a philosophical core, a basic core philosophy, if we may call it that, a critical issue as old as the first glimmerings of jurisprudence in our world. Let us say that this is both true in international law as well as in domestic law. And this is the controversy in critical times between law and authority on the one hand, and individual rights and independence on the other.

As Heraclitus stated simply 25 centuries ago, “authority unlimited by individual rights is tyranny, and individual rights unlimited by law or authority is anarchy.” But the old philosophical view, whatever may result from these statements, is happily still prevailing assumption of the law. That there is indeed an opposition between authority and liberty and that it is our business to strike a balance between the two in the making of a just, humane public order. And I repeat, this is true within the jurisdictions of states and it is true in the relations among states.

We should add, however, that the striking of the balance needs to be more pragmatic than ideological; to the wisdom of the law, we must add the probity of science.

You have come to a country in which the core of philosophic issue, as I have referred to, of liberty and individual rights is being passionately debated from day to day. This should not come to you as a surprise. For after all, this country is a country that did aspire and did proclaim the first republic in Asia after the revolution of 1896. This republic that was proclaimed was based on a modem fundamental law, the Malolos Constitution which probably bore the mark of the sovereign Filipino people. And before that great period, our ancestors wrote down their codes of law and morality.

It has been said that the Philippines has too many lawyers and that we have a tendency towards legalism, I presume the speeches in this morning’s ceremonies will prove this.

The other side of course is that for us, the rule of law is an unalterable fact of both our history as well as our tradition. Thus, even at the time of transition from the old to the New Society, even in the face of rebellion and violence, and while confronting a separatist war, we remain faithful to the tradition of legality.

I need not remind many of our friends here that my first decisive act after the proclamation of martial law was to reject all notions and suggestions of establishing a revolutionary government outside of the pale of the Constitution. Our strongest resolution was to establish reforms, so drastic because they were necessary as to be nearly a revolution but all within the framework and in the name of the Constitution. Hence the term “constitutional authoritarianism” to characterize the present crisis government.

The relevant constitutional provision for this course of action is Article 7, section 10, paragraph 2 of our Constitution which reads and I quote:’ “The President shall be Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines and whenever necessary he may call out such Armed Forces to prevent or suppress lawless violence, invasion, insurrection or rebellion. In case of invasion, insurrection or rebellion or imminent danger thereof, when the public safety requires it, he may suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or place the Philippines or any part thereof under martial law.”

The decision to avail oneself of this constitutional protection for the Republic against the leftist-rightist rebellion as well as the secessionist war has of course been misunderstood by many outsiders and naturally condemned by vested interests whose unwarranted power over the rest of the population had been ended. Subsequent events have demonstrated however that martial law or crisis government such as it is, has been exercised and continues to be exercised for the good of the many whose liberties had been rendered meaningless by poverty, ignorance, disease and worst of all, lack of opportunity and dominance of the law.

In our old society of ostensible democracy, much was made of the freedom of the press and above all, the people’s free choice in colorful and often excitingly violent elections. The hope was always the magic word — change. But there never was any change, while the rest of the world was changing. In this instance the ensuing change was palpable and tangible and almost immediate. In quick succession, we reorganized not only the government but our economy, reconvened the Constitutional Convention, called periodic plebiscites and referenda, organized the barangays — the fundamental level of popular political participation and the other organs of political involvement such as the sanggunians or the councils — and lately, the Batasang Bayan or Legislative Council, and now, the Interim Batasang Pambansa or the Interim National Assembly, which is the precursor of the regular National Assembly under the new political system as provided for in our new Constitution.

Thus martial law was instituted in accordance with law and the demands of our people. And as Justice Fernando has opined in writing, “the merit of martial law was that, we were able to apply the Constitution in appropriate cases.”

In all these labors, we did not change the concept of liberty in order to adjust it to the purposes and aims of our New Society. We simply set an order of priorities. While setting forward to transform our society and in this sense to reform popular attitudes in favor of more civic responsibility, we did not say or we did not ask our people to sacrifice what is most human in themselves to achieve a stronger better world for future generations. On the contrary, we hold that this is our finest hour and that the little sacrifice we make now will be redeemed not only in the future but in the present. That, ultimately, in accepting the challenge of remaking our society, we are serving our best individual interest.

But the core philosophical question as I have said, is the fine balance between authority and liberty. And this as you may be aware of has shifted year to year without either side of the equation destroying each other.

In the release of political prisoners, the lifting of curfew and of the travel ban and other restrictions, and the holding of elections, we have been guided not by sheer exigency but by a calculated appreciation of what the evolving society can endure. To be sure ours still has some of the elements of a command society. But in time, as we proceed towards rehabilitation and normalization, the institutional mechanisms for maintaining the balance between liberty and authority will have been completely established.

We may therefore take pride in a political experiment based on legal and constitutional grounds, an experiment which demonstrates the rule of law even under extreme circumstances. Had we hesitated or misread the popular sentiment, our Republic probably would have expired. And within the impotence of the legal order, violence and bloodshed would have been the midwife of the new dispensation.

But no society however creative in its legal application can exist in a vacuum. Therefore the decisions and actions of such a society are often strongly affected by, if not prey to exigent forces beyond its control. This is the plight of developing societies and nations in the world today. Not all their legal creativity nor all their political piety can survive for long the incoherence and confusion of the international legal order, if indeed there is order at all.

The rhetoric of a common cause for survival, the doctrine of interdependence are mocked by the facts of international behavior.

The question is: How can society striving for a new order for its members survive amidst the savagery in the wider international order? Your committee report on the theory and methodology of international law suggests that the Batellian composition of the equality of states approximates more closely the needs and reality of today’s international community. But we should ask now how our scholarships and serious activities can help mankind without the proper authority to enforce international law. The making of law, of society itself, is an act of political will.

I note too your recollection that the participating states in the drafting of the UN charter were opposed to conferring on the General Assembly any legislative power to enact binding rules of international law as well as to impose general conventions and states by majority vote. We can guess that the reason for this seemingly narrow-minded decision is it would have been impossible to gain the assent of other states, much less of those actually participating. Thus the core philosophical issue of law, the balancing of authority and liberty flounders in the face of national sovereignty. Civilized societies have thrived on the willingness of human beings to adjust their individual freedom to the claims of the community. With the state of the world today and the state of our present knowledge, we do not see any other way for individual nations, if humanity is to survive the perils of our era.

We fall back then on the dream and the vision of a united humanity, of an ultra-national authority that the governor of Metropolitan Manila has so lovingly referred to in her welcome speech. And yet before this dream and before this vision, we must come to the conclusion that the predators of the world whether commercial or territorial will remain always as man’s principal adversary in the quest of this vision and this dream.

Are these intemperate words coming from a scared and desperate head of state? Let us look around us. Racism, subversion, wars by proxy under various rationalizations, hunger, pestilence, degradation, terrorism, all these continue to denigrate our pretensious to the richest societies man has ever achieved. I was about to say, the richest civilization but for the lack of civility in many areas of international relations. Now, as it was then, weakness invites domination and power is a temptation to aggression.

How then can we say that we have advance the rule of law in international relations which, Batelle agrees is but the wider expansion of the relations of man with man? Let us put the matter more dispassionately to ourselves.

The need for cooperation among nations in matters of law and peace, while either is persistently overshadowed by the bitter rivalries and competition of the powerful states so much so that when only their voices are heard in the global arena, has become a virtual imperative in our time as the voice of the rest of humanity has enered the compass of history. This voice has made us conscious of the problems well beyond what once engaged the attention of previous eras. It has made the whole world aware, I daresay, of the indivisibility of the family of man. For if the developed nations have need of law to regulate the relations and their concurrence with one another, to conciliate their conflicts and their differences, even greater is the need of developing nations for a system of law and morality to govern international society, since being less powerful they can easily be dominated as they have been, and being less developed they can easily be discriminated against as they continue to be. For most of their histories, the people of this country have lain outside the ambit of the law of nations as the colonists, dominions and protectorates of powerful empires.

Indeed, whatever form of international law governed global affairs then, it sought to protect instead the rights of the colonizers. Most of these peoples have had to wage long and protracted struggles against their colonial rulers in order to claim their right to self-government. And only when fully independent did they begin to reside within the law of nations.

In many ways the developing countries provide the impetus for changes in international law in our time as they endeavor to replace structures and relationship in the world that recall to them the legacy of their colonial past and to establish relations with other nations in terms consistent with their primary concern of securing their independence and promoting their national development.

If we trace the evolution of international law as it is today, and understand how its prospects have advanced and developed, it will be seen that it has followed the growth of sovereignty for the small nation-states and not a risk at its expense.

Men of the law like you have since time immemorial sought to regulate the actions of states and their relations with the discipline of world law even in ancient days when the world was but the province of a few mighty empires and civilizations. All the same it was the legal discipline of the imperium of conquest and domination serving the ends of the few and not of the many. As it was then, so it is now in many respects.

But just as the royal lawgiver of old gave way to the modern legislator and jurist, so must the legal discipline of the strong give way to the consensus. We say that this is dictated by the human predicament. Still it is a predicament that must be recognized by all, especially by those who have it in their power to advance the quest for an authentic international legal order.

We cannot deny the advance that has been made by international law especially under the United Nations. There is an increasing tendency to view the challenge of international law today as the creation of a world economic community where a balance can be struck between limited food supply and population explosion. The result of this phenomenon is the growth of what many of you have called the “law merchant,” who today seeks to govern multi-national corporations and their contracts with various governments. We see for instance the common example of the inclusion of arbitration agreements in these contracts, an achievement which must be credited to the International Chamber of Commerce.

We also seek as another example the convention and the settlement of investment disputes between states and nationals of other states, which was drafted and submitted to governments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

At this point, I recall to you with appreciation some of the milestones in the growth of world law such as the work of the International Labor Organization in the codification of labor laws, the work of the International Institute for the unification of private law, otherwise known as the ROM Institute or UNIDROME. And the work of the United Nations Commission on International Trade law, or UNCITAL, in harmonizing the law of the international sale of goods, commercial arbitration and international payments. And at least one survey has shown that a marked advance in integration has occurred in the law in the last half century and that despite setbacks it continues. In the meanwhile, the world community has come to grips not with the great formulations of law and the government of states and the relation of nations, but with the clamor for a common law of the human rights of individuals in their respective communities.

The humanitarian concern for human rights has grown worldwide. At the very start, I wish to say what for me is an important word on the subject. It is common to attribute the origin of human rights to the Western world, more specifically to the Europeans. This attribution is a common error. For it cannot be denied that the love of freedom is universal and antedates the issues that confront a literate society.

I take the liberty of pointing out that the histories of pre-colonial Asia and of pre-colonial Africa abound with examples of devices instituted by the natives thereat to prevent or eliminate tyranny in any form.

We in the Philippines repudiate the concept that as the people of a developing country, the Philippines should run to a developed country for the protection of its human rights. For no developed society can arrogate unto itself the function of acting as ombudsman or protector of the Philippines or guardian of the rights of its citizenry.

This function, the Filipinos with their venerable record of sacrifice in the name of freedom and of liberty are best equipped to do. And from this function we have no intention of stepping backward in favor of those who would presume to undertake what is best left to ourselves.

This position, of course, is based on an equal or parallel principle in domestic law. A person whose rights have been violated, say, by his government must first exhaust all administrative remedies before embarking with an extra-judicial or extraordinary or judicial course of action. We need not close our eyes to or gloss over the fact that there is not a single government on earth today which has not somehow violated human rights in one way or another.

The proper inquiry therefore should not be whether there has been any violation of human rights — for then, all countries must plead to the charge— but rather, whether the violation is in accordance with government policy or a part of government policy, and if it is not a part of government policy, whether the government involved has taken steps to redress such a violation in accordance with its internal structure or law. Foreign observers or interventionists do not seem to realize this to be the more rational and wiser approach.

As head of state of a developing country, I place great emphasis on a human rights policy that embraces political and civil rights on the one hand, and economic and cultural rights on the other hand. Human rights should not be interpreted so narrowly that the issue is restricted only to political and civil freedom. Moreover, it must be understood that the human rights issue cannot be utilized as a vehicle for a new moral imperialism especially when the developed countries continue to ignore the demand for a more equitable distribution of resources world-wide and for increasing development assistance to the Third World. The developed countries can continue to ignore the call for a new international economic order only at the risk of major dislocations in the world community.

At this point, allow me to address myself to the call for a new international economic order which I shall henceforth refer to as the NIEO. The essential philosophy of the NIEO is set out already in the declaration and program of action adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1974 for the purpose of redressing existing injustices and making it possible to eliminate the widening gap between the developed and developing countries. These two United Nations resolutions were followed by the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of the States.

Perhaps, it is proper to add that up to now they have not been implemented.

I have touched briefly on the issues of international human rights and the new international economic order as well as the basic and core philosophy in international relations as well as domestic law. These are examples of what a developing country would view as core issues in a scholarly meeting of distinguished men of the law such as those who compose the International Law Association.

But as I conclude, I beg your leave to take an overview of international law as it stands today. There can be no debate that the effectiveness of international law in our time is anchored on the problem of national sovereignty. Our system of international law rests on the conception of absolute state sovereignty, and certain principles flow from this concept.

Among these principles, we might mention that which postulates that international law does not concern itself with internal changes in the structure within the states. And, therefore, states have a duty of non-interference in the internal affairs of others. Another basic principle is that agreements solemnly undertaken must be fulfilled. Another is incapsulated by the phrase that war is the litigation of states. And still another is that traditional international law is limited to relations between sovereign states with the addition of what has been termed as a few analogous but slightly anomalous communities without room for the recognition of the individual.

With these concepts of traditional international law it was no small wonder that the League of Nations foundered on the rock of national sovereignty. And this possibly teaches us the lesson that there can be no compromise between national sovereignty and international order. If the League of Nations failed, it was for a variety of reasons. But the most fundamental was that the membership lacked the will to make it an effective instrument of international peace. This is the same question that faces the United Nations today, as well as all considerations of international law and international order.

International law can achieve international peace and order only if the peoples of the world can acquire the habit of cooperation. But before they can do so, they must change their national attitudes and before that, their individual attitudes. Hence, it has been pointed out that any design for Utopia or any design for world community on most modest terms can be achieved only by some kind of an educational process. Only thus can the rule of law in world affairs be realized. I have no doubt that our deliberations which we inaugurate today will play a significant role in this educational process which certainly must be the most difficult ever undertaken by the human race.

The educational process will take time. Meanwhile, let us pray that we have enough time in our hands.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].