Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 24th International Conference of the Red Cross

On behalf of the Government and people of the Philippines, I am pleased to welcome all of you– participants and guests of the twenty-fourth International Conference of the Red Cross.

As you may have heard, Manila has recently become an increasingly popular place for international meetings and conferences. Even so, we are especially honored by your International Committee’s decision to hold its 1981 Meeting in our capital city, and by the presence here today of so many distinguished Red Cross delegates from so many countries. I can only hope that the warmth of our hospitality becomes proportionate to our affection and respect for the Red Cross– and all that it stands for.

Like most of the world’s peoples, we Filipinos regard the Red Cross as embodying the noblest impulses of man. We look to your organization’s service to humanity of well over a century–a cause that we have tried to share, no matter how modestly–as somehow an affirmation of our own solidarity with all of mankind.

As one of the 150 nations that are signatories to the Red Cross–initiated Geneva Conventions, the Philippines is committed wholeheartedly to the principles for which your oganization stands.

Our country has also been a beneficiary of the Red Cross’ ministrations, whenever it has met its share of natural calamities. In times of flood and typhoon, volcanic eruptions, great fires or epidemics, Filipinos have learned to look to the Red Cross for kindness and sympathy–symbolic acts that are often even more comforting than material help, particularly during those times when the more conventional mechanisms of social welfare and relief break down.

The example of the Red Cross has also made the doing of good works–acts of altruism–that much easier for us. For, the Red Cross, in helping us when we most needed help, has taught us how to share.

Filipinos have a saying that, in paraphrase, goes like this: “a single act of kindness is like a pebble thrown into a still pool: it creates ripples all along the water and so ends up much bigger than it was at the beginning.”

This is what had prompted us, without a moment’s hesitation, to decide to provide a haven for those who fled their troubled homelands at the height of the Indochina troubles.

There were those who said, then, that such as act would incur the enmity of some of our neighbors. Even while realizing this, we still acted calmly on our decision. For we had neither the leisure–nor the inclination–to inquire into the political affinities or the racial background of those who came out of the seas into our territorial waters. To us they were simply fellow human-beings in distress–and we were proud to do what we could do for them, to share with them the little that we have of peace and safety and compassion.

The philosophers tell us that the mark of man’s ascent from his primeval beginnings is his increasingly sharpened sensibility to the sufferings of his fellow-man. We in the Philippines regard the Red Cross as the guardian of this still-fragile moral sensibility, which defines man’s humanity.

Having said this, I must however tell you candidly of our apprehension about the attempts of some quarters to compromise the Red Cross tradition of being non-partisan.

The Geneva Conventions and its protocols are sacred institutions, testaments to humanitarianism. In natural and social environments wracked by turmoil, these documents have worked to check the momentum of violence.

During fits of human fury, the Geneva Conventions and its protocols define the norms of civilized behavior–reestablishing sanity amid the madness that men still inflict on themselves with disturbing regularity. That the Geneva Conventions and the additional protocols have on the whole been observed is a reflection not only of their intrinsic worth, but also a credit to the organization which campaigns hardest for their observance — the Red Cross.

As an organization whose sole concern and involvement are defined entirely by the precepts of humanitarianism, the Red Cross has an international prestige that no similar organization can claim.

Its determination to remain aloof from political or ideological consideration; its capacity to resist the machinations of less-commendable interests; its historic record of selflessness and self-sacrifice; all these have given the Red Cross a unique influence and persuasiveness that other international and often better-endowed organizations can only aspire to.

Because of this unique influence and prestige that it possesses, the Red Cross must ever be vigilant against those who would use it for their own political and partisan interests. It must also take every care in dealing with the prickly nationalism of the new countries.

It is true that internationalism has, since the League of Nations, been the acknowledged ideal of the world community. Yet until now we–both the new nations and the old–live in the era of nationalism. Particularly in the Third World, this sense of nationalism is jealously guarded–perhaps because it is still so precarious and uncertain.

Many of the developing societies must still concern themselves, above everything else, with the task of political and economic consolidation. The character and extent of this process may vary from one nation to the other. But it must be completed before these new societies can take their rightful places as self-confident nation-states of the world community.

In this process of national integration, new nations may sometimes be forced into policy decisions and adjustments that may seem harsh and authoritarian to older societies, whose own civic tradition is secure. When this happens, one can only hope that liberal societies will understand the difficult circumstances that may compel an emerging state to undergo this necessary process of consolidation, no matter how painful it may be.

As a new nation, the Philippines has recently been going thorugh a somewhat similar process of nation-building. Today, the most critical phases have passed; I am confident that the unfolding of our national destiny from here on will be less traumatic to the conventional wisdom.

Our own experience has prepared us to be sympathetic with other developing countries who are forced by their unique circumstances to exercise the greatest vigilance in safeguarding their sovereignty.

We understand how they can become so indignant over any suggestion of outside “interference” — no matter how altruistic its disguise — that in effect undermines their capacity for self-determination.

This is the thought I should like to leave with you as you begin your conference — and I hope that I have not misinterpreted for you the delicacy and gravity of a potential problem that, I fear, will arise again and again in the relationships of international organizations and their clientele in the new states.

Forbearance and understanding will come easier from you if you keep in mind that the ultimate ends of the international aid-givers and national governments coincide.

Any government, if it is to be worthy of its popular mandate, must have as its sole objective the improvement of the national condition through the extirpation of poverty, hunger and disease from within its territory. And this effort is almost always enhanced by the help of worldwide humanitarian movements like the Red Cross.

Once again, let me say how happy we are to have you visiting with us: I wish you all a pleasant stay–and a fruitful conference.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.