Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Second National Convention of Lawyers sponsored by the Integrated Bar of the Philippines

Chief Justice Fernando, Minister Mendoza, President Roco, Members of the IBP Board of Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen:

After a fairly long summer of engagements involving many groups and sectors of our society, I consider it a welcome change to be in the company today of my brothers and sisters in the profession of law.

I have no expectations here, of course, that our meeting today will be less exacting or inquisitorial than those which I have had in recent months. Indeed, I expect this to be more so, we being lawyers all. But there is nothing more stimulating or invigorating than to be with a group of men and women with whom one shares a common bond and interest.

It was Lord Francis Bacon, himself a lawyer of talent and ability, who suggested that every man owes a duty to his profession. But to hear a lawyer interpret it, it seems that in the case of the law profession, this wise saw is capable of amendment and addition, to wit, that every man in the community also owes a duty to our profession. And this, because, at some time, somewhere between the cradle and the grave, all must acknowledge their liability to our profession and pay the debt.

I remember one story about the lawyer who was about to take a vacation abroad, and then cancelled the trip at the last minute. When pressed for an explanation, he answered: “one of my rich clients has just died. If I take my vacation now, I’m afraid the heirs will get all of the property.”

That anecdote, Apochryphal or not, reflects one popular view of our profession. There is another which reflects yet another popular sentiment.

It is related of Abraham Lincoln that as a young lawyer he once had to plead two cases on the same day and before the same judge both cases involved the same principle of law, but in one Lincoln appeared for the defendant, and in the other for the plaintiff. In the morning, he made an eloquent plea for the defense and won his case. In the afternoon, he took the opposite side and was arguing with the same earnestness. The judge, noticing the major change in position, interrupted him to ask why.

“Your honor,” Lincoln answered, “I may have been wrong this morning, but I know I’m right this afternoon.”

Our profession brims over with stories and anecdotes of this sort — many of which are pure inventions, and sometimes by lawyers themselves. And if they persist and thrive, it is perhaps because we lawyers confirm them in some way and at some time in our careers.

But not all questions of law, however, may be treated with the same alacrity and confidence as Lincoln’s from both sides of the spectrum. And not all disquisitions at the bar are pecuniary in nature.

It is of such matters that I shall speak today, before this national convention of the integrated bar.

During the last few months, there has been much discussion in our country, and especially within the legal community, about certain powers vested in the presidency, and about the system of government we have in our land.

It is hardly arguable that these questions go to the heart of our national life today, to the security and well-being of our people and our country. There is therefore all the more need to enhance public understanding of these issues, and what better way is there for this than through the service of our legal community.

With respect to the first of the questions involved, there is need to understand the rationale for Amendment No. 6 through which the constitution vests legislative powers in the Presidency; there is need to examine how this authority has been in fact exercised by the president; and there is need finally to know how we propose to exercise this authority henceforth with the convening of the regular Batasang Pambansa,

Amendment No. 6 came into being when our sovereign people in the referendum of October 16, 1976 voted in favor of its adoption as part of our constitution. At the time of its adoption, our country was then under Martial Law; it was not therefore-specifically to the situation at the time that the amendment sought to fill a need. It looked rather towards the time when Martial Law would be lifted, and normal democratic government would be restored. And this took place on January 17, 1981.

The text of the amendment reads:

“Whenever in the judgment of the President (Prime Minister), there exists a grave emergency on a threat or imminence thereof, or whenever the interim Batasang Pambansa or the Regular National Assembly fails or is unable to act adequately on any matter for any reason that in his judgment requires immediate action, he may in order to meet the exigency issue the necessary decrees. Orders or Letters of Instruction which shall form part of the Law of the Land.”

There are only two instances specified in the amendment when I can exercise the power to legislate: (1) The existence of a grave emergency or threat or imminence thereof; and (2) The failure or inability to act adequately on the part of the Batasang Pambansa on a matter that requires immediate action.

Emergency connotes that time is of the essence. To wait too long would jeopardize National Survival. Emergency is concerned with action rather than understanding, with decisions rather than analysis and procedural niceties.

The government must be able to withstand sudden emergencies and to avail itself of sudden unexpected opportunities to enhance the security and welfare of the people to borrow the penetrating words of Justice Pacifico de Castro: “Presidential action to meet the exigency must be prompt or it is of little value”

In case of the failure or inability of the Batasang Pambansa to act adequately on matters that require immediate action, the time element is equally of paramount importance the immediacy of the problem calls for decisive and prompt action.

It is therefore pertinent to ask what the considerations were that led to the adoption of the amendment. Why was there a perceived need to have such a provision incorporated into the constitution?

In upholding the validity of the amendment in the case of Legaspi vs. Minister of Finance (115 SCRA 418), the Supreme Court took note of its rationale in opining thus:

“…The problem was what may be needed for National Survival or the restoration of normalcy in the face of a crisis or an emergency should be reconciled with the popular mentality and attitude of the people against Martial Law.

XXX XXX XXX

“Thus, our understanding of the development or events and attitudes that led to the adoption of Amendment No. 6 is that in addition to the four measures authorized in the body of the charter this amendment is supposed to be a fifth one purportedly designed to make it practically unnecessary to proclaim Martial Law, except in instances of actual surface warfare of rebellious activities or very sophisticated subversive actions that cannot be adequately met without Martial Law itself.”

The four measures referred to are: (1) The delegated emergency power to the President Under Sec. 15, Art. VIII of the Constitution wherein the President is authorized, in times of war or national emergency, to exercise powers necessary and proper to carry out a declared national policy; (2) The power of the President to call out the Armed Forces to prevent or suppress lawless violence, invasion, insurrection, rebellion or imminent danger thereof, per sec. 9, Art. VII of the Constitution; (3) When public safety requires it. To suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus; and (4) the power to place the country or any part thereof under Martial Law.

In introducing this fifth manner of response to an emergency situation for the country. We were thus providing for a means to act and resolve the emergency without recourse to the other measures and especially without setting the nation on the fateful course of Martial Law.

It will be remembered that at the time the amendment was proposed and adopted the country was then under Martial Law. And because the tides of crisis were lifting. We were looking forward to the time when Martial Law could be fully lifted. But under those circumstances too. We fully recognized that the dangers to the stability and security of the Republic were not about to disappear completely once Martial Law was lifted. Thus we were also concerned about how to respond to various gradations of threat to the Republic. And we did not want to lift Martial Law only to be compelled by the first sign of crisis to proclaim it yet again.

Amendment No. 6 then was designed to provide for calibrated, expeditious and efficacious responses that will promptly and adequately meet the demands of the times especially concerning matters involving national security.

Amendment No. 6 is the difference between getting ahead and solving the problems and just getting by. It expedites the decision-making processes to meet emergencies or contingencies with immediacy. To convene the Batasang Pambansa to enable the members to meet. To debate and at times vacillate finally to vote may take time. The emergency or contingency may have already spread beyond salvation or has already destroyed the very foundation of our democratic processes sought to be prevented.

And let us also take note by way of replying to those who in simplistic logic argue that in a democracy. Legislation must be wholly left to the legislature, that Amendment No. 6 is a constitutional mandate it is an expression of the will of the people it is the answer of if the people to the obstacles posed to us by the complexities of the time.

In the event this is what the amendment has done to serve us in the period since January 17, 1981, when Martial Law was lifted to the present.

By the judicious exercise of this power to legislate we have weathered the early challenges to national security and public order that came with the lifting of Martial Law; we have managed to provide efficacious responses to urgent social and economic problems during the last four years; and we have prudently filled the gap that occasionally arose between the workings of our legislature and the demands of the times.

Nowhere in the record is it shown that this power was exercised arbitrarily or unilaterally as feared by some; nowhere has it been employed save in direct and urgent response to a need of the nation.

If we look at the brief history of our exercise of the powers granted by Amendment No. 6, we can see how the security and economy of our country might have been imperilled but for its efficacious exercise, and how the governance of the nation might have been locked in impasse without it.

A few illustrations will demonstrate this point.

When the opposition demanded certain amendments to be incorporated in the election code in time for the last elections, representations or demands of the opposition could not have been met were it not for the issuance of PD 1907 granting certain rights for the opposition. Said PD reset the scheduled meetings of citizens election committees “to allow those who failed to register to be able to do so.

With the surge over the past year of insurgency, terrorism and subversion which created a climate of turbulence in the country, we promulgated a number of decrees increasing the penalties for the crimes of insurrection and rebellion.

When the Rent Control Law was about to expire and there was public clamour for its extension for the benefit of the great majority of apartment dwellers. PD 1912 was issued extending the effectivity of BP 25 up to December 1984. Were it not again for Amendment No. 6 the President w would have been helpless to alleviate their condition.

When our financial and other economic problems threatened the very health of the national economy, again. Upon the recommendation of our economic managers and various sectors of society, I had to issue economic measures such as PD 1883 defining crimes of block marketing and salting of foreign exchange and imposing penalties therefor and PD 1931 further defining and strengthening the authority of the Presidential Anti-dollar Salting Tax Force.

When government agencies and corporation are no longer responsive to the demands of changing times, the President is empowered by PD 1772 to restructure and organize them so that they may be more relevant to our society.

When we needed urgent measures to check graft and corruption in the government and to institutionalize reform measures under an effective authority. We created through PDS 1606 and 1607 the Sandiganbayan and the Tanodbayan.

Finally, let us not forget that during the last election campaign when the Batasan was not in session and when labor groups were agitating for wage increases it was through Amendment No. 6 that we were able to deal expeditiously with the problem and the need, without having to wait for the Regular Batasan to convene.

This is not the place to recount each and every Decree and Executive Order issued by me, by virtue of this constitutional amendment. I shall merely refer you to a detailed listing of these which you may peruse and examine at will. What I wish to stress is the fact that during the period from the time of the lifting of Martial Law to the present. This power to legislate has been utilized with prudence and purpose, and our actions have been effective in providing immediate remedies and solutions to problems.

If then we turn to how we propose to utilize this power in future with the regular Batasang Pambansa fully-convened. We are faced basically with a question of how this authority can be maintained in support of and not in rivalry with the Batasang Pambansa.

I have already stated in my message to the Batasang Pambansa at the opening of its inaugural session. The specific guidelines under which this authority to legislate will be employed. If ever.

The specific conditions for the use of the power as provided for in the constitution will be scrupulously adhered to: namely, first, the existence of a grave emergency or threat or imminence thereof; and second, the failure or inability to act adequately on the part of the Batasang Pambansa on a matter that requires immediate action.

I have said moreover that I shall exercise this power only upon the recommendation or concurrence of the majority party in caucus. This is the same party that holds the majority in the legislature, and directs the administration of the majority of our local governments.

There should be no question therefore of arbitrary or unilateral action of the President. There should be no doubt as to our intent to mold national consensus behind every response which we shall be impelled to take in the event of an emergency or a void in legislative action.

All these considerations throw some light upon the other question as to what form of government we have today. Whether we have reverted to the Presidential system or have in fact a parliamentary one.

The question, however, to begin with is only relevant to the degree that its answer provides us a clear picture of the process of national decision-making. Nomenclature does not matter very much in solving problems before the nation. Decision-making does. And the process of shaping public policies is therefore of utmost importance.

The blur, you might say, in public perceptions of our system of government today has emanated principally from the fact that executive responsibility is vested in a president elected directly by the people and who is not himself a member of the Batasang Pambansa and this has been compounded by various conflicting opinions from within government itself. Some officials and functionaries in government refer to our system of government as “parliamentary in character.” on the other hand. The supreme court speaking thru Chief Justice Enrique Fernando in the case of the F ree Telephone Workers Union vs. Minister of Labor (108-SCRA 757). Has said that ours is essentially a presidential system. The court stated that:”The adoption of certain aspects of a parliamentary system in the amended constitution does not alter its essentially presidential character. XXX.”

It seems to me, however, that the crucial point here is the process of decision-making and the interplay of the Executive and Legislative in the making of public policies. While the President is not responsible to the Batasan, the Prime Minister and the various ministers, who are part of the Executive Circle, are ultimately responsible to the Batasang Pambansa of which they are also members. This clearly underlines the blending of the Legislative and the Executive Departments which are essential features of parliamentarism. This mechanism ensures close collaboration between the two great political departments of government. Decisions as to policy are taken not only by the legislators but also by those who implement approved policy.

This leads us to two other aspects of Parliamentarism, which have become very pronounced in our present set-up, namely: “Party Caucus Mechanism” and “Party Responsibility.” Although the President is not elected by the Batasang Pambansa but directly by the people. His position as leader of the ruling party enables him to make the party system an effective machinery within the governmental structures matters of national policy (guidelines of which the President is mandated to formulate) that may require legislation are first tabled, argued, debated and resolved in the party caucus. Thereafter, whatever is the consensus arrived at in the caucus becomes the position of the party members when the measures are presented before the Batasang Pambansa. This is not atavism but a sacral practice in parliamentary democracy.

The present governmental set-up is such that the power of legislation is ultimately reposed in the party caucus which in turn is headed by the president who is not a member of the Batasang Pambansa at present, the decisions even in the Batasang Pambansa especially when the subject is controversial, are made by a caucus of all members of the KBL. Including the Governors, city and municipal Mayors, and the President and members of the cabinet, and not merely of the members of the Batasang Pambansa. And all abide by the edict of the party caucus.

This approach to decision-making does not make of the legislature a “rubber stamp” of the President. As some have foolishly charged. Far from being docile and subservient. The Batasang Pambansa members are inarticulate, resolute and responsible in their role as policy-makers. A clear example of this was the resolution of the question concerning the restoration of the Vice-Presidency. We are all aware of how Minister Tolentino and his allies in the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan fought for the restoration of the Vice-Presidency, and how I publicly opposed the idea. But in the KBL caucus, the position of Minister Tolentino won. And I, following the rule that majority will prevail, went along with the party resolution. Subsequently, after the Batasang Pambansa itself approved the measure, I urged our people to vote freely on this question.

Because of this party caucus mechanism, Governmental responsibility has been shifted from a single person to an aggrupation of politicians constituting the majority of the Batansang Pambansa. At present, it is the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan.

The prominence of the President in a political system does not determine the nature or the type of government. There are countries with parliamentary forms of government which provide for a strong President. Under the Egyptian system for instance, the President of the Republic is nominated by the national legislative body and confirmed by the people in a referendum as the Head of State and as the Situs of Executive Authority. In the French governmental structure, the President of the Republic is elected by direct universal suffrage and is vested with broad powers. Among which are to appoint the premier and to dissolve parliament. Although France has a parliamentary type of government, it has a strong executive which emerged as a result of de Gaulle’s observation that the constitutional impotence of the President during the fourth republic was partly responsible for the continuance of “ephemeral governments” that weakened French independence and prestige.

But whether or not there are precedents in the world of the kind of blending we have made of Presidential and Parliamentary features of government is not itself the important thing. The question is or should be does our system work? Is it an advance from the deadlocks and paralysis of the old presidential system we had? Does it provide for checks against revolving door governments that are sometimes the disease of parliamentarism?

I believe we have a system that provides correctives to these maladies. Without destroying the essence of popular representation in our government. I believe we have the kind of governmental leadership that can respond with resolution and imagination to the problems before the nation. Whether these may threaten the very security of the state or the economic fortunes of the country.

And we have effected all these changes in our political life by constitutional means. And it is on those terms that we shall face up to the present tide of insurgency and subversion on in our land. And the formidable economic crisis that confronts us today.

Roscoe pound once said in the course of a long and distinguished career in the American judiciary: “the law must be stable but it cannot stand still.”

We could hardly have stood still before the tempests of rebellion that swept our land in the early seventies; and we can hardly destroy now the very mechanisms that we have invented to cope with emergencies, in the face of the security perils we face today.

Many of us do not realize, I think that in addition to the legal considerations, there are a myriad of elements or extra-legal considerations that prompt the Presidency to take certain actions, such as the decree increasing the penalties for insurrection and rebellion. Indeed, it is so easy to criticize and fault governmental acts purely from the legal point of view, not realizing that there are numerous and multifarious elements and factors involved in taking a certain action.

For instance, how many lives of people, civilian and military, have been lost as a result of subversive activities? How many realize that from 1981 up to the present around 2,320 military personnel and 2,602 civilians have already been killed or liquidated by terrorists?

How many of you know that within the same span of time, the subversives have carried out a total of 33 major sabotage activities throughout the country resulting in damages to property valued at P291.07 million, broken down to P258.67 million in the private sector and P32.4 million in the government.

How many realize that there are various local and foreign organizations that have funded in subtle and ostensibly innocent manner certain organizations whose main purpose or aim is not only to embarrass or humiliate the government and its functionaries but also to replace it with a Communistic system of government?

How many of our young have fallen into the prey of the drug menace upon the insidious machinery of the same subversive elements?

These are but some of the multifarious considerations that have impelled me to increase the penalties of said crimes if only to protect our people and our nation.

Our constitution and laws cannot remain static in the face of the continually and drastically changing elements in our economy, society and the whole world. Traditional actions, reactions and solutions in these unsettled times are proving themselves to be inutile and inadequate this is an era of rapid development, a time of fast and radical structural shifts. The economic, social and political environment faces new realities, new challenges and new uncertainties.

Against this backdrop, what we need are innovative legal ideas or means to confront the swift changes that are taking place in our midst, and to cope with emergency situations.

To successfully ride this time of fervent, we need the best efforts of our legal community — they who compose that vital foundation for the rule of law in our land.

Lord Richard Wilberforce of the British House of Lords once said: “Let us remember that the structure of the world society is lawyer-made. Its concepts are lawyer-devised.” In that statement is the challenge to all lawyers including members of the Philippine Bar.

Our role as lawyers in the realization of our country’s goals and aspirations hardly need underlining. We all know that we would be doing less than justice to the noble ideals of our profession if as practitioners legislators, politicians, law professors or judges, we do not share in lifting the common burdens we face today. In these times we live in, we all know the strains that the law must bear for both its observance as well as its improvement.

And in the IBP, we know finally that we have here a potent organization that can help our people to achieve our goal of a just, progressive, and modern society.

Progress is attainable only within the framework of a society that has law and knows order. As once said by the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead, so must we say again: “The art of progress is to preserve order amid change and to preserve change amid order.”

I have great faith that your initiative, your caring here in the IBP will match our own efforts in government, and when combined with the labors of millions of our countrymen, we cannot fail in either the most modest or grandest of our aims.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.