Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the awarding of land titles to residents of Barangay Maimpis

I am pleased to be with the residents of Barangay Maimpis, San Fernando, Pampanga. On this occasion, we once again celebrate the liberation of ordinary citizens from the hardship that has long witnessed the effectiveness of this program. You, the citizens of Barangay Maimpis, constitute a magnificent example of what can be the result of any effort united by the government and the people. The liberation of citizens like you is the main principle of our New Republic. Long live the citizens of Barangay Maimpis! Long live the New Republic!

The New Republic cannot and will not turn its back on the struggle of the impoverished. Today, we rededicate ourselves to that struggle. The achievement of Barangay Maimpis stands as an affirmation of what the government and the citizenry can accomplish when they are firmly convinced and steadfastly united behind the correctness of a cause. In this case, that cause is the liberation of ordinary citizens from the bondage of poverty. In this case, we have waged together a determined struggle in the face of formidable odds. In this case, we have achieved victory. And the example of Barangay Maimpis is a sign of our victory against the hardship that has long oppressed the small people.

Poverty is not a natural state. It is not a condition that has been predetermined by some divine authority. Poverty is not a fact of life in the face of which we are helpless. Poverty in any society is a disease and as such it can be cured. Hardship is not a condition ordained by any lord; rather, it is a disease of society. Where there is hardship, there is also a society in need of change. Destroying the chains of hardship that bind the small people is the main objective of our government; because these citizens, in truth, are the reason why our government was established.

The needs of the poor constitute the priority concern of government. We have instituted a number of programs designed to give ample opportunity for total human fulfillment especially to the most disadvantaged sectors of our society. In this effort, the immediate task involves providing for the basic needs of the poor including food, clothing and shelter. By far, the greatest investments have been made in the construction of low-cost housing facilities.

The government’s housing program, while varied in its approaches, responds nevertheless to the most critical need of the poor: land for a sense of security; shelter for protection from the elements; a community and environment for ample human development; and livelihood for the instruments that would finally smash the cycle of poverty. These thrusts are evident in Barangay Maimpis, a former landed estate filled with the history of our poor. Maimpis is a legacy of a past when our forebears were shackled to the land they tilled for others. Today, however, we are writing off this tragic entry in our history. Today, our farmers have not only become owners of the land they have traditionally tilled, they also have become owners of the land on which they have built their homes. On this occasion, the awarding of titles to the family-beneficiaries of Barangay Maimpis signifies the continuing thrust of the new republic to restore to every Filipino his dignity.

For decades, our national leaders had promised land for the landless. Administration after administration, president after president vowed to give land to the poor. But these aspirations remained frustrated until the new society and its successor, the New Republic finally launched a massive land reform program that has achieved more than the effects of three previous measures. The American regime’s attempt to parcel out the former friar estates, the laws enacted in 1954 and 1955 redistributing land to surrendered H.M.B. guerrillas, migrants and slum dwellers, and the so-called Land Reform Program of 1963 all failed because: they lacked the necessary political support from national leaders who remained beholden to landed interests. In the face of these setbacks, the Institution of Land Reform in 1972 stands as a major breakthrough because it not only represents an unprecedented act of political will to finally initiate radical change in our society; it moreover, extended to millions of farmers the opportunity to share in the justice and prosperity which for centuries had been denied them. In the most fundamental and undisputable terms, the Land Reform of 1972 transformed millions of former tenants into landowners.

There is no doubt that after nearly 10 years of implementation, the achievements of our land reform program have surpassed our most conservative expectations. But that must not be taken to mean that our task is finished; that we have done everything we could possibly do to give justice to the age-old dreams of our people. Instead, we must learn to view land reform as an ongoing process, a state of perpetual social change where the accomplishment of one phase serves to inspire us to reach out for more. The enslavement of our people to the land they tilled for others had been far too protracted to be remediable in just 10 years. The nature of our land problem is so complicated that it would require a long term solution and an even more far-sighted commitment from the national leadership.

It is because of these considerations that the government recently—last January 9, to be exact—committed to expand land reform to include the awarding of homelots in former haciendas to bonafide residents. This program is designed to anticipate and prevent the degeneration that has fallen upon many of these vast estates. It will develop old haciendas into liveable human settlements before they evolve into slums. It confronts once and for all the problem of tenancy even as it rectifies the inequities of traditional landownership which has historically plagued Philippine society.

From hereon, this program shall be known as the National Bliss Program for Communities in Landed Estates. The letter of instructions which shall put this program into effect contains the following salient policy-components:

First, it shall be the policy of government to protect the rights of bonafide residents in landed estates over the homelots they have been occupying for many years.

Second, the objective of the policy is to resolve the issue of land tenure and to provide the residents of landed estates the opportunity to own the lots on which they have built their homes.

Third, the owners of landed estates shall be prohibited from evicting tenants and their families from their homelots without the residents’ concurrence and clearance from the national housing authority.

Fourth, the N.H.A. shall evolve this program in coordination with local governments. The implementation of the National Bliss Program for Communities in Landed Estates will be funded under its corporate program on a year-to-year basis.

Fifth, the yearly funding requirement of the program, as may be determined by the N.H.A., shall be incorporated in the national budget. In addition, the N.H.A. shall be permitted to float housing bonds, as authorized under decree 757, as a long-term source of funds.

Sixth, local governments, with the assistance of N.H.A., shall undertake the improvement of these tenant/farmer communities in the context of the Slum Improvement and Resettlement Program as provided under LOIs 555, 557, and 686.

Seventh, the N.H.A. shall extend technical and funding assistance to local governments as contemplated under the aforementioned program.

And eight, the N.H.A. shall acquire the estates or portions of estates involved in this program. Such land shall be subdivided and awarded to qualified beneficiary-families who shall pay the cost of land and its development through monthly amortization payments.

The National Bliss Program for Communities in Landed Estates is an example of the effort to redress age-old grievances through the discipline of clearly formulated goals. What it seeks to finally resolve is the issue of land tenure, long the cause of much popular discontent in our country. What it proposes, in turn, as a solution is a scheme that offers the opportunity for tenants to finally acquire the land they occupy, without sacrificing to any significant extent the interests of all the parties involved. Moreover, this program will reinforce the people’s confidence in the possibility of positive change through what is essentially their own effort. It reinforces the Filipinos’ belief in themselves, in their capacity to achieve what for ages had seemed so distant and out of their reach.

As in all other housing programs, the National Bliss Communities for Landed Estates shall be involved in the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran. We shall continue to adhere to the concept that the provision of shelter alone does not make for adequate human settlements. The housing programs aim for the development of dynamic, enterprising and self-reliant communities where every member has access to livelihood opportunities and where the physical economic as well as social environment stimulates productivity.

Our reform programs do not only aim at settling centuries-old grievances, they also seek to engender in every citizen a sense of civic responsibility and a personal commitment to the affairs of the entire community. Only freemen can develop such an attitude. Only freemen would have any sense of responsibility to maintaining the structures that we are now erecting. Only freemen can truly wage a struggle such as ours.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.