Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the School of Economics Complex of the University of the Philippines

[Delivered on October 30, 1978]

Economics and the Making of Public Policy

I CAME HERE really to find out if my misgivings about the birth of the Economics Complex was well founded or not, to see whether the money was well spent I am very happy to see that it has been.

I am aware that an old alumnus like me always gets carried away by the feelings of homecoming, no matter how much the university changes. The university is always there: It changes and yet it continues. This is the meaning of a university. And long after you and I have departed from this world, the university will still be here, moving, growing, living and continuously expanding, I hope, to a better and greater horizon.

Today, I come to see the expansion of this university into horizons that I have long thought should have been reached. This is not to say that I did what others could not do. It’s just that, you know, way back in 1974 or 1975, when I signed the decree, we were in the midst of the oil crisis. It was the time, a few years after the great flood; the oil prices had gone up and we were still importing about $500 million worth of rice. And our exports in 1975 increased. But before the price went up, the prices went down first. So it was not the most auspicious occasion to start out anew on some kind of a grand planning. But one should not discount the presence of strong hearts like those who now constitute the Board of Trustees, headed by the Minister of Economic Planning and the Dean who from the beginning, wanted this entire complex to prevail against the prophets of doom, and so we now have this complex.

I am indeed very happy that all the dreams and visions have started to be realized. As one who had spent most of his student period in this university, there is always, of course, a special pleasure and thrill in seeing the University of the Philippines change and improve.

The field of economics, of course, is something alien to a lawyer like me. And yet, almost all national problems, short of security, and even security can be reduced as some experts have said, into economic terms, have to do with the economic planning of the New Society. Every national problem almost always seems to relate to economics.

I have been inquiring about the facilities for graduate studies in economics in this country. Of course, I was shocked in the past at finding the insufficiency of our facilities. This is one of the principal reasons for signing the original Letter of Instructions, that would make up for such deficiencies.

We all know that this Center embodies a long history; it has prestige, in that the UP School of Economics, over the years, has been the premier school of economics in the country. Come to think of it, if I had known I was going to be President, I would have studied economics. That’s for sure, yes. Anybody who aspires to be President, should consider the need for the study of economics.

We all know that when we christen this institution the Philippine Center for Economic Development, we look back on the past of an institution which all these years has maintained the most critical of ties with the very life of our country, just as much as we look forward to the Center’s role in our contemporary national economic development effort.

It has always been the case that the ideas and viewpoints developed in the UP School of Economics had found their way into the matrix of policy-making in our country. But there is no question that the richness and variety of its thinking has served as an important perspective in policy-making in government.

Perhaps more than in any other department or school of the university, it has been here in the study of economics, where the preoccupation of the university has had the most practical relevance and influence upon the making of public policy. It has been here — in the signal effort at understanding the problems of the national economy and the challenge of engineering development — where our two institutions — the university on the one hand and the government on the other — most often meet as servants of a common quest.

To speak of partnership in these terms between the institution of learning and the government is not to say that the independence of the academy should not be jealously maintained. It is simply to suggest that in a developing country like ours, there will always be, as there has been, a compelling necessity for the society to look to its institutions of learning for support and even for direction.

It is also to suggest that the university’s agonizing craving to be relevant and to have an influence on practical affairs — sometimes expressed in radicalism and agitation — should fully be recognized in return by society.

The recognition of this tie between the university and society, and its expression in their active interaction in the affairs of the nation, are indications of our growing maturity and wisdom. When the government recognizes the role of the thinker from wherever he may come, from the university or the professional group or the elite as well as the common man, then government may be said to have come of age. I am very happy to note that these days our government takes advantage of every opportunity to listen to all views, and to utilize them to its advantage and the people’s.

We live today in a period of major economic ferment and activity. In which now, more than ever, ideas bear practical weight on our affairs, in which the university intellectual and the university-trained have never been more urgently needed, and in which the role of institutions of learning has never been more explicity felt.

The thinking that now prevails in our government’s approach to the development challenge is nothing if not a strategy that was developed with the active participation and counsel of various sectors in our national life, not the least of which is the university sector. And it is hardly a coincidence that in government today — in the very center of economic planning and direction in government — we find some of the illustrious products of the UP School of Economics.

The principal advisers in economics in government of course come from this institution. I need not point to the Minister on Economic Planning. It is not an accident that some of my principal advisers in government have been professional economists and share their early professional life as instructors and professors in economics here. We have the Minister on Economic Planning, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Budget as prime examples.

Furthermore, it is not an accident that in supporting and expanding the School of Economics, the government as well as the private business sector, expects the school and the university to insure a steady supply of competent economists available from the academic profession.

There are any number of agencies in government that are utilizing the services of your graduates now. I have their number here. I had an account made of those who are actually in the very pivotal and central positions in government. This includes, let’s see, 96 agencies and bureaus spread out among 465 graduates. That’s a substantial number, isn’t it? I am sure that if we were to have the usual test on what would happen if we were take out these men from the government, the answer would be, it would collapse. I certainly think that this is an accolade for this institution. I am happy, therefore, to have been a participant in supporting this particular Economic Complex of the U.P.

I am informed, moreover, that the center now is attending not only to our domestic needs, but is also engaged in performing a key role in the education of economists in the larger ASEAN region. I am gratified that the school, like other segments of the U.P. is extending facilities not only for graduate studies here, but also for advanced educational and technological cooperation with our neighbor countries especially those in the Third World.

Now let me acknowledge the generous assistance of the Japanese government, through its ambassador, for the construction of this particular building, the library conference hall where we are right now. This assistance of the Japanese made possible the construction of this library facilities, and reflects the generosity of the Japanese. I hope this initiative will not only continue but also increase.

It is also my hope that the other building, the third building, that will house the rooms and other facilities of the staff will be finished soon. I gather that this building is on its fourth month.

I gather that the graduate students here are mostly, if not all, supported by scholarships. We need to look into possible scholarships for the undergraduate students too. I certainly would be very happy to encourage the grant of undergraduate scholarships for economics in the U.P.

I hereby announce the grant of scholarships in the undergraduate level whose number I cannot determine, but which we can work out with the team. Such scholarships are to come not only from government, but also from the private sector, and it should be initiated by the Marcos Foundation.

As I said, if the government development plans were prepared with the help of the graduates of this institution, we are approaching a period where we will be in greater need of implementors of economic planning. Thus from planning we must move into implementation.

It is my hope that again this institution will furnish us the necessary materials for this corps of men and women who will actually work out the plans that have been initiated from as far back as rationality in economic planning was infused into the development effort.

Needless to say, our government’s vastly expanded role in the economy has occasioned various anxieties especially within the business community who fear government takeover of enterprises as well as the emergence of a welfare state system in our country.

This we have repeatedly sought to allay, and here I say again that it is not Our intent nor our desire to set up a system of welfare statism in our country. We look now, more than ever, to the strength of private enterprise as the force that will enable us to achieve the specific goals and targets of our development plan.

However, there should be no mistaking here that in our view, as was once said, “economics must always be the servant of society.” No amount of growth for us will be of any consequence if it does not fill a human or social need. The most efficient factory cannot justify the squalor of slums. And growth is of little meaning if it serves only a fraction of the people.

So if we affirm our commitment to a system of free enterprise in our national development effort, it is also in a sense to look at what we believe to be the creative and beneficent energies of such a system. And I certainly believe that free enterprise, whatever it may have suffered from or been prey to, has the resources and the capability to make change and development in our developing society.

One of the hopes that the system we live by can become a dynamic servant to the aspiration for development, and that within our country, we will have the managerial vision and capability to carry through a demanding effort at modernization, lies in institutions like this, whose life is dedicated to the training of minds for such a task. Here, young men and women will come to teach and to learn, to explore and to discover, to inquire and find answers to those questions that will ever appear in the economic horizons of our nation.

My faith is strong that the Philippine Center for Economic Development will carry forward the already admirable record of the venerable UP School of economics.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].