Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Opening Ceremony of the 1st Asian Conference on Agricultural Credit and Cooperatives

[Delivered at the Philamlife Auditorium, December 1, 1970]

A Cooperative Ideology for a New Asia

YOU HAVE COME at a time when our country is still reeling from the effects of three typhoons and a flood that left Manila and several provinces in state of disarray. It is possible you may experience some inconvenience and discomfort due to the disruption of normal facilities. I hope, however, that the warmth of our welcome for you and our enthusiasm over your presence in our midst will make up for whatever inadequacies there may be.

This conference, I am informed, grew out of a workshop on agriculture credit for countries in the Far East that was started in 1956 in Manila and Baguio. We are doubly honored that this First Conference on Agricultural Credit and Cooperatives for all countries in Asia is also held here. This invites our gratitude and deepens our goodwill for all the nations participating in this conference.

Fourteen years have passed since the 1956 workshop. Many things have happened during those fourteen years in Asia and in the world at large. The time and the occasion do not permit the enumeration of these events. Certain developments and situations, however, have special relevance, to the subject matter of your conference. One of them, for instance, is the green revolution.

What many now call the green revolution is one event that has contemporary and far-reaching import and implications especially to the huge population of Asia whose lives have for so long been darkened by the spectre of hunger and want. The spectacular advances in production in many areas of agricultural particularly in rice which is Asia’s principal staple, have lighted up hopes and confidence in the future. It is no small source of gratification that the green revolution has rapidly spread in this region and beyond as a result of international cooperation.

Advances in the field of agricultural production however brought about new problems and exacerbated old infirmities in our traditional societies. The spectacular increase in the production of a major crop like rice has always and will always create a complex of problems. Almost overnight the existing facilities for storage and processing became obsolete or at least sorely inadequate. Credit and financing, already inadequate to sustain the momentum of production, have to be greatly expanded to support the green revolution.

A corollary problem, perhaps even more vital to the whole social economy of agricultural production, is marketing. This problem has both domestic and international implications. Within the nation, the need for a different system of marketing has arisen — one that would break away from the exploitative middleman-dominated set-up which deprives the small farmers of a large share if the value of their produce and one that will be owned and controlled by the farmers themselves. This is essential to continued production. It is also a matter if social or economic justice.

In its international aspect, marketing of agricultural surpluses of countries in Asia brings these countries into competition with one another, most of Asia being agricultural and in many cases producing identical crops.

This, however, is only one facet of the problem. It is also, I feel, the less important facet. Under the pressure of common goals and aspirations, the nations of Asia, l am sure, will find the solution to this difficulty.

The more challenging facet or phase is the competition that certain advanced countries outside our region poses. Because of superior financial and bargaining position, these countries can dump their surplus agricultural crops in the available markets anywhere in the world on terms that we cannot compete with. This has happened in the past. It is bound to happen again. It is a problem that developing nations of Asia and elsewhere must learn how to overcome.

In the domestic and international aspects or dimensions of the marketing problem that the green revolution has brought to the fore, another development may be viewed in perspective: the eruption of social protest and discontent in Asia and for that matter in practically every country in our restive world. This social convulsion is, to be sure, not new, it has been with us for so long. In cent years, however, it has acquired the quality of a universal upheaval the meaning and message of which are as deep and profound as they are candid and clear.

The meaning and message of this universal upheaval is change in the established order of things—change in the structure and premises of the traditional societies. In one fearsome word it means one thing, revolution, whether is peaceful or violent.

There is another gentler but equally expressive term for this epochal phenomenon. It is social justice—the rising clamor of the poor and the disinherited of the world who have finally realized their rights, entitlements and worth as human beings and as members of the political and social orders from which they have been alienated for so long.

This rising clamor is, I think, loudest and clearest in Asia where it is also most relevant and justified.

All Asia, with the singular exception of Japan, is agricultural and in the main feudalistic in character. Its poverty is massive and its poor are being exposed to winds of change.

The winds blow from two directions: one from the West to which most Asians have had long attachment in colonial servitude; the other from the East, close by, where brother Asians, similarly despoiled by foreign domination, claim to have conquered poverty and ended the exploitation of man by man, and wish to export political ideologies.

Exposed to these competing winds of change, the masses of Asia are aroused and agitated. They are restive and confused. They are clamoring for change, for liberation from poverty, for social justice. And, they are learning to articulate in militant and organized activism.

It is against the backdrop of this historic drama of Asian masses actively seeking and demanding change that, I feel, this conference finds or should finds its significance and its perspective.

Agricultural credit and cooperatives are strategic areas in which the imperious clamor for change in Asia can find a substantial measure of satisfaction. The participants in this conference who are all equipped with experience in the problems of agricultural credit and cooperatives will, I am sure, realize that timidity and orthodox methods of grappling with the problem of old-age poverty and stagnancy will no longer suffice. Bolder, more imaginative and more socially conscious ideas, policies and techniques in both programming and implementation are required if the race must be won between poverty and prosperity, between social chaos and social stability, between violent revolution and peaceful change.

We in the Philippines are trying to mobilize all available resources, human material and spiritual, to achieve the required social change and transformation through the ways of peace. In this historic task, we know we can learn from the experience of others. We therefore lay great value on conferences like this one that we are opening today. I am sure every delegate here shares the same mind and the same motivation.

Of the two fields that this conference will address its deliberations to — agricultural credit and cooperatives — the latter impresses me as the more basically vital and potentially more dynamic. For cooperatives are institutions of human beings with a deeply humanitarian philosophy and purpose, with a firm and faithful commitment to the achievement of social justice and economic democracy on the strength of voluntary action to satisfy common economic and social needs of people. They are peculiarly suited to the economically small and weak for whom indeed they have been conceived. Propelled by the power of self-help and self-reliance, cooperatives can be effective means of nationalizing the problem of credit both with respect to generation of funds and to their efficient management. As institutions of people, they can replace or at least dance the institutions of poverty that today constitute the citadels of the status quo. They can thus bring about the revolutionary change that the temper of the times demands.

For the restless masses of Asia, cooperatives offer perhaps the only desirable and acceptable alternative to a violent revolution.

Asia is poor in material wealth but it is rich in human and natural resources. The capacity, for development must be drawn from and built upon the organization of a vast reservoir of human resources which after all constitute the real and true productive and creative power in any society. Mobilized, motivated and organized in accordance with the dynamic principles of cooperation, the great asses of Asia can transform this sprawling but depressed region into a giant power bloc that can out-pace the existing power system in the establishment of a new civilization.

In pursuing the cooperative vision, however, let us be practical and pragmatic. Cooperatives do not come out and develop out of a mere wish or whim or even a solemn declaration of intention or policy. Speeches will not organize cooperatives. In the existing environment, including the culture which shapes the attitudes and actuations of our peoples in Asia, cooperatives can only come to their own if supported and sustained by a consciously planned and consciously implemented program of education in cooperatives. Less than this will not be enough. Indeed we shall need more.

We shall need, to begin with, to elevate cooperatives or the cooperative system into an ideology. An ideology of change and development. An ideology of social reform and human reformation. A revolutionary ethic.

That is why I have taken time out from my schedule to come and give my views on this. That we may emphasize by my presence and by my words the importance of this new ideology not only to the nation, our Republic, but perhaps to all of Asia.

If we in Asia can adopt the cooperatives ideology, we shall be seeking our common development on ideological grounds where the decisive struggle in the world today is being waged.

The choice and the decision are not easy to make. Yet they must be made before it is too late.

At the proper time and occasion I hope to be able to take this up with our own national policy authorities in greater detail. In fact we have started to do this already. I may later formally propose it for the consideration of the constituted leaders of free Asia.

Meanwhile, I close with the hope that this conference will provide some fresh insight into the problems of cooperatives and how best to approach and solve them. Such insights can help in the formulation of a new ideology for a new Asia. A new ideology not for any political system nor for any country but for all of Asia, and especially for the poor of Asia. Very few people have realized the importance of this particular problem, but perhaps on this particular point lies the formation of a new society not only in Asia but throughout the world.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].