Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 83rd anniversary celebration of the Philippine Navy

[Delivered on June 23, 1981]

It is quite understandable now why the Philippine Navy moved its anniversary celebration from February 9 to June 23. The month of February is nothing but dry and cool weather. Not so in June. In June we have nothing but the rains and we all know the universal truth how navy men take to the water.

Jesting aside, we recall today the beginnings of the Philippine Navy in that revolutionary period in our history when the Filipino Nation was coming to birth. President Emilio Aguinaldo signed the decree for its creation barely eleven days after the proclamation of Philippine independence on June 12, 1898.

The early act of government will ever attest to the enduring foresight and wisdom of the country’s early leaders in forging a firmer foundation for the security of the nation. It was the same foresight and wisdom that recognized the imperatives of building a credible navy in the early days of the Philippine Commonwealth under President Manuel L. Quezon. And it is the same that spur and lead us on today to build this service into a truly vital and indispensable part of our armed forces.

History has repeatedly vindicated this national ideal of building a worthy naval force. For the  fledging organization that it was when World War II broke out in 1941, the men of our navy stood on to the last combatant patrol boat before they took to the hills and mountains to continue the struggle against the enemy. What they lacked in materials, equipment and training, they more than made up for in courage and patriotism.

And so it has been everytime the security of the nation was involved. Always the service has not been found wanting.

And this is not at all. For our navy too performs very vital and multi-faceted services for our people, such as assistance in times of natural disasters and calamities during floods and typhoons, search and rescue missions at sea, maintenance of aids to navigation for safety in navigation, protection of fishing grounds and oil drilling sites, ferry missions that bring personnel, equipment and goods to far-flung areas of the archipelago not serviced. By regular commercial-vessels and the like. One should mention too the vital role the navy plays in our on-going campaign of reconciliation and rehabilitation in the south and the vigilance it maintains to preserve and protect the integrity of our territorial waters.

To be sure the navy has lost many sons in the process. But the loss of lives and sacrifices notwithstanding, all these accomplishments have become so common to the point of being taken for granted. That all these are being done without thought of reward or recognition is the essence of excellence so characteristic of the profession of arms.

For the profession of arms must ever face challenge: the challenge of leadership and vigilance over the nation’s peace and security. It must necessarily be so because our armed forces as an instrument of national policy is our basic safeguard in the exercise of our essential prerogatives as a nation. This sensitive and continuing task becomes even more critical when we consider the implacable reality of tension and uncertainty in global affairs today.

But we are unfazed by this uncertain environment of the times. Here in our land we continue to maintain the momentum of our thrust’s that seek to hasten the development of the nation in all its aspects — social, economic, political and cultural. This we hope to achieve notwithstanding the debilitating effects of various factors among which is a burgeoning population vis-a-vis resources that grow scarce or expensive with the passage of time, also we are acutely conscious that in doing this, we have to contend with certain elements in our midst that tend to divide, destabilize and undoubtedly aim to destroy the gains and progress we have achieved thus far.

Within this context of problems and goals, necessarily we are aware of the important role that this service must serve and fulfill.

In its broader aspect, we need at this point a logical, integrated and coherent strategy for the development of our naval force. Most assuredly, this strategy should not be a mere compilation of interests, individual prejudices and needs which can only bring about fragmentary and indecisive approaches to a particular situation or set of circumstances. We have enough costly lessons in terms of failures and lives lost to drive home this point which I rather not enumerate so as not to reopen the wounds of anguish, despair and loss inflicted on our people. Suffice it to say that it was only providential perhaps that our flexibility and resiliency as a people have carried us through during those dark moments brought about by inadequacies and lapses in our plans and strategy.

We cannot afford to commit these mistakes in the armed forces in planning a strategy for survival and victory. When the stakes are high as in war, the only thing that counts is victory. The loser hardly gets a second chance assuming of course that he is still around to make a go for that chance.

Moreover, the strategy must put a premium on developmental but highly feasible, practical and economical defense programs that will bring about self-reliance. The areas and possibilities where self-reliance can be achieved are many. But I would leave it to the leadership of the navy and the defense establishment for that matter to explore all these in order to bring about a lasting solution to the quest for a credible defense capability that is anchored on indigenous talents and resources backed by technology that we ourselves can either develop and improve upon or if necessary acquire through transfer in conjunction with other developmental or technical programs.

I purposely mentioned “transfer in conjunction with other developmental or technical programs” to drive home the basic guideline in achieving self-reliance through mutual interaction and maximum integration between the agencies of the government and-the private sector. It must be a partnership where the initiative for the impetus of growth is equally shared by both the government and the private sector. For too long now that initiative has always been banked on the leadership of the government. Dismal performances, more so in the case of failures, are then blamed upon that leadership. Of course I still maintain that while the government must not and will not abdicate its responsibility as a catalyst for growth and development, reasonable limits have to be set after the private sector has taken over in order to shift resources and substantiate the other pressing priorities of government. More importantly, the policy of withdrawal in cases like this should be gradual but inexorably set towards total withdrawal nevertheless in order to foster the spirit of self-reliance even more and sharpen the will to compete, survive and grow. This after all is the essence of the true free enterprise system that all of us advocate.

In a larger sense, this is part of what I envision in a scheme geared towards the reorientation of Filipino values — the premises and issues of which I have repeatedly stated and explained to our people, especially during the recent presidential campaign. The fresh mandate that has been generously given me vindicates our shared conviction for the emergence and edification, indeed the renaissance of the true Filipino spirit that saw us through the struggle, the torment, the agony and despair of the long dark periods in our history as a nation and as a people, and make us ever seek for change and advancement in our national life.

It is for this reason that with the mandate given me, the first task to which I shall address myself will be the sweeping and relentless infusion of morality, responsibility and concern in the government service to make it more sensitive and responsive to the needs of our people. The postal service revamp and the clean-up at the manila international airport are only the beginning. More will follow and this is not only a promise but also an obsession on my part.

What will be the implication of all these in the navy of the 80’s? First of all I want the navy as well as the other major and special services of the armed forces to reflect and substantiate the synergism of the social, economic, moral, psychological and even cultural goals of the government in its own particular sphere of responsibility and influence. This entails a reexamination of its short, medium and long range programs to ascertain a strong interweaving of the means to achieve common ends. Any departure or anything that does not meet this criterion must be treated with caution for it could be that it is what specific circumstances would require. But then the importance attached to it should always be considered as an exception and nothing more.

Nothing however, should so preoccupy the leaders as to forget the individual soldier, sailor, constable or airman. The profession of arms owes its uniqueness to them for despite the ever-changing tools of warfare, the key element remains the same — the individual soldier whether he is the leader or the led.

Having a big navy with fast and modern combatant vessels equipped with the latest in sensors and weapons, both offensive and defensive, is not within the realm of immediate possibility, given our circumstances. But certainly this is no barrier to our having a compact, efficient, operationally ready and well-trained navy’ backed by an equally compact and efficient organization run and directed by capable and dedicated men. We can build — and we have the definite nucleus of one – a navy that is prepared and capable of developing itself as an effective defense arm. Most important of all, we can have an organization of motivated and dignified personnel who will readily lay bare their qualities and capabilities in a spirit of sacrifice and duty.

In the final analysis, as is the lessons repeatedly brought home to us in the history of warfare, in the conflict of wills and desires, it is the motivated soldier with his dignity intact who will always prevail in the end.

With this thought, I will now close and extend warmest greetings and congratulations to the men and women of the Philippine Navy on the occasion of this 83rd anniversary of the service. You and I, everyone of us, have much to do before we can fully achieve the liberation and the rebirth of our country and people. Let us pledge again today to carry this work bravely and without thought of failure.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.