Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of the 18th Annual Convention of Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines

[Delivered at Pines Hotel, Baguio City, May 27, 1971]

Rural Credit: A Pillar of Agriculture

I WISH TO congratulate the rural bankers who, jointly with the Central Bank of the Philippines, are holding their 18th Annual Convention at Baguio City on the theme: The Effective Utilization of Rural Bank Credit to Meet the Changing Pattern in our Rural Economy.

I have watched with pride the phenomenal growth of the rural banks in our country. Today, it is the most extensive rural banking system anywhere in Asia. I understand that you have grown into a network of 500 rural banks with combined resources of P650 million, as of December 1970. You have generated savings deposits with a cumulative total of P237 million. Your loan portfolio has reached a level of P1.16 billion and that some 1.9 million farmers have been extended your financial assistance. By any standard, this is a significant contribution to the economic development of the Philippines, as your loans go where they are needed most— to our small farmers and entrepreneurs.

As a Congressman from the Second District of Ilocos Norte, eighteen years ago, I had the privilege of sponsoring in the House of Representatives the bill which was subsequently enacted as Republic Act 720, otherwise known as the Rural Banks Act. Since then, and whenever it was within my power to do so, I have consistently lent support and encouragement to the expansion of our rural banking system.

You all know that our economy still relies heavily on the agricultural sector. About 36 per cent of our national income or roughly P10 billion is derived from ‘agriculture. We have 9 million hectares of land planted to food crops. And yet much remains to be done. We must accelerate our food production through improved methods of cultivation, planting, cropping and marketing, to meet the ever-increasing needs of our expanding population and be able to gear our economy for greater exports.

That is why, after consultations with fiscal and monetary authorities, I have made it an overriding objective of this administration to accomplish in those five years what had not been achieved in two decades of agricultural development.

We are harnessing the resources of government and all available financing from world organizations, like the US AID and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development for agriculture expansion. The Central Bank oil the Philippines, through its sale of certificates of indebtedness, shall be able to draw P600 million from urban centers this year. The money will be channeled to the rural areas for production loans through the rural banking system.

For this reason, we will encourage the establishment of more rural banks. We want to double the present number to 1,000 rural banks within 5 years. This would require P3.7 billion in resources sufficient to generate a P4.8 billion loan volume a year to an estimated 4 million farmers.

The Supervised Credit Scheme which will characterize this massive financing for rural development calls for the stationing of one food production specialist in every rural bank of the country. I understand that for this coming crop season, the Central Bank has recruited and trained 150 government food production specialists for initial placement in rural banks of land reform areas, The Central Bank’s target is 1,000 food specialists drawn from fresh agricultural graduates and who will go through an intensive training program at UP Los Baños.

Our more immediate concern are the 176,000 tenant-lessees in the 16 provinces declared as land reform areas. These farmers sadly lack the financing to give true meaning to their “emancipation” from the age-old bondage to the soil.

But social justice demands that these farmers be helped; hence, the Supervised Credit Scheme which the government is going to provide them, through the rural banks, on good faith alone. It is here where the expertise of the food production technician — living in the barrios with me farmers — can assure proper use of credit, increased production, and better market returns, to assure repayment of the loan as they fall due.

Criticisms have been levelled from some quarters that the government is favoring the rural banks to the prejudice of other entities also engaged in providing credit to the farmers. I say that the CB-Rural Bank scheme for supervised credit merely complements the efforts of other government or private entities.

To cite specific examples: The Development Bank of the Philippines, for all its massive resources, has been able to grant loans to an average of 15,000 farmers each year. ACA meets the requirements of just about 20 per cent of our farmers. That leaves a wide area in which millions of farmers have no available financing.

I appeal to, the rural banks to respond wholeheartedly to this program of Government to provide massive financing for tenant-lessees to enable their transition to owners of the land they till. I can see several avenues of reform within the rural banking system itself.

First, rural banks must exert greater efforts to gain deeper acceptance in their respective communities. One way is to take more stockholders, while retaining a reasonable degree of control. They could also reexamine their organizational set-up to see if it could stand improvement to meet expanded operations. And finally, I ask every rural banker to regard his profession as a splendid opportunity to serve the people and the country.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].