Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the 84th Foundation Day of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

[Delivered on June 23, 1982]

It is a distinct honor for me to join you here today and, in the name of our people and Government, to extend congratulations and best wishes to the officials and staff of our Ministry of Foreign Affairs, whose 84th Foundation Day we commemorate today.

The fact that this ministry has survived these many years, and to this day continues to fulfill its vital role as the articulator and implementor of the foreign policies of the Republic, should attest to the authenticity and vitality of our sovereignty as an independent state.

I say this from the outset because I believe that true and full and undiminished sovereignty is the core value and valid mark of our nationhood.

From this emanate the great motive force of our existence as a nation, and our clear perception and conviction about the vital interests and values that animate our people to purposive action.

The search and constant struggle for achievement of our national destiny, and the process through which we refine and enhance our national purpose, constitute the saga that makes meaningful the existence of the Philippine state, whose permanence and immutability we as Filipinos devoutly protect and preserve.

It is therefore only appropriate that at this commemorative occasion marking the birth of our Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we pause a moment to reflect anew on the meaning and implications of sovereignty to our national life.

The Roots of Nationhood

For every country in the world today, there is indisputably no national purpose or priority higher or greater in importance than the preservation and protection of national sovereignty. Yet it may well be that for our country and our people, this is a burden that carries all the more significance because of the costs and sacrifices that we repeatedly had to make in order to win the keep intact the sovereignty of our nation.

The whole of our history as a people telescopes our difficult passage from youth to manhood, from our ancient beginnings through centuries of colonization to the achievement of national independence. When we reflect upon our past, we see how the sources of national consciousness and ideals run deep to the time before the coming of the Westerner; yet we also know how often we have fallen short of the goal, the hapless victim of more powerful nations and the hostage of our own shortcomings as a people.

This hall of the ministry perpetuates the memory of our country’s very first Minister of Foreign Affairs, Apolinario Mabini, who did much to shape the ideals and the goals of our First Republic, which saw birth as a consequence of the National Revolution of 1896. Yet he himself saw that Republic brought down by the superior arms of a new colonial power, and he died fortelling for us the further struggles that yet had to be waged before full national sovereignty would be won.

48 years would pass, a devastating war would visit the country, and countless sacrifices would be made, before at last independence could be recovered. But we may also say that in contrast to other Asian territories in the aftermath of the Second World War, the Philippines was best prepared institutionally to assume the status of an independent state. Through the Commonwealth experiment — along with the proto-parties formed as early as the first decade of the 20th century, — the Philippines had a political framework ready to exercise authority over the entire archipelago once the anti-Japanese liberation process was complete. Moreover, through such political framework, Filipino leaders had been afforded an experience in democratic self-rule not available to other Asian nationalist leaders.

It was not surprising, therefore, that the Philippines would emerge as the First Postwar Independent State in Asia. This distinction, however, also embodied an irony, which in subsequent years was to become increasingly glaring: and this was the fact that while the Philippines was the first Asian nation to achieve independence in the Postwar Era, she would be seen as too closely identified with the United States to be considered a prime exponent of Asian nationalism.

Abroad, our closeness to the U.S. had its political costs in the merging concern of nations. Although they had the earliest traditions of modern nationalism in Asia, the Filipinos could not be disassociated diplomatically from the Western bloc, Asian nationalism appeared to be more eloquently voiced by China and India as well as Indonesia in the fifties and early sixties.

At home, many began to question the many arrangements which collectively translated into “special relations” between the U.S. and the Philippines.

In all the debates that we have had about the bases, about parity, about our foreign policy being made in Washington fundamentally we have had to face the question whether our national sovereignty was authentic on merely a sham.

To the credit of our leaders and our Government in the early postwar era, the issue was not ignored and efforts were made to assert the independence of the country from U.S. interests in both economic and political terms. It was the Philippines that took the initiative of having the 1946 Trade Agreement reexamined. In 1954 the Philippine Economic Mission to the U.S. headed by Senator Jose P. Laurel, after negotiations with a U.S. panel headed by James L. Langley, came up with an agreement that indicated a strong desire of Filipinos to cater to their own economic interests. The compromise reached made for a slowdown in the pace of reducing Philippine duty-free quota preferences in the U.S. preferences in the Philippine market. The Philippines also asserted control over its currency, achieved the elimination of quota limitations on various Philippine articles, made the enjoyment of parity rights by citizens of either country in the territory of the other reciprocal, and made the imposition of quantitative restrictions on the products of both countries reciprocal as well.

The assertion of national sovereignty was also manifested in amendments to the Military Bases Agreement. The Serrano-Bohlen talks of 1959 and the Ramos-Rusk Agreement of 1966 led to the reduction of the lease period of the military bases from 99 to 25 years. Originally numbering 23, the bases were reduced to the Clark Air Base, the Subic Naval Base and three other relatively minor ones. The Philippines obtained the right to be consulted prior to the bases’ being used for combat operations. The sizes of the remaining base areas were significantly reduced even as, symbolically, the U.S. surrendered its title of ownership over the base lands to the Philippines.

But in all these assertions of Filipino independence and sovereignty, could never said that the Philippine government and the Filipino people had turned anti-American. What the Filipinos aspired for was a reasonable amount of equality and reciprocity under a relationship of friendship with a former mother country. In effect what the Filipinos desired was greater dignity for themselves and higher respect from the other nations of the world. It was only coincidental that the reassertion of Philippine nationalism could only occur within the historically-ordained mold of U.S.-Philippine closeness.

Thus, the immediate Postwar period up to the 1960s saw Philippine foreign policy virtually hitched to the American wagon. But Filipino leaders then felt no sense of betrayal of the national interest, for they fully believed that under the circumstances of the time, it was the prudent course to follow.

As articulated then, this view of our foreign relations sufficed perhaps for the challenges of the immediate Postwar Era; in the subsequent decades of the late 60’s, the 70’s, and the 80’s, its limitations were to become glaring as the world moved into a convulsive tide of ferment and change.

The New Environment for Philippine Foreign Policy

Within the last two decades, we have seen a degree and pace of change that have virtually transformed the environment for international relations. And it has been largely under the thrust of this development, that as a nation we have more and more recognized the need to fully develop on our own the foreign policies of the Republic, and to employ our diplomacy in the service of national needs and interests.

In sum, we have witnessed during this period profound changes in global politics with regard to the participating actors and their security perceptions, the distribution of nuclear and conventional power, the alignment of forces in East-West relations, the quantum leap of the armed might the Superpowers, the proliferation of modern weapons in many regions, the emergence of new issues related to energy dependence,, and the needs of the impoverished nations.

Relations with the Socialist Bloc

In a sense, the opening of diplomatic relations between the Philippines and China and the Soviet Union and the socialist countries merely highlighted the series of practical adjustments in Philippine foreign policy. As we endeavored to mold our old relationships along new times, so did we open relations with the Socialist world. We needed a pragmatic review of our old ideological rigidity, just as much as we needed to review our traditional obliviousness to our interests in international affairs.

Upon assuming the Presidency of the Third Republic in 1966, I immediately moved to open the Philippines to normal contact with the Socialist bloc, by relaxing the restrictions on travel to and from Socialist states. Exploratory talks and exchanges of trade missions and cultural groups followed. And in 1968, the Philippines announced her readiness to open trade relations with Eastern European countries.

Diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia and Romania were established in 1972. This was followed in 1973 by the normalization of relations with the German Democratic Republic, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the People’s Republic of Mongolia. As earlier mentioned, diplomatic ties were established with the People’s Republic of China in 1975 and with the Soviet Union in 1976. In the same latter year, the Philippines opened herself to ties with Algeria, Cuba, Libya and the New Socialist Republic of Vietnam. By 1982, ranking officials of Socialist countries had become regular state visitors or callers in Manila.

The establishment of diplomatic relations with Socialist countries was based on a hard headed assessment of our national interest vis-a-vis the changing global situation. At the same time, it was intended to broaden the Philippines’ economic windows to the world in anticipation of the expiration of the Laurel-Langley Trade Agreement with the U.S. in 1974. The termination of the agreement would mean loss of a preferred duty market in the U.S. At the same time we realized that with the Philippines’ primary exports (sugar and copra especially) facing depressed prices in the Western market, there was a pragmatic need to turn to the Socialist countries which offered generally higher prices for our export products.

The Third World and North-South Issues

The readjustment of Philippine diplomacy was not just a function of changing conditions in East-West relations. Another momentous change in the global situation, which provided a new external environment in U.S.-Philippine relations, was the “North-South” situation. In 1960, seventeen new nations became members of the United Nations, the biggest single number of new states to gain entry into that world body. That was a significant event. It epitomized the emergence of a change in the number and nature of the participating actors in global politics. This was the rise of the “Third World,” a term first used by Alfred Sauvy in 1961.

Former colonies and trust territories, mostly in Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Pacific were to become independent so that by the 1980s, by their sheer number (133 as of 1981), they would form an almost automatic majority in international forums on issues that were usually anathema to the world’s major industrialized powers. Above all, this meant the confrontation of the issue of progress for all peoples, so well stated in the final declaration of the Cancun Summit last year, “Hunger is incompatible with the level of the world economy especially in terms of the existing capacity to produce food.”

As a Third World country, the Philippines joins the ranks of its colleagues in voicing out the sentiments of the LDCs or less developed countries, in both economic and political terms. Thus, since 1945, the Philippines has consistently espoused the right of self-determination of peoples. From the Bandung Conference of 1955, through the Group of 77’s emergence in the 1970s and down to the Non-Aligned sessions of the 1980s, the Philippine affiliation with the Third World has become a regular feature of Philippine foreign policy. In 1979, we thus played host to UNCTAD V in Manila.

As I have written in a recent book, the Third World demand for a new international economic order, adopted by the United Nations in 1974, is essentially a moral one. In this sense, the Philippines feels it necessary to view North-South disparities in moral terms. And to that extent, the Philippine position is rooted in the belief that unless the poor peoples of the world achieve economic self-reliance and dignity, they cannot exercise real sovereignty. There will be dependence rather than interdependence. In turn, there will be incessant chronic political instability. For as long as peoples are impoverished and wanting, there can be no economic peace. For as long as economic peace is unrealized, there will always be political instability.

In other words, oftentimes, economic issues become inextricably intertwined with political issues. The question of developmental requisites for national survival makes economic concerns political as well. For example, the Law of the Sea Treaty stipulation for an international council to govern access to minerals in the Earth’s seabeds makes for a political delimitation of the prerogatives of powers possessing superior undersea exploration technology.

It is perhaps unfortunate, in U.S.-Philippine relations, that the North-South dichotomy has, in many ways, converged with some significant political schisms in global politics.

Philippine identification with the Third World, and now with the Non-Aligned Movement, only means a rational distancing from the interests of both East and West and a manifestation of the fact that the Philippines looks foremost to her own interests (which happen to be usually in common with Third World countries) and adheres to her own ideology.

A Turning to Asia

The rise of the Third World as an economic and political phenomenon in international relations served to underline, for the Philippines, a significant, related sentiment which she had always harbored by reason of geographic location. This is her “Asianness”. Perhaps it may be said that the growing assertion of Third World sentiments by the developing countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America helped set the stage for the restoration of Filipino consciousness to its Asian roots.

It is in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations or ASEAN, established through the Bangkok Declaration in August 1967, that regional cooperation in Southeast Asia has witnessed some proven results. The ASEAN member countries — Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand — have made ASEAN an epitome of economic and cultural cooperation, a unified forum for mutual benefit of its members vis-a-vis the industrialized world, a show-window for dynamic economic growth through free enterprise, and a stabilizing force for peace and security in Southeast Asia.

In February 1976 the first summit meeting of ASEAN heads saw the organization forge stronger ties of cohesion through the declaration of ASEAN Concord, the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and the Agreement to Establish an ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta. These summit outputs, combined with the pace of cooperation reached in trade arrangements, industrial complementation, and others, were to set the foundation for unwavering ASEAN unity when political issues, particularly the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea, later became vital to ASEAN security.

ASEAN now carries on annual dialogues with the U.S., Canada, the European Economic Community, Japan, Australia and New Zealand, after every annual ASEAN Ministerial Meeting. Such dialogues signify global recognition of ASEAN’s growing importance in the region, in economic and even in political terms. Inhabited by 260 million people, ASEAN remains the fastest economic-growth area in the world. It stands therefore as eloquent proof that a free enterprise economy is the answer to gaining meaningful self-reliance among developing countries, provided that the highly industrialized states do not adopt prejudicial policies that tend to stifle such growth.

The Philippines finds in ASEAN an Asian Third World grouping with which she can most closely identify culturally, economically, politically and ideologically. We have come to the point where the national interests of the Philippines is almost equivalent to the interests of ASEAN itself. In ASEAN, therefore, the Philippines has found not only economic strength in unity, but also a broader institutional solution to her quest for a proper Asian identity in today’s global climate of cosmopolitan interdependence.

U.S.-Philippine Relations

All these new initiatives complement our efforts to strengthen old relationships, especially our relations with the United States.

To the Philippines, there are complex internal and external challenges confronting U.S.-Philippine relations. The problem basically lies in the fact that the two countries are situated on different planes, with divergent levels of policy priorities. The United States is a global power, has worldwide security interests, and is engaged in a strategic adversary relationship with the Soviet Union. The Philippines, on the other hand, is a young state concerned foremost with her developmental problems and anxious to show the world that she is a sovereign state enjoying complete autonomy in the formulation of her domestic and foreign policies.

The American operated bases in the Philippines are vital to the U.S. as a global power. They support the U.S. Military presence in Japan and South Korea, enable her to project power into the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean and on to the east coast of Africa, allow her to have effective oversight of the strategic waterways that link East Asia to oil from the Persian Gulf. On our part, we also desire to contribute our share to the maintenance of peace and stability in Asia, even if we ourselves are not immediately exposed to dangers of aggression. But we believe that this contribution should not exact from us the diminution of our national sovereignty.

The Military Bases Agreement, as renegotiated and in effect since January 7, 1979, has resolved the sovereignty issue to a significant extent. The Philippine flag now flies alone over the bases, the bases are under a Filipino commander, the base areas have been drastically reduced, and the security of the bases’ perimeters have passed into Filipino hands. But still some irritants remain, particularly those related to criminal jurisdiction over cases involving American servicemen and the need to station Filipino immigration and internal revenue officials in the bases. All of these are now in the process of getting resolved to the satisfaction, I trust, of all concerned.

The Fullness of Independence

What we must always keep in mind is that sovereignty is never won once and for all; rather it must always be fought for, guarded and promoted with care. In our daily work to keep it intact and to enjoy its application in the widest sense possible, we are limited only by our own free and enlightened will, and by no other interest than our own.

Today I am confident that our people fully appreciate the importance of their independence as a nation and their rights as a free people — and this appreciation is the distinct hallmark of the authenticity of our national sovereignty.

Through the instrument of diplomacy, and through the safeguard afforded by our vigilant defense policy and with the all important cooperation and partnership with our people, the continued and eternal existence of Philippine sovereignty shall be assured.

This is a thought which I would evoke today on this occasion of the 84th Foundation Day of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In the tradition set forth by Mabini, the first Foreign Affairs Minister of the Philippines, I shall continue to hope that the conduct of our foreign policies will always be pursued in the enhancement of our freedom, and other national values, in the context of our full sovereignty.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.