The Reform of the Bureaucracy

NOTHING IN THE agenda of our national government is more important in the long term than the continuing re vitalization of our government bureaucracy. And nothing can truly insure the sustained implementation of our national development program except an effective governmental machinery.

We placed high priority on government reforms immediately after we established a crisis government. And it was for this reason that we continue and must continue with the effort to improve and enhance the operations of our government bureaucracy.

Here in these graduation exercises are represented the basic thrust of this program of governmental reform, the extent of its reach throughout the whole length and breadth of the bureaucracy, and the depth with which reform is being sought.

Today, we graduate 693 members of the service under the Junior Executive Training Program (JET) bringing to 1, 836 graduates the number of those who have benefited from this middle-management reorientation program of the Civil Service Commission.

In addition, we witness today the graduation of the first two batches of graduates under the Supervisory Training for Effective Administrative Management (STEAM), which has been designed as the managerial skills development program to complement the JET program. Under this later training scheme, 887 officials from 26 government agencies have benefited from the program.

Although these two program touch only a fraction of the more than 600,000 work force of the national government bureaucracy, their impact to my mind will be far-reaching and profound. For they are concerned basically with the training of those who hold key positions in the bureaucracy, those who man the middle-management layers of the government machinery, and who therefore lead and direct a critical aspect of governmental operations in our country. We have remarked many times in the past about the inefficiency and graft of the government service. We have been bewildered and appalled by the degree of waste and misuse of limited resources yearly being perpetrated in government.

But it is only now that we are really beginning to understand the true soil of inefficiency and corruption in the service, and more important, it is only now that we are beginning to really cope with it.

The basic problem had always been a question of where to begin such an effort at reform. Because the problem was too large, we tended merely to focus upon one aspect of the entire malaise — on the so-called ineffectiveness of government competitive examinations, on the presence of grafters in government, or on the selection of people for the higher-ranking cabinet positions.

But in fact, weeding out undesirables from the service was only a partial answer to the total problem. Improving the civil service selection process answered a part of it, but not the whole. And in spite of the growing technocracy of the official family, we have continued to confront very basic problems in the operations of our governmental setup.

All these have convince me that our fundamental concern must be laid squarely in building towards a total concept of governmental reform, based upon a practical and workable system that provides for stability, development and growth. We have to turn our thoughts to the total units first, and from there work out the ways and means to repair the malfunctioning parts, to eliminate the obsolete and ineffectual, and to harmonize operations under the total scheme.

And this is in fact what we have now begun to achieve.

Under this total scheme of governmental reform, we now have a governmental structure that has considerably eliminated the duplication of functions among agencies, and has attained a level of harmony and cooperative action unrivalled in previous years. This was the particular achievement of the Integrated Reorganization Plan which streamlined the flow of governmental work from national to regional to local level.

But this structural concept, while all-pervasive, was in fact only the starting point of reform. Our next focus, after streamlining responsibilities and functions, was a far more demanding task – that of galvanizing people and units within the bureaucracy so that its operations would fully reflect itself in the implementation of vital national programs.

This latter task was preeminently the responsibility of an effective Civil Service Commission, and it was in this light that the Commission was constituted by no less than the fundamental law, the New Constitution, as an independent constitutional office. In keeping with this Charter provision I ordered the reorganization of the Commission, and consequently issued a series of decrees, instructions and policy directiveness designed to aid and guide the agency in the accomplishment of its tasks.

That this latter responsibility is well-reposed in our Civil Service Commission is well-demonstrated by the various programs that it has launched, and the innovative spirit that has marked its efforts to adjust the long-standing policies of past commissions.

I am glad to note for instance that the Commission no longer forms a stumbling block to the operations of government agencies. Instead of being a medium of control over the bureaucracy — as it tended to be in the past— it has become a support and assistance arm of the departments and agencies of government. And this is best reflected in its post-audit policy regarding appointments.

It is also significant to note that we are finally moving out of the system of seniority for promotions within the service, towards a more dynamic concept of personnel enhancement that recognizes the need for a dynamic corps of government personnel and seeks to welcome the wave of technological change taking place in governmental administration.

Most of all, there is great significance in the attention being given by the Civil Service Commission to the training of management and the rank and file in the government bureaucracy, an aspect of its work which we see today at this commencement.

The training of people within and for the government service is necessarily a complex process, and I will be the first to say that it will fail if it does not recognize at once the complexity and vastness of the army of men and women we are trying to reform. Immediately there is the question: Whom will we train? Where shall we put our emphasis? How shall our training programs be designed to attain the greatest impact?

For the government bureaucracy is an institution of many layers — starting from the very top and stretching all the way down to the rank and file — and to the multiplicity of layers, there is the added problem of innumerable personnel. It is easy to say that we must improve every member of the government service — a fact we well recognize — but how do you begin such an effort to reform a veritable army of personnel?

The only effective way is to institute first a singular concept of government which would in short emphasize the unity of all government departments and agencies as a single bureaucracy. That is to say, that we must build a one-team concept from the multiplicity of functions that characterize the individual units and arteries of government It is only on this basis that we can conceive of one functioning and harmonious bureaucracy, and it is from this team concept that the Civil Service Commission works towards the improvement of the whole machinery.

Secondly, when the idea of team effort is accepted wholly by the departments and agencies, it becomes possible to conceive of training officials and employees from different agencies under a common program. Regardless of the specialized functions of different agencies, there are a multitude of administrative tasks — from accounting, to supplies, to services, to budgetary functions, up to the simplest administrative functions — that are shared in common by these agencies. And it is really at this level where many of the bottlenecks of government administration occurs.

Finally, because the bureaucracy is of necessity a hierarchy of responsibilities and functions, the training of administrative skills cannot be the same for every member of the service. It is important therefore that personnel development evolve a system to develop skills and competencies proper to every level of the service.

There must be a personnel development program for the rank and file, and there must be also a development program for those who manage and direct the operations of government.

Traditionally, we have always been weak in the training of the people for sensitive middle management positions in our government bureaucracy. I have always been convinced that the real bottleneck in our government has been neither the top nor the bottom of the hierarchy, but the middle layer of management personnel. This is in part due to the fact that many of these attractive positions were captured by the politics of privilege and influence in the past, which by-passed the effective application of civil service rules and regulations.

And from incompetence at this level have flowed the gross corruption that visited our government bureaucracy, in addition to the malfunctioning of entire agencies and even departments.

While it is important therefore that we focus continuing concern on the recruitment of able men for the highest offices of government, as well as for the rank-and-file positions, there is urgency to the need to develop a corps of government managers at middle management level in the bureaucracy—that is to say, able managers to head and supervise divisions and services.

This is the significance that I attach to the Junior Executive Training Program and to me Supervisory Training for Effective Administrative Management.

In this first program, we have the necessary reorientation process needed to instill in government personnel the proper work attitudes and concepts within the total scheme of national effort. This is necessary because there is need more than ever for people in the service to understand the fundamental programs, thrusts and objectives of our New Society today, and to understand how managerial competence exercises its influence on the attainment of such objectives. Unless we involve our many supervisors and division chiefs in the total scheme of national effort, unless they understand and believe in what they are working for, I do not think that we can effect any appreciable change in the quality of managament of the bureaucracy.

The second program — STEAM as the Civil Service Commission describes it — is a skills training program. It was designed as a follow-through of the Junior Executive Training Program, and it was specifically in response to my Letter of Instruction No. 518 which directed the Civil Service Commission ‘ ‘to establish and implement a supervisory training program for chiefs of divisions throughout the national government, which it shall make available to the different departments and agencies.” Such training program, the LOI further directed, “shall be geared towards the development of necessary skills in supervision, especially the training, development, and motivation of personnel.”

The basic rationale therefore of STEAM is the development of managerial insights and attitudinal reorientation fostered by the first program, the JET. It would translate concepts into practical work programs within the specific con text of individual environments in the bureaucracy. Thus, STEAM was administered on a decentralized basis in order to imbue it with work-centered orientation.

It is gratifying to note that this latter program is already developing at this stage support and assistance from such institutions as the UP College of Public Administration and the Development Academy of the Philippines. This is only proper; for obviously, we must ever build towards a heightening of skills and a broadening of scope in our training programs.

It is of course too early to judge how the JET and the STEAM would affect our civil service, the entire national bureaucracy, for we must caution ourselves that it is a long-term effort. But it would seem to me that we have now at this stage effected already a new form of coordination and cooperation among our departments and agencies through our personnel development program. There is much less confusion today concerning how our governmental machinery works, and much less despair about getting things moving in government.

My confidence in the necessity and effectiveness of these programs lies in the fact that they have generated the full support of our government agencies, and more important, the interest and eager participation of those whom they seek to train.

At first, I was afraid that if the seminars were held during office hours, it might be considered by those participating as some kind of a vacation. But I gathered that you have seriously worked at the development of your talents, capabilities, and skills. And I am very happy to hear this. This further strengthens my trust and hope that the Filipino will rise up to the challenge if he knows what he is fighting for, if he knows what the stakes are, if he knows what the objectives are, and if he knows what the alternatives are. What is going to happen if we do not change, if we do not reform?

And from such small perhaps humble beginnings lofty goals will be attained.

For conceivably, the hundreds who have been graduated by these programs will move on from here to motivate and to spur the thousands who serve in our government service.

Today, therefore, I take this opportunity to commend you all upon your successful completion of these training programs. I wish you success in your work, and I ask you to continue to develop your skills within the service.

I commend also the Civil Service Commission for its painstaking efforts to develop and implement these training programs, and for its even more ambitious effort to promote personnel development in our national bureaucracy.

Of course, we must also thank those who have participated in this program — the Development Academy of the Philippines headed by no less than President O. D. Corpuz of the University of the Philippines; Dean Raul de Guzman of the UP College of Public Administration; Director Celerina G. de Veyra of the Junior Executive Training. We congratulate all of you. You are well aware that these are not the only training programs that are going on. We have the Career Executive Service Development Program which is being implemented by the Career Executive Board through the Development Academy of the Philippines. This is the training of the undersecretaries, assistant secretaries, bureau directors, assistant bureau directors, regional directors, assistant regional directors, department service chiefs, and other officials of equivalent rank.

The CESDP is administered by a board. The President of the Development Academy of the Philippines is the Chairman. The Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and the Chairman of the Presidential Reorganization Commission are members.

Then we go down to the JET which is the middle managers training program.

The follow-through program for teachers consists of distance training schemes in which learning packages on the New Society are mailed to teacher JET graduates for self-learning purposes. I launched this last year and all of the 15 073 who graduated from the first phase of the JET course are undertaking this program.

Now the training of the rank-and-file is conducted on a decentralized basis and it is concerned with orientation, reorientation, the development thrust of government, without precluding the inclusion of subject matters of special interest. How many employees in the rank-and-file have gone through this training? 47,952 employees.

In addition to these, we have the youth training program for leadership, the Buklod ng mga Kabataang Kawani, aged 30 and below. The Civil Service Commission leadership development program is for leaders of the future. These are the young men who are marked out to assume higher responsibilities in government. The National Defense College of the Philippines has a new program geared towards instilling in the youth the sense of pride in our heritage, and further exposing them to the development program and goals of the New Society. It is a five-week program which is going to start on October 17. The first class consists of 70 participants, including a group of regional directors, chosen on the basis of rigid screening by the Civil Service Commission. The Civil Service Commission has allocated at least five slots each for the 13 regions of the country. This was done to ensure that the regions shall have a fair share of trained young people.

Now, how about scholarship programs? You are an undergraduate. You want to get your degree. We have a scholarship program. I go through all these because I know that many people are listening to me now. And they might think that we have nothing but training programs for the middle management level. No.

What are these scholarship programs? We have the national scholarship for development which encourage those who have not completed undergraduate studies to do so on a study-now-pay-later scheme. However, they are required to pursue courses in areas considered by NEDA as priority areas for development.

Now, scholarships in public administration prepare the persons in government for the requirements of the higher executive levels through formal education. And I have instituted a scholarship program even in the Armed Forces. While you are in the service, you can go to college depending on your qualification and specialization. This program has just started under my administration. Quite a number have gone to college and obtained a basic bachelor’s degree, a master’s degree, even a doctorate degree.

What is the Balik-Barangay program? Well, at least, you spend 15 days in the barangay. And I wonder whether we have any feedback on how this is being implemented. But by and large, this interaction between the bureuacracy and our people will be for the good of everybody.

Now, the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission is now working out with heads of departments engaged in extension services a program to integrate and upgrade the extension services of government. An extension worker is an expert in a particular line of undertaking. He must likewise be able to carry out the other training programs of government. This is for reasons of economy. So you see, we have an entire new structure for training and revitalizing the bureaucracy.

I can only therefore express my satisfaction over these initiatives, but l wish to formalize the effort to train, retrain, reorient, motivate the civil service. And because of this, I would like to sign in your presence a decree which establishes the Civil Service Academy with the assurance by the Civil Service Commission that there is not going to be much additional funding. This will integrate and render more purposeful and systematic all these efforts. When this matter was presented me, my first question to the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission was: Can you see the same funds you are using now in the various departments for training, put them all together into an academy with the same personnel? And I have his assurance that this is so. I say this because I am sure Commissioner Laya is listening to this speech, and wondering how much more he is going to set aside for training. And with this assurance, I hereby sign in your presence this decree.

Now, you will come under a formal umbrella. I direct that all those who have graduated from these training programs — JET, STEAM— to come now under the umbrella of the Civil Service Academy. You are well aware how this will affect you personally because your rankings, your capability for promotion, your screening, will be based on these qualifying seminars and training programs and the attitudinal tests that will be a part of this course.

I therefore hope that these programs will continue as well as they have started. And so long as I am President, I assure you that they will receive the support of the Office of the President. For I am certain that this training program is the key to the efficiency and stability of the entire bureaucracy. And, perhaps, the fulfillment of many of our national programs.

So to each and everyone of you again, congratulations and good luck.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library