Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Inauguration of the Civil Aeronautics Administration Semi Automatic System

[Delivered on October 2, 1969]

The Modernization of Airports

WE ARE INAUGURATING here a center which skeptics predicted would not be completed in five years, but which, as you see, is now finished. I was informed that it is now in full operation, but not being an expert on this matter, I have to take the word of those who are intimate with the project.

This center was built as part of the crash program aimed at modernizing our international airport before the end of the year. We are opening bids by November 7 on the construction of facilities for jumbo jets. I don’t know why they chose a date just before the elections, but I can tell you that I had nothing whatsoever to do with the choice of the date. The proposed facilities for jumbo jets in the Manila International Airport will cost about P25 million.

I have also just authorized the construction of a number of domestic airports, about 36, worth about P36 million, to be installed from North to South.

From the start, in 1966, I knew that the country could not develop a pace economically without adequate infrastructure which includes, of course, the much needed airports to serve our more than 7,100 islands.

As a consequence of the high priority that we placed on infrastructure, we concentrated our resources on infrastructure, but at the same time we gave the stress to agriculture. Now that we have laid the infrastructure, perhaps we should now go into the building of the superstructure. This indeed is what we are trying to do now and this is what we intend to do in the next four years, God and the Filipino people willing.

I take pride in pointing out, of course, that no other administration has built as much infrastructure as we have in the past three years and a half, We have built, for instance, more concrete roads than this country has ever built from the turn of the century in 1902 to 1965.

I am happy to note that the private sector has been cooperating with the government on this matter.

The Philippines had the dubious distinction, around 1965, of being one of the three countries in Asia with the poorest telecommunications system. This has been changed in the past three years and a half. Growth in telecommunications has accelerated at the rate of 10.5 per cent per year. In capital alone, private industry invested an additional P8,264,000 in 1968, which was three times that invested in 1966.

Right now, I would like to explain the government’s activities in civil aviation. We must provide civil aviation with modern facilities. This project which we have just inaugurated was designed not only to serve domestic aviation but also to meet regional aviation requirements, particularly at this time when the Philippines has become a focus of air travel on this side of the Pacific. In keeping with the requirements of the jet age, we are collaborating with the other nations in the region in the development of modern communications systems and the message switching center provides us with an efficient system of message transmission and reception.

In terms of speed, accuracy and capacity the center is adequate to meet problems brought about by faster aircraft, high altitude capability, and bigger volume of operations. And this is just the beginning of the development of a highly sophisticated system to handle the anticipated jumbo jets and supersonic aircraft. As we keep pace with the jet age, we should at the same time be able to make great strides in our national development program. There is no question that we will be able to maintain our pace. We have been able to do it because of the ingenuity, resourcefulness and efficiency of our people.

I take this occasion to pledge the support of the government, the national government and of the Office of the President, to all the efforts in this area, to attain all facilities needed by modern air travel. It is my intention to present to Congress as soon as it opens in January 1970, if I am still in the position to submit such recommendations, a development program for our aircraft and aviation facilities including the most sophisticated radar system, communication system, as well as facilities in the way of terminals and runways, so that Congress may be able to prepare a five-to-ten-year program of development. At the same time, we should immediately meet today the urgent requirements of air travel. I shall give air travel and the funding of facilities required for modern air travel the highest priority in the years to come.

So, I believe that you and I should get together and support each other so that we can finalize this plan.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 2). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].