Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the UP Law Alumni Association meeting

[Delivered on September 29, 1978]

Why Martial Law Must Stay

I WOULD LIKE to thank you once again for this opportunity to be with you on die annual gathering of the UP Law Alumni.

The public, particularly the media, has come to expect me to speak on foreign policy every time I address this gathering of the UP Law Alumni, and I have always complied with their expectations. Perhaps there is no reason for me now to depart from the tradition. However, I shall in accordance with the tradition of brevity among lawyers, try to keep my main speech to 30 minutes and then open the table to interpellations.

I believe that perhaps it is in the nature of the discipline of law as well as in the knowledge that we acquire in international law, that our formulations or our discussions tend toward international relations. The discipline of law, not to mention the knowledge that we acquired in the college, is indeed good preparation for the study of international relations. Call it art, call it by any other name — science, if you will. Statecraft, which I presume is the interest of every lawyer, deals with the gamut or international relations, not the least important of which is the avoidance and the management and the resolution of conflicts, conflicts among nations, among their nationals, and among states.

Seven years ago, I stressed the need for an accommodation with reality in the formulation of our foreign policy. We have endeavored to keep abreast of unpredictable changes in the unfolding evens in the world scene. Today, or these days, it is incumbent upon us, upon the political leadership of our government, to endeavor, to keep abreast of these changes and to assess their impact and determine how they tend to affect our political, strategic or economic position — whether they be beneficial, adverse or simply innocuous.

In Southeast Asia, for instance, one has seen the dramatic changes since 1975. In July, 1974, the Laurel-Langley Trade Agreement between the U.S. and the Philippines was terminated. The year 1975 saw the withdrawal from the Indochinese peninsula of American forces. After that withdrawal, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or ASEAN, became more active. And Southeast Asia is emerging once again as the scene of significant events and developments that makes it the focus of world attention. Perhaps, it was only the ASEAN countries that averaged an individual growth of 7 percent annually in its Gross National Product. Also, it has doubled its Gross National Product every 7 to 12 years. Thus you note that the disturbances which might put a stop to the economic development in the region are the chief topic of concern of observers of the international scene.

We noted also the visit here of Deputy Prime Minister Li Hsien-nien of China as well as Prime Minister Pham Van Dong of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. You are well aware, and it is not a matter that we can consider secret, that all countries in Southeast Asia have been wary of the possible support to subversives in their respective countries, coming from various powers within the region. China and Vietnam have been referred to.

I am happy to report to you that we have prepared here a long, long list of the steps that have been taken towards one single end, and that is to now lay the basis for a guaranteed period of development for Southeast Asia as well and especially for the Philippines, free from the possibly not only of massive infiltration of subversives or exported war but also from the threat of external aggression. This became necessary if Southeast Asia’s plan was to move aggressively forward, along the cooperative endeavor, in order to attain its primary goal — at the beginning, its only goal — that of economic collaboration. Then it was necessary that this be in an atmosphere of regional peace.

Because of the developments in the area, it is now possible to project and predict comparative peace in the Southeast Asian region for at least five to 10 years. And with this, therefore, our country and the other Southeast Asia countries can proceed with accelerated pace towards their objective of economic and social reforms as well as modernization.

The threats that did appear formidable in the past sprang from many sources. The first was external, and because of this we entered into military agreements with the United States of America. We are in the middle of negotiations with the United States regarding three military agreements, which are: the Mutual Defense Pact, the Miltary Assistance Pact and the Military Bases Agreement.

There have been many commentaries about these pacts. But in view of the fact that they are the subject of negotiations, I will not now go into their details. Any answers to these questions will be at best guarded ones.

Let me go to what I really had in mind. I wanted to discuss with you the obstacle which I have pointed out as a formidable deterrent to the lifting of martial law. What is this? This is the Southern subversion or secessionist movement. I would like to call your attention to the situation in Mindanao today. Why do I find this an obstacle to the lifting of martial law? First of all, the secession movement continues. You are well aware that the secessionists, admittedly have been trained outside the Philippines. Admittedly, too their arms, as well as funds and material support, come from outside the Philippines.

I will now essay to explain the steps that were taken by our government in order to meet this problem of the secessionist movement in the South. The question is often asked: Why did the Republic of the Philippines not only allow, but actually invited the Islamic Conference, the conference or organization of Islamic countries, to participate in the settlement of what I have always and repeatedly said is an internal problem of the Philippines? This is a valid question.

Let me go back, therefore, to the year 1972. In the year 1972, to our surprise, the Islamic Conference approved a resolution expressing deep concern over the allegations of genocide committed by the Republic of the Philippines against our Muslim brothers in the South. We immediately, in a state of alarm, sought to rectify the false report. But in the year 1973, notwithstanding all our efforts, the Islamic Conference agains expressed concern over the plight of the Filipino Muslims. And the fourth Islamic Conference in 1973 not only expressed deep concern over the reported repression and mass extermination of Muslims in Southern Philippines but urged the Philippine government “to halt this operation immediately.”

A committee of four, known as the quadripartite committee composed of the foreign ministers of Libya, Saudi Arabia, Senegal and Somalia was created to visit the Philippines and look into the situation. Since we were not concealing anything and because we believed that it was necessary that the whole world knew what was happening in the South, we actually invited this committee to come over, and they did come in 1973. Their expression of surprise is now of record, which reflected the true situation in Southern Philippines. Notwithstanding this, however, the fifth Islamic Conference of 1974 urged the Philippine government to find a political and peaceful solution through negotiations with the Muslim leadership, particularly with representatives of the so-called MNLF. And I am quoting from the resolution of the Islamic Conference.

You remember that I sent the then Executive Secretary Melchor to Jeddah. Nothing came out of this meeting because the MNLF representatives headed by Nur Misuari demanded that the Philippine government accept their conditions before they sat down for the negotiations. And one of these conditions was a recognition of a status of belligerency and that of a separate state. Of course, no republic, no self-respecting republic would deal with its own nationals and grant them a status of belligerency and accept their existence as a separate state. Naturally, the then Executive Secretary Melchor wired back saying that irrespective of the consequences, he was not going through with the negotiations unless the MNLF representatives came down from their excessive and unacceptable demands. This resulted in a stalemate.

In the sixth Islamic Conference in 1975, Indonesian Foreign Minister Adam Malik regretted that the talks in Jeddah had failed because of the “disproportionate” — and I quote him — “demands of one of the factions of the Filipino Muslims”. Of course, he was referring to the MNLF.

The seventh Islamic Conference in 1976 again demanded the resumption of negotiations as well as the granting of autonomy. And here I quote “This is the first time that the Islamic Conference has made a demand for autonomy ” They demanded resumption of negotiations and the grant of autonomy based on a previous resolution of the sixth Conference, despite the unacceptability of the provisions to both the Philippine government and a new majority of Mindanao leaders, and in spite of steps taken by the Philippines toward further negotiations.

Upon the invitation of the Philippine government, Secretary General Mohammad Al-Toami came to the Philippines in order to establish a relief agency for the welfare of Muslims in the Philippines. And from then on we sought the intervention of the Islamic Conference in order to neutralize the apparently successful efforts of the secessionists to paint the Philippine government as repressive and oppressive toward the Muslims.

You will remember that there was no fighting in Mindanao until 1973, other than, first, the abortive fighting in Marawi in October of 1972, which was immediately terminated. But the actual fighting started in Lebak, Cotabato, sometime in the last day of February 1973. For some reason I was in the area. I do not remember now why, but this was the beginning of the all-out attack. From 1973, 1974 and 1975 the MNLF succeeded in taking over many of the provinces and towns. The Philippine government retained control only of the capital towns in the regions. This was true of Tawi-Tawi, in Sulu. In 1974, Jolo the capital town of Sulu, was taken by the MNLF. This was true of Basilan, and most of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte. And this was also partly true of Cotabato, as the lawyers from there will remember, as well as of Lanao del Sur and part of Lanao Norte.

Anyway, with this situation, it became necessary for the Republic to seriously consider looking into solutions that would be acceptable to all parties concerned. But before we did so, an analysis of the situation indicated that support for the now overwhelming majority of forces in the Mindanao secessionist movement was coming from outside the Philippines. By this time, 1976, or 1975 and 1976, the Philippine government was already in possession of confirmed and complete information as to the funding, the training and numbers of the MNLF. For by this time, not only the infiltrators that we have sent into the MNLF but also captive rebels confirmed the fact that training was undertaken outside the Philippines as early as 1968 and 1969, and that the purpose of the secessionist movement was to establish a separate state to be composed of Palawan, Mindanao, Basilan, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, and Sabah, a state of the Federation of Malaysia, with a chief minister or prime minister or president coming from the ranks of those who would organize it outside the Philippines. It also became obvious from this intelligence that there were at least 16,000 armed men against the Republic of the Philippines at this particular time. And it was now necessary to prevent further, massive entry of additional firearms into Mindanao. Thus it was necessary for us to identify the actual source of this funding and support, which the intelligence of the military and the defense establishment succeeded in doing. After this, it became necessary for the government to utilize available lines of defense to protect the country.

In foreign relations, the first line of defense that a government utilizes is diplomacy or international relations. But at that time, the Philippine government had no diplomatic relations with some of the states in the Middle East. It became necessary, therefore, to establish such relations so that we might have a channel for negotiations in order to neutralize the source of support of the MNLF.

This was the reason, the principal reason, for the invitation of the Philippines to the quadripartite committee of the Islamic Conference to come over. And in this meeting it was agreed that we should start negotiations for the settlement of this conflict with the MNLF — not with the Islamic Conference but with the MNLF. And it was agreed that there would be no preconditions; that no status of belligerency would be granted to any of the insurgents, and that the Constitution and territorial integrity of the Philippines would be respected. This was put down in writing and properly recorded.

Accordingly, the First Lady was invited or rather, the President and the First Lady were invited to attend. But since I was then too busy attending to internal matters in our country, the First Lady went. She went to Libya some time in November 1976. This visit, which took about five to six days, resulted in the establishment of diplomatic relations with Libya as well as the promise that Khaddafy, this outstanding leader in the Middle East, would utilize his influence as well as his powers to attain a just settlement of the problem in the south.

This led to the ceasefire which was signed in December 1976. The ceasefire was ultimately and formally agreed upon by two commanders, the commanders of the MNLF and the Southern commander of the Republic of the Philippines, Admiral Espaldon, on January 20, 1977. It was agreed that there would be a complete cessation of hostilities.

T will not go into the many violations of the ceasefire now. All I can say is that in addition to the ceasefire, there was a Tripoli agreement. This was an agreement signed by two parties, with others as witnesses. The parties were the Republic of the Philippines represented by Undersecretary of National Defense Carmelo Barbero, and the Moro National Liberation Front represented by Nur Misuari, the chairman. All the others who signed, including the Foreign Minister of Libya and the other members of the quadripartite committee of the Islamic Conference, were witnesses to this agreement. It was agreed in the Tripoli agreement that the Philippines would then submit the matter of secession to and in accordance with its constitutional processes. And because it-involved the creation of an autonomous region, or semi-autonomous regions, in accordance with the agreement then we decided to call a referendum which was set for March of 1977. And it was also agreed that there would be a second meeting to work out the details. The second meeting was called some time in January of 1977, and this resulted in a stalemate. Under the Tripoli agreement, the second meeting was supposed to last until March 3, 1977. But by then, there was no agreement as to the details. On the contrary, fighting had resumed in the South.

Accordingly, the First Lady was again sent to Libya in order to negotiate a stop to the fighting. And she went to Libya on March 7, 1977 and stayed there until March 17. On March 17 she called me up by urgent long distance, saying that there was no way of arriving at a settlement, and that the committee headed by Undersecretary Barbero and its counterpart, the quadrilateral commission or committee of the Islamic Conference, could not agree on anything. Therefore, this committee was asking the heads of the two governments to intervene and propose a compromise agreement. These are all in writing. We actually have a compendium, a collection of these books.

And I would like to read to you publicly for the first time certain communications on the matter of, first, the referendum, because it is now claimed by some that the question of referring the Tripoli agreement to the people of the South was never agreed upon in the Tripoli agreement. And I say that it was. Likewise, the claim that the referendum and the questions were not authorized.

On March 17, 1977 I received this telephone call from the First Lady in Libya. She told me that there was only one chance of our arriving at a continuation or resumption of the ceasefire negotiations and that was for me to talk to President Khadaffy. Accordingly, I talked to this outstanding leader of Libya. We put on record and taped the entire conversation. It was agreed that the President of Libya would send me a cablegram in order to avoid any errors in the translations or interpretations pertaining to a very sensitive matter which was a question mark in the Tripoli agreement, and that is — what was meant by the autonomy therein to be established, and what was meant by constitutional processes to which the Tripoli agreement was supposed to be subjected by the Republic of the Philippines.

And so I now read to you the cable which was sent me in conformity with our telephone conversations.

“I referred to the talks of today’s evening between the First Lady and myself. And it has been agreed with her, in accordance with the Tripoli agreement signed on 23rd December, 1976 and in implementation of its provisions, that the following steps be taken:

“1. A decision to be issued by the President of the Republic, declaring the autonomy in the 13 areas defined by the Tripoli agreement.

“2. A provisional government for the autonomy to be formed by a decision issued by the President of the Republic in which the concerned parties from the Moro National Liberation Front and the inhabitants of the areas, of the autonomy take part.

“3. This provisional government shall hold a referendum in the areas of the autonomy; that is, in the 13 provinces mentioned in the Tripoli agreement concerning the administrative agreements within the areas of the autonomy in accordance with Article 3 of the Filipino Constitution. And this means that the people be asked how to organize themselves administratively within the areas of the autonomy.

“4. This solution shall put an end to this question and an end to the war and leaves no chance to those who are opposing the reaching of a solution, and it will open on the other hand a new page in the relations between the Philippines and the Islamic states.

“On this occasion I would like to inform Your Excellency that the Jamarihiyah received confirmations from the members of the Quadripartite Ministerial Committee, the Islamic Conference from the current president of the Islamic Conference and the Islamic states supporting the endeavors of the Socialist People’s Arab-Libyan Jamarihiyah in order to reach a peaceful solution and reassure their obligations towards any agreement to be reached by the Jamarihiyah.

“In case of Your Excellency’s favorable reply on this agreement reached between the First Lady of the Philippines and myself, I will contact the National Moro Liberation Front to convince them to agree upon it.

“Accept, Your Excellency, my highest considerations and best wishes.”

Accordingly, on 19March 1977, I sent the following cablegram to Colonel Moammar Khaddafy:

“Allow me to extend to Your Excellency the gratitude of the Filipino people and ourselves for the continued attention and decisive endeavors that you have applied to the solution of the stalemate on the Southern ‘Philippines’ conflict.

“I have today March 18 received your cablegram confirming the agreement between my wife, Mrs. Imelda Romualdez-Marcos, and Your Excellency in accordance with the Tripoli agreement of December 23, 1976, which cablegram provides for the declaration of autonomy for the 13 provinces mentioned in the Tripoli agreement, the organization of a provisional government for such areas of autonomy, in which provisional government die concerned parties of the moro National Liberation Front and the inhabitants of the areas of autonomy shall take part, and the holding of a referendum by the provisional government concerning the manner in which the inhabitants within the areas of autonomy may wish to organize themselves administratively in accordance with the Constitution of the Philippines.

“I wish to transmit to you the wholehearted accord and approval of our government as well as ourselves for this proposal and solution, knowing fully that the solution puts an end to the conflict and, as you have said, ‘leaves no chance to those who are opposing the reaching of a solution, and it will open on the other hand a new page in the relations between the Philippines and the Islamic states.

“I am certain that on this occasion all the members of the Islamic Conference, including the Quadripartite Ministerial Committee of the Islamic Conference, will support your brilliant solution as well as support the People’s Socialist Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah. On this occasion, therefore, I wish to congratulate Your Excellency and the people of the People’s Socialist Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah for having their President as guide, a decisive as well as recognized leader of the Third World and of humanity in Your Excellency’s person.

“Accept, Your Excellency, my continued esteem, admiration and affection.”

Thus, the Republic of the Philippines proceeded to organize the provisional government. An invitation was sent to Mr. Nur Misuari to become the chairman of the provisional government in the 13 provinces. He refused the invitation. Because of this we invited other MNLF leaders who were available, in accordance with this agreement. And other leaders participated in the organization of the provisional government. In fact, these members of the provisional government ultimately became the governor of Tawi-Tawi, the governor of Sulu, the governor of Basilan, and also the mayors and governors of other provinces.

Accordingly, a call to a referendum was made, and set for March 1977. But this again was stopped by a protest filed by Nur Misuari, saying that the questions asked were not in accordance with the agreement.

I will not go into the further details because there was an exchange of many cables. Allow me, however, to read some of the secret cables which I reveal for the first time. I received these cables from Colonel Khaddafy as well as from Nut Misuari as to the nature of the questions to be asked in the referendum. The cable of the President of the Jamahiriyah was preceded by this letter that I sent to the Secretary General of the Islamic Conference, dated 14 April 1977, in which I pointed out the agreement with Colonel Khaddafy, which I was trying to implement. And I said:

“Moreover, the Saudi press agency has reported that Nur Misuari has agreed to the setting up of a provisional government in Southern Philippines as worked out by President Marcos and President Khaddafy. We have kept faith with the agreement to establish a provisional government in the autonomous regions by immediately decreeing the formation of such a provisional government on March 25, 1977.

“In accordance with the agreement that the Moro National Liberation Front shall take part in the provisional government, I have invited ranking MNLF leaders to occupy 15 to the 29 positions in the preparatory committee for the formation of the provisional government. This is also entirely consistent with our efforts to involve the MNLF in every step of the negotiations.”

And I informed the Islamic Conference about that telephone conversation. At the same time, we invited them to come and attend the referendum. When they realized that the Republic of the Philippines was insistent on the call to a referendum and that the provisional government was ready to hold a referendum, Colonel Khaddafy sent me the following cable. After discussing the nature of the questions in the referendum, he said:

Nothing in the Tripoli agreement called for these questions, and in accordance with the Philippine Constitution which prescribes that the setting up of new administrative units or the changing of actual ones already set up necessitates to ask people’s advice. Therefore the matter calls for the inhabitants to be asked on their administrative arrangement as per the Constitution.

“In view of that, we see that the questions be formulated as follows:

“1. Do you agree for the amalgamation of the two provinces, 9 and 12, in one region within the autonomy or remain separate within the autonomy?

“2. Do you agree to join your province with the other two provinces, 9 and 12, in one region within the autonomy or remain as it is within the autonomy?

“3. Do you agree for the introduction of changes in your municipality in accordance with the autonomy or prefer to maintain them as they are within the autonomy?

“4. Do you agree for the introduction of changes in your barrios in accordance with the autonomy or prefer to maintain them as they are within the autonomy?

“Mr. President, I wish to assure Your Excellency that the questions proposed have been formulated in accordance with the Constitution of the Philippines ” and so forth and so on.

So I answered that in accordance with his suggestions, the questions in the referendum would be as follows:

“1. Do you approve the merger of regions 9 and 12 into one single autonomous region?”

For voters of Palawan, Davao del Sur and South Cotabato, the questions was:

“2. Do you approve the inclusion of your province as part of any single autonomous region in Southwestern Philippines or any of the two regions, Region 9 or 12?”

Now these questions were translated into Arabic. I told Colonel Khaddafy that the matter was already the subject of intense campaign within the two regions. And I said:

“We hope that Your Excellency will understand our situation inasmuch as the questions have been distributed, debated and discussed by the people not only in the area of autonomy but also nationwide and outside the country, and to withdraw them now will create the impression that we expect answers from the people adverse to the government and cast doubt on the integrity of the referendum results.

“In addition to these considerations, almost all the countries which have diplomatic relations with the Philippines are sending representatives to the 13 provinces in the South to observe the referendum-plebiscite. Foreign correspondents from all parts of the world have started to arrive and are coming to participate in the general observation of this referendum-plebiscite on Sunday.

“It would therefore be most embarrassing if, for any reason, the proposed questions are in any way altered or changed.”

I inquired from the Islamic Conference Secretary General whether there were any further comments on the subject. And this is a letter that I received from Secretary General Amado Karim Gaye. It said:

“We agree, however, with the form of questions communicated to Your Excellency by His Excellency President Khaddafy on April 14.”

And so, even the Islamic Conference agreed with the questions.

In addition to this, I sent an inquiry addressed to Nur Misuari, asking him whether he would participate in the referendum, and guaranteed his safety and return to wherever he comes from it he were to participate in the referendum as well as head the provisional government in the South.

In answer to this, he sent me a letter dated 16April 1977. Again, for the first time, I will reveal this publicly. He said:

“Any consultation with our people in area of autonomy shall be the sole responsibility of the autonomous Muslim regional government. And in the event that the consultations are held with our people, the questions that can be raised are only thoe contained in Colonel Khaddafy’s cable to Your Excellency dated April 13, which are as follows   ” — and then he included the same suggestins of Colonel Khaddafy, which are substantially embodied in the questions asked in the referendum of April 17.

Accordingly, therefore, the referendum was held on April 17. And out of, I would say, more than 1,800,000 Muslims, only 40,000 voted for the MNLF. All the others decided, first, that there not be only one region but two regions and that the leaders be chosen by election.

In accordance, therefore, with this decision, we wanted to call an election of the legislative council which would choose the executive council for the two regions in 1977. But if you will remember, this was the occasion of the great earthquake and the tsunami which killed about 8,000 people in southern Mindanao sometime in August 1977. Accordingly, the whole matter was shelved and postponed.

Now I have announced that the Batasang Pambansa will now consider the question of the establishment of this autonomous or semi-autonomous region. And such a responsibility has been transferred to it. It is my hope that the Batasang Pambansa will act on this as soon as possible. After which, it is my intention to call elections to the legislative council of the two regions and thus organize the two autonomous governments in the two regions. The powers of each of the autonomous regions have been determined by the people themselves in this referendum and plebiscite. But it is my hope that if these elections are called, the representatives duly chosen, the recognized leaders of the Muslim communities will run the affairs of these two regions.

With this, therefore, we will be able to settle the question of the secessionist movement as well as the question of peace and order in the South.

It is my hope then that after this we will be able to eliminate the one, single, overwhelmingly serious obstacle to the lifting of martial law.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].