Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 36th Anniversary of the Battle of Ipo Dam

[Delivered on June 6, 1981]

I am so glad that so many of our comrades-in-arms are able to join us today to commemorate one of the most glorious campaigns in the military annals of our nation. I am sure that the fires of your youthful heroism, that so effectively served the cause of our people in the last war, are still burning among all of you, and are being channeled to the more immediate pursuits of the present era. Heroism once accomplished, they say, becomes a burden; for after one heroic act you are thereafter judged; your every word and deed is measured on the basis of that past accomplishment. It may be an honorable burden, but it is a burden just the same that must be borne for the rest of your life. That ironically is the price of heroism.

Over the years many veterans of the last war have tried to live up to the expectations of their people, despite the great personal difficulty it posed. Some of us have had to pass up certain material opportunities simply because as veterans, it was not expected of us to avail of them, as though we had become invulnerable and immune to all the hungers, aspirations and ambitions that beset other human beings. But not surprisingly, many of us have managed to live up to our people’s expectations. The heroism that pulled us through countless bloody encounters with the enemy is the same spirit that sustains us today, in our day-to-day existence.

As we commemorate the 36th Anniversary of the Battle of Ipo Dam we invoke once more that spirit, not only for ourselves but also for the sake of those who are not fortunate enough to be with us today. I refer especially to those comrades of ours who in the flower of their youth made the ultimate sacrifice. As in previous occasions such as this, we recall their bravery not merely to pay them their due homage, but also to make their sacrifices serve as a durable inspiration and a permanent reminder to us all.

For certainly, we miss their capacity for selflessness in this age when even some of our former comrades have chosen to demean the memory of our sacred dead in order to fulfill their own personal ambitions. They have chosen to act the blind, the deaf and the mute to the appeals of millions of our countrymen who are crying out for liberation from poverty, from ignorance, from disease and from exploitation by their own countrymen. They have lost that sense of unqualified service to the people. They have instead allowed themselves to become mere pawns of other forces still operating in our society who are dedicated to demolishing the gains and achievements that not only the government, but all of us, the entire citizenry, have been able to accomplish over the past few years. They have chosen to set themselves as impediments, hindering the advance of progress and development. But on this day I serve them fair warning: our people, having grown disgusted over the centuries of social, political and economic oppression to which they had been victims, will not stand or tolerate any attempt to snatch away from them the fruits of their efforts under a government that has constantly stood by them and for once has been upholding their interests.

I must confess a certain distaste for some of their tactics during the current campaign. As gentlemen and veterans, I had expected everybody conduct themselves in a manner worthy of proven patriots. But over the past few weeks they have been conducting themselves in a fashion that sometimes makes me question their sense of honor and decency. One has become a tool, a puppet—if I must say so—mouthing the pronouncements fed to him by others. He has been waging his campaign not on the basis of the clear and valid issues that, I admit, must be brought out and discussed by all concerned. He has instead resorted to disparaging the character not only of the president, but also of those who are dear to him and those who have been serving the people with him. He has been made to say things that I believe he does not fully comprehend. He has portrayed the problems facing our nation—for certainly, there are many of them—in a manner designed not to help solve them, but to instigate outright popular rejection of the normal workings of government.

Our other opponent stands on a platform that I cannot help but call ridiculous. He has publicly declared that should he be able to assume the highest office of the land, he shall deliver our people and our country to a foreign power. He has depicted this power as an omnipotent benefactor who would endow upon this nation the overrated blessings of its development. I cannot help but personally feel that his declared intentions is a form of treachery. Treachery to the millions of Filipinos who in numerous struggles, such as the Battle of Ipo Dam, laid down their lives so that our country can gain independence and the respect as an equal of other sovereign nations. Treachery to the cause of nationhood that has sustained us and continues to guide us despite the many tribulations that accompany the awesome task of nation-building. Treachery to future generations of Filipinos who, if he were to have his way, would be robbed of their identity and would be denied their legacy and right to a bountiful land.

But more pernicious than these are other elements who have publicly declared their desire to once more reinstate in our land a political system that for many years, as we have painfully witnessed, bred only chaos, anarchy and underdevelopment. Their arrogance knows no bounds. Their objective of remaining aloof from one of the most crucial political exercises in our history, should indicate their indifference to the plight of our people. Childishly they seem to believe that striking a pose of puerile defiance would earn them the right to national prominence and leadership. Again, I must warn these few individuals that their announced plans run counter to certain provisions enshrined in our Constitution, which also provides penalties for acts of civil disobedience. I have no plans of playing lenient nor of playing magnanimous once the elections are over. I shall have to allow the law to run its full course if only to demonstrate that the government, having surmounted far more perilous threats to its integrity, will not now countenance any attempts to endanger its stability.

We owe this much to our people, who have long suffered under the yoke of exploitation by some of their own countrymen. We owe this much to memories of our fallen comrades whose sacrifices were made not for the sake of personal glory, but for the establishment of a nation worthy of the talents and of the dreams of our people.

We face at this moment in our national history nothing less than a crucial choice of the path we will take towards the future. More than a choice of the leader who will lead the nation into the turbulent and uncertain waters of the future, the coming elections is a choice of alternative visions of tomorrow. Some of us who aspire to the presidency may be only dimly aware of this need to provide vision; the fact remains that when one opts to side with them, he stands with them for something that bears gravely upon the life of the nation tomorrow. Some may only be in this election to sabotage and impugn the integrity of the balloting, the fact remains that if one opts to side with them, he also makes a choice for the future.

It is not for nothing, my friends, that we look upon the Office of the Presidency as nothing less than the incarnation of what we are and what we aspire to be as a people and as a nation. In that lofty office are vested not the personal dreams of one man, but the dreams of an entire people, and that is why we say too that while any man can justly aspire for the office, only a very few are found to be deserving.

To run for the presidency is a matter of honor and dignity, so that even in defeat, one must bring to the pursuit of this precious gift the best of one’s hopes and aspirations. To win that office and then to serve it is a matter of the highest purposes and ideals, for only in high idealism and purpose can a man hope to bring the light of leadership to bear on the course of people and country.

It is in the light of these momentous questions that I have insisted throughout this campaign that we in the KBL must lift our sights above the din of partisan confusion and defeatism to bring before our people the great significance and import of this historical period we are passing through. We must live and work in full awareness that at this moment we are making history—and history will salute and bless our aspirations only to the extent that we guide and direct the great currents pulling our nation into the future.

Our task I say now, as I have said before, and as we said in the many battlefields of the last war, is to build the nation not only for our generation, but for the generations to come. We cannot avoid facing the overpowering pull of historical forces, which have repeatedly entrapped us in courses unwanted and uncertain, because of the infirmities of leadership and the poverty of vision. We must change, I say, the very trends of our national story, from the pervasive one of vaccilation and weakness, to the resolute course that will provide for growth and unity in our national life.

The opportunity is in our hands to do this now—to declare to ourselves and before the world that this is where we are going, this is what we aspire to be, and this is what we are resolved to build upon our land.

It is an opportunity, for which many dear sons and daughters of our motherland have braved the agony and vicissitude of battles to win. It is an opportunity won at the price of heroism in war and heroism in peace. It should not happen, and I believe it will not happen, that in this crucial moment in our national history, we who live today—heirs to the proud tradition of our heroes—will fail to take the cup of opportunity and challenge that has passed into our hands. For I do believe that we are not the same nation that we were a decade ago when we almost went under the tides of crisis. We are in fact a new nation and a new society convinced and aware as never before that dreams no matter how lofty can be made real and enduring. Thank you all and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.