Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the graduates of the first CSC-NDCP “Future Leaders Program”

For A New Soldiery

FIRST OF ALL, allow me to congratulate the graduates, those who completed their studies at the National Defense College of the Philippines. I accepted the invitation to hold the graduation ceremony of the future leaders program to emphasize the importance of this program.

I do not attend graduations anymore; even the National Defense College cannot get me to its graduation rites because I am rather busy these days. We are in the middle of many important things — the negotiations with the United States, ASEAN, the problems in the South, the problems with respect to the referendum, and the like. However, I think the future leaders program is just as important as any other problem that confronts the President.

You might think this is just a formality – some kind of consolation for all the work that you have done. And for the men, it seems like payment for their haircut.

You know, one of the problems of any leader is the continuing programs already initiated as well as their pervasiveness. One must watch the soft portion of the population: these are the people who do not commit themselves to the programs. We are busy, let us say, bringing the new gospel of the New Society to the small people who may understand it, but those on whom we depend as the source of initiative and orientation — the implementors as well as the originators of new ideas for new doctrines and new programs — may themselves be the weak parts of the chain.

And this is why the civil service has often been observed as a drag on reform. The bureaucracy is seen by political and social reformers as the conservative sector of any society. It believes in the status quo, in routine of work. These, precisely, are the impressions about the civil service. The bureaucrat routinizes and institutionalizes functions so that reaction becomes automatic. Whenever there is any change, there is an awkward pause and dislocation in the forward movement.

Today, we are engaged in radical reforms. When I proclaimed the New Society, I said: “ We will dismantle the apparatus of the rebellion and extirpate the causes of rebellion. To do this, the leadership cannot act alone; it must motivate the greater number of the people — and the most valuable group are the young, those who will carry the burden because they understand. For we do not expect that many of the radical reforms we have instituted in the New Society will be fully realized even in my lifetime. I know that many of these reforms will ultimately have to be assumed by those who follow in my footsteps and those of my generation. My generation, however, will have fulfilled its mission and accomplished its objectives — to lay the foundation of the New Society.”

We are not so naive nor so sanguine as to think that we can finish all the work that has to be done. It is necessary that the leaders must look to another group to carry on the fight, the group that will be the successor, that will carry the same burden and raise the standards of the New Society.

I say that you who constitute the vanguard of this group of new leaders are showing the way for those who will follow. I understand there were 3,000 who applied for this schooling and that could accommodate only 300 for the time being. So you can see the high standards that characterize this training.

I am pleased to learn that you are actually more diligent than the brave soldiers of our country. The graduates of the Philippine Military Academy are known for their military discipline. Now that you have outdone these PMA cadets, I probably should start thinking of commissioning you for a new type of armed forces.

Talagang pinahirapan nguni’t nagtiis. Ang mahalaga nga naman ay may halaga. There is a saying that there is nothing valuable or priceless in this world that is not actually paid for, if not in pain and tears, then with something else. It could be your life. Perhaps it is a part of your valuable time, but you pay for it. And I am very glad that you have invested in the new leadership of our country with the time you have devoted to this kind of dedicated and intensive study.

I do not need to tell you that your presence in this palace of our people is symbolic. Incidentally, this is a leaky old palace. Huwag lamang umambon ay gumagamit na kami ng raincoat. But it is the symbol of power and authority in our country. That I have asked you to come here—this place that has seen the passage of the leaders of many countries and the transfer of sovereignty in our country — from one country to the other, from the Filipino to the American, from the American to the Japanese, from the Japanese back to the American, and from the American back to the Filipino, we hope for good — indicates the value which I place on this program. I need not stress in words the fact that this program fills up a hiatus in the development program of our country.

We are moving forward in our economic and social development programs. We have a five-year, 10-year, and 23-year economic and social development programs. These programs are being prepared on the economic and social fronts.

I am concerned that on the socio-political front, we do not have a publicized program — that of utilizing all the resources of our people for strengthening the political foundations of our country.

The programs that we think of are written on paper, and they are nothing without the minds, hearts, and hands of human beings. But human beings, by force of nature, must depend upon leadership. I need not quote to you such writers as Toynbee who said: “The great developments in civilization and the forward movement of mankind depend not so much upon the mass who often look up to the leaders who, in critical moments, must make up for the lack of orientation, dedication, energy, enthusiasm, and talent of many of the mass.” This is the role of the leader— to sacrifice and offer whatever God has endowed him in order that he shall utilize the great force of the mass. For a noble objective may be unseen by the great many but is quite clear to the leader: this is the reason why you must go through this training. And do not think that because you have received your diplomas, you are finished with your training. You have just started. You have just been accepted to the group of men who must now forever aspire and work. You can no longer rest. This is the stigma that is upon me. Since you have accepted the brand of leader, you are no longer lazy, you are no longer weak, you are no longer corrupt, you are no longer shallow. You have style, you have something to live up to. And having something to live up to, you must continue to exercise your energy, your talent, your dedication, and your will-power.

It is therefore presumed that all of these have been developed in your training. For as you move forward, these will be required of you. I am certain that you will live true to this challenge. And as a matter of recognition of these qualities, I hereby sign a Letter of Instructions which directs the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and the heads of the departments and agencies concerned, that the upper 50 percent of the graduates of this program, who have been exemplary in both academic and non-academic pursuits, shall each be assigned to a career service officer, if from Manila, and to a regional director, if from a region. They will be rotated and given an opportunity to serve with the different regional directors to expose them to the different government programs.

If after six months of special assignment, it is determined by the career service officer, concurred in by the Civil Service Commission and the National Defense College of the Philippines, that the Buklod member has provided outstanding service, he shall be entitled to a merit increase m accordance with guidelines established for the purpose.

I hereby also order all heads of departments and heads of agencies to now immediately make provisions for the further development of the career of these young people. And this Utter of Instructions, which I sign in your presence, is effective immediately.

And so once again. I congratulate each and everyone of you, the new soldiery of the New Society.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].