Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 9th Agricultural Credit Conference

[Delivered at the Pines Hotel, Baguio City, December 8, 1972]

Credit for Agricultural Development

IT IS MY pleasure to meet today the people who in more ways than one can accelerate the upward thrust of our rural areas and particularly the farmers, all those who are involved with the basic economy of our land, agriculture, through the extension of that often elusive economic prop — credit. In this gathering, the men and women who might possibly shape the future of our rural areas are now present, and it is my hope that during their conference they will indeed begin to forge the means by which our agricultural sector can develop and prosper.

This ninth conference of our rural bankers on agricultural credit, coincides with the 20th year of operations of our rural banking system. All the more reason why we expect great and good things coming from this assembly. If the next decade can equal the rapid growth of our rural banks, in terms of support to our farmers, then we need not fear that we shall not attain our goals in food production. It took a long time for rural banks to take root, indeed more than half a century of trying was experienced by all those concerned with establishing here a system of banks which could directly induce the development of agriculture. But since the first rural bank was authorized only 20 years ago, the growth of the system has been unequalled in scope and number.

The reasons for the earlier failure were predictably lack of capital, inadequate supervision and management skills. But we persisted because we knew that agriculture was basic to development and we realized that it had to first be fully made a productive sector before we could think of total modernization, or even of partial industrialization.

I would say that the ultimate success of the rural banks can be traced to the simple formula of the partnership of the public and private sectors. Learning from the sad experience of failure, our lawmakers passed R.A. 720 which in essence launched the partnership of government and private bankers. To increase the capital base, the government matched peso for peso the investment of private interest. To make supervision able and efficient, the whole system was placed under the Central Bank. And to upgrade personnel and management, training was imposed on all who would work within the system, with the Institute of Rural Banking in the Department of Rural Banks of the Central Bank taking responsibility for this training. Since then, the growth and stability of our rural banks have been assured.

Just how well in concrete figures this partnership has proved salutary may be gleaned from these facts — there are now 580 rural banks in the country, with total resources of P848 million, total deposit liabilities of P568 million, private investments of P118 million, supplemental capital from the government of P75.2 million and a loan portfolio of P690 million. With such financial sinews the government cannot but expect more from the rural banking system in contributions to the implementation of priority programs for development.

And as long as our partnership holds, as long as it is maintained with faith and goodwill, the rural banks will continue to be a crucial element in the attainment of progress.

There was a time when banks of whatever kind and size appeared to the public, and especially to the lowly such as the farmer, as a rather formidable institution, aloof and heartless and exceedingly unresponsive. Only the rich, those with collateral, appeared to benefit from banks. All that has changed, and I would say that the rural banking system has had much to do in bringing about this salutary change.

Nothing has speeded up this change more than the supervised credit program of the rural banks, first tried out as a pilot project in Laguna in 1965. It was a rousing success. It announced to the farmers the presence of a friend in need — the rural banks — and it opened up to them broader horizons in the cultivation of land. These new horizons yielded new techniques, new tools to make farming less a drudgery and more of a challenge and a profitable enterprise. And the difference lay in the availability of capital for farm mechanization, for better seeds, for more inputs like fertilizers.

I might add that the government succeeded in providing the credit needed through the Central Bank because international financing houses were ready to give bans precisely because of the viability of our fanning enterprise and the solidity of the rural banking system. Thus we had a plethora of loan and credit funds, including seven special funds which methodically funnelled out credit to our farmers.

How well our rural banking system serves the country may be appreciated by recapitulating its yeoman work during the destructive floods earlier this year. The massive rehabilitation entailed could not have been undertaken as expeditiously and systematically had there been no rural banks through which credit and loans could be funnelled to the victims.

In an important way, the rural banks became a rallying point for aid and reconstruction. Strategically located, the banks became logical centers for mobilizing the rehabilitation program. Some 159 rural banks in the disaster areas handled P52 million in rehabilitation funds, releasing a total of P65.5 million to 49,664 flood victims in three and a half months. The normalization of agricultural production in the ravaged lands could not have been as speedy as it was were it not for the active participation of the rural banks.

I foresee that the rural banks will once more play a central role in making land reform work in our country, and in every way substantiate and inform the program designed to emancipate forever the tenant-farmer from the bondage of virtual serfdom of sharecroppers. I have recognized the worth of our rural banking system through Presidential Decree 57, which calls on the active involvement of our rural banks among other financing institutions in making available an immediate source of funds for loans or credits to tenants or farmers cooperative under the supervised credit program and in accordance with the strategy for making land reform come alive and yield the desired results.

In many ways, the land reform program will decide the destiny of our country. It is not only because the fortunes of the majority of our people — those in the rural areas — may be decided by its failure or success but also because land reform effectively counters many of the social ills which have raised grievances to a tragic level. Furthermore, as I have already pointed out, we must leap from our agricultural base to modern industrialization, and land reform will be critical in this action. That is why not only the rural banks but also the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Department of Agrarian Reform, and the Department of Local Government and Community Development, among others, have been harnessed for this program.

Each has its assigned task, and the rural banks are relied upon to channel as fast as possible all available funds to the sectors in need of them, with, however, proper discretion and direction.

Let me add that rural banks need not fear of falling into pitfalls along the way, or of dissipating their strength. The government, particularly under R.A. 6390, has provided guarantees and incentives. Rural banks have guarantee coverage of up to 70 per cent against losses. Loans from the Central Bank Loan Guarantee Fund are covered up to 85 per cent.

Finally, let me ask you to do everything in your power to carry on the operations of our rural banks, for in the days to come, as we increasingly extend ourselves in order to meet old and new problems, we shall need more and more the resources of rural banking. The government itself has been concerned about your energies and sustenance. For example, not so long ago when the prices of palay dropped on a nationwide scale, we took immediate steps to save the situation. We felt that if the price drop were not arrested, farmers would be unable to service their loans with the rural banks and the banks in turn would be hamstrung in their lending operations, perhaps crippled in this operation.

The Central Bank, the National Grains Authority, and the Philippine National Bank joined hands to reverse the trend, and fortunately they succeeded. We must continue to prop up palay prices, and this is the reason the NGA is carrying out its palay and corn procurement program. The NGA, by the way, was created to act as a sturdy link between the land reform program and the farmers themselves. It is not enough that tenant-farmers acquire lands; they must be nourished, assisted to enhance their productiveness. And so under Decree No. 4, we created the NGA.

In the operations of the NGA, the rural banks are again in the forefront as prime sources of funds for grain procurement. You are the direct source of the farmers sustenance, for it is with the rural banks that they will cash their checks from the NGA.

We look forward to the time when our farmers will be truly liberated as persons and as productive members of our society. In that time, land reform will have been past history, a milestone passed. And our land will bloom with crops, our agriculture will be linked to a modern complex of necessary industries. When and if we are still around when that season of well-being and progress comes, we shall know that in achieving our goals we were immeasurably supported and encouraged by our rural banks.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].