Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting

[Delivered on June 17, 1981]

Distinguished Ministers of the ASEAN Community, Secretary Haig, Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps, Ladies and Gentlemen:

We convene here in Manila at a moment of historic opportunity for the cause of peace in Southeast Asia, and for the cause of community and union for our Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

At long last, after efforts exerted by our community and by other countries of the world, the United Nations under the leadership of its Secretary General will convene an international conference on the Kampuchean Question in New York on July 13.

All of us are aware of the great import that this question bears to the cause of peace, stability and progress in our region, so dear and, central to the hopes of the ASEAN Community. When we talk about progress in ASEAN cooperation, when we address our visions of the future for our community, we speak inevitably of the climate for peace in the whole of our region in Asia.

All of us therefore must have the wisdom to grasp this opportunity for peace opening to us, and find the will to bring to that forthcoming conference ASEAN’s vision and counsel for resolving the situation that for many years now has entrapped millions of our Southeast Asian brothers under the shadow of war and aggression.

Within the councils of ASEAN, and to the world as a whole, we have repeatedly spoken of the road that resolution of the situation must take.

We have not been blind to the agony of Kampuchea under the old regime that Vietnam’s fortuitous intervention brought to an end. And we certainly have been concerned about the grave injury done to the people of Kampuchea by Vietnam’s decision to intervene in their affairs.

Fundamentally we look to the spirit and letter of the United Nations resolution calling for the withdrawal of foreign troops in that war-torn land, as the first initial step towards the resolution of the problem. There are other steps that must follow, but the essential respect and recognition of the right of the Kampuchean people to self-determination must be accorded and regarded as fundamental to any solution or approach to the problem. The assistance of other nations, of our ASEAN community, and surely of the world as a whole, is necessary for Kampuchea to have peace and to turn around the long agony of conflict; but this must come under the framework of Kampuchea’s sovereignty over her affairs and her future.

We have no illusions that this can be an easy task.

The long history of turmoil in Kampuchea is rooted in problems, grave and multiple, in conditions of continuous travail and sorrow, and in inconclusive periods of conflict and peace. This persists today, as deeply as they endured yesterday. Sometimes it has seemed to some as though the march of that country from crisis to crisis was foredoomed and beyond prevention.

Yet we do not believe that this is so. Manifestly within our association, we are convinced that Kampuchea, given but the opportunity to heal herself, and unimpaired by the designs of others who would wish to do it for her, can turn the tide of crisis and misery around.

The forthcoming New York Conference is also an affirmation that there is a solution to the Kampuchean problem, just as has been for the other problems that not so long ago raged in the other lands of Southeast Asia.

Today there is hope for the future—even if for now it only resides in the fact that other nations are concerned, as we are, about the situation in Kampuchea.

It may be regrettable that one party entangled in the problem, supported by others sympathetic to its cause, will not participate in the conference. Still, we believe that the conference can be productive of proposals that will tilt the tide of crisis in Kampuchea towards new initiatives and hopes for peace.

The great value that we must recognize in international attention on the Kampuchean problem lies, first, in the understanding that the international community will gain therefrom of the complex issues involved, and second, in the potential marshalling of international consensus and initiative towards a solution.

In Kampuchea today, we hear one constant and recurring theme rising from the lips of all involved in the conflict. They all want peace. They all speak of providing stability to the war-torn nation. But they have different ideas of how peace and stability can be attained. One side insists on its right to intervene in the affairs of that nation. The other—and this is the Kampuchean people themselves—insists on the right to self-determination.

The common goal of peace and stability seems to us broad enough to provide a basis for peace negotiations to begin. The variant aspirations and perceptions of the problem ought to be susceptible to the mechanics of peaceful discussion, and not to the agency of force.

There are surely no guarantees that talk will result in immediate success. But there is no alternative, no hope for resolution of the Kampuchean problems, other than this, if we reject conflict as a course for resolution.

On the part of our ASEAN community, we know and accept our responsibilities to serve the cause of justice in Kampuchea, and of peace and stability in the whole of our region. Our governments are united in the decision and desire to commit their energies to this task.

For it is certainly time to end the turmoil in Kampuchea.

It is time that all parties involved in the Kampuchean crisis and the rest of the world pull together to bring to light the avenues for peaceful settlement.

The question has never been, I repeat, whether there must be peace. The question is how it can be attained, and what can be done to make a beginning now in the direction of its attainment.

In line with this, my government believes and hopes that the New York conference will speak with a clear and unmistakable voice in behalf of an end to the fighting, and in promotion of the goal for peaceful negotiations.

Prior to the calling of this conference, there had been efforts to convene a similar conference on the Kampuchean question, but they failed. And in frustration, the fighting continued, the agony of the Kampuchean people went on, and that country passed on ever deeper into misery.

Now that the opportunity has come, it must not be dissipated for lack of effort from the family of nations.

Second, we consider it important that the world really understands, and we with them, what can be realistically attained. we must know what kind of steps are necessary to make the beginning of a solution possible; and we must also come to a recognition of what cannot be immediately attained and yet must be continually pursued at a later time.

In this way, should we look upon the key issue of the disengagement of forces in Kampuchea today, and the cessation of hostilities.

Thirdly, we consider it important that the New York conference and the approach to peaceful settlement should seek to provide a vision of future relationships among the nations in Southeast Asia—relations that will put to an end the climate of division in the region today, and replace mistrust and suspicion with respect and cooperation. The discussion of the Kampuchean issue must relate the need for peace and stability within that country to the necessities of security and peace in the region as a whole. There should be no doubting the fact that what is sought is not the insecurity of other nations, but the security and integrity of all.

Here within our community, we must reflect upon these concerns and forge our common stand. and then in one mind and as one community, let us then move into the venue of an international conference to bring our long-standing concern and care for the plight of the Kampuchean people and seek to make it an essential element in the peace process.

This is not alone the issue that have brought you here to Manila. There are other parts of the agenda that relate to the progress of regional community and cooperation. But I believe I speak to the heart of this ministerial meeting when I say that in the attention we give to the Kampuchean issue, we speak also to the whole of our concerns within the ASEAN Programme of cooperation.

Our goals in the area of regional economic cooperation, of intensified acceleration of on-going and outstanding projects, are implicated in the measures we take to guard and promote the security and the stability of the region.

Since the restrengthening and expansion of the ASEAN program in Bali in _____, we have always diligently followed the principle that our work must be carried on many fronts. We have not focused on single issues of concern, unaware of the whole; rather have we recognized that the building of community involves all the many sectors of regional life as crucial to success and achievement.

Thus for your ministerial meeting here in manila there are in the agenda topics relating to the further restructuring of ASEAN Economic Programs and relationships, and the matter of our relations with other countries and communities.

There are issues that require discussion now, and there are those that wait for decision.

Likewise it has been proposed that the question of a summit of ASEAN heads of state be informally discussed during your meeting. We in the Philippines view this as a matter that must come from real imperative and need, especially in regard to what will substantially affect the progress of the ASEAN program, which so far has been pushed forward creditably through cooperative work and consultations at lower levels of our governments.

In any case all these questions must be decided though the consensus among all the member governments. They all seek the light of your counsel and perceptions. As ever, the ASEAN Council of Foreign Ministers provides our community the direction in which to move in seizing opportunities and in meeting challenges.

Finally, your meeting looks to the post-ministerial talks with the pacific basin countries that will immediately follow. To this aspect of this working week for ASEAN in Manila, we attach much importance and significance. for this is the continuation of a dialogue that is already going on and has been successively promoted by our regional community, and we have the opportunity here to advance this dialogue to a stage in which we can bring into our perspectives the fresh changes that have occurred in the overall Pacific and Southeast Asian situation, and in the matrix of policies governing our relationships.

The matter of our relationship as a community to the dialogue countries are fraught with opportunities and challenges that must be the subject of consultations now. Some matters that were the subject of agreement before require fresh initiative today. Others are new in the light of changes and problems that have recently emerged.

For the most part, we are really involved here in the merging of aspirations for the realization of shared goals. We are of the belief that much progress can be made at this point, when there is goodwill and interest on all sides. The important point is for us to sight together the specific areas in which action can be taken and result in change and improvement of relations.

The totality of your conference agenda forces upon our consciousness the great significance of this time of ferment in Southeast Asian Affair. We realize more than ever how critical are the problems rimming our region, and how imperative it is for our community to hold fast to its sense of union and utilize it for lofty goals.

The one great fount of confidence for all of us who peer into the uncertainties of the future is that we have today this association that enables us to look at the future together, to face problems together, and to seize opportunities together.

Excellencies, you and your council have done much to raise up this confidence in our ASEAN Community, and you bear a great part of the burden and the tasks that it connotes. As you begin your meeting today, our people and government are one in extending you their congratulations and felicitations, and in praying for the success of your deliberations.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.