Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 2nd conference of the Road Engineering Association of Asia and Australasia

[Delivered on October 16, 1978]

Development through Road Engineering

IN BEHALF OF the people and government of the Philippines, I take great pleasure in welcoming you all to Manila and in extending to you our very best wishes for a pleasant and successful conference.

For us, it is a great privilege that our country has been chosen to host the second conference of your association. For we attach great importance in the programs and objectives of the Road Engineering Association of Asia and Australasia, and we believe with all of you that the Association has much to contribute to the development of our respective countries.

It pleases me to note that for this second conference, 20 countries are represented here, and they include significantly the technologically advanced countries of Europe and the Americas. The participation of these countries from outside our region can only further enrich the new sense of collaboration among the countries of Asia and Australasia.

Those of you who were midwives at the birth of the Road Engineering Association back in June 1973 will no doubt still remember the reasons that impelled you to associate under the umbrella of a single regional body. Until that decision was made there was hardly any coordination or exchange on an extended basis among our countries. While various road construction and maintenance seminars and conferences were convened early during this decade, those meetings only concluded with the view that collaboration and exchange could only be productive if pursued and carried through a formal organization, tapping our engineers and specialists in both public and private life.

I think that for the nations of Southeast Asia in particular the idea was of critical importance. Here in the Philippines we were in the midst of a massive infrastructure development program. The other ASEAN countries were similarly engrossed in major road development programs.

For in an undeveloped country, what is more indicative of modernization and progress than a road or a bridge? Thus in all the socio-economic and political development programs of most, if not all of the developing countries, roads even in terms of priority in the problem of energy and energy sources, maintain a high priority.

And it was not for nothing that Southeast Asian advocacy of this association rewarded us with the choice of Kuala Lumpur as the seat of the Association’s Secretariat.

And it should come as no surprise to anyone why we the developing world attach the highest importance to the founding of this Association. It should be even less surprising to the developed nations, whose rapid modernization no doubt involved them in innovative and epic efforts in road engineering and development.

In the Philippines, Minister Aquino had well referred to the fact that when I first became President in 1965, we had only about 55,000 kilometers of roads. Since then we have increased the road network to about 120,000 kilometers, an increase of 65,000 kilometers over a period of 10 years or more.

In the Philippines, like in most Southeast Asian countries, we have a problem of the water-logging of roads and the difficulty of maintenance due to rainfall that can be anywhere from 80 inches to 200 inches a year. Thus the base of our roads has become a special problem to all of us, and when I say all, I mean all of the countries in the periphery of the Western Pacific, where the monsoons carry the rains almost eight months of the year.

In the Philippines today, the cost of road building for asphalted road, would be anywhere from P500,000 to P600,000 a kilometer. The concrete roads would be anywhere from P700,000 to P1 million a kilometer. We are presently trying to maintain these roads, the national highways, at a cost of P11,342 per kilometer and the feeder roads, or the barangay roads as we call them, P4,500 per kilometer, expenses which we find inadequate to maintain the roads the whole year round.

We are therefore met with the problem of establishing a better approach to the question of a stronger and reinforced base for our roads. We are at present experimenting with the Polinar process; polinar mixed with lime is supposed to convert ordinary soil into a hard base for our roads. As I said, this is still on an experimentation stage. We find, however, that whether it is cement or asphalt, the problem is solved with a solution pertaining to the base. As a layman, a lawyer by profession and administrator by avocation, I find all of these interesting, and this is one reason why I decided to accept the invitation to attend your opening ceremonies.

The hope in which we greeted the birth of this regional body, and the state in which we find it today tell us much that of course redeem our faith. In five years, we may say that the Association has gained stability and standing, that it has not failed to affect the entire landscape of development in our part of the world, and that its importance has more than ever been confirmed.

It is my hope that during this conference you will look into this special problem that affect our region, the problems that arise out of continuous rainfall during the monsoons which seriously affect all the roads wreaking havoc on the finances of the developing countries, and threatening even its survival in many instances.

Allow me to use this forum to make a few announcements that affect our local environment.

I am happy to announce that in view of the fact that there have been serious problems regarding transport, we are establishing and creating a new department, to be known as the Ministry of Transportation. Presently this office is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communications. We will now transfer both transportation and communications to a new ministry. We now have about 20 ministries or Ministers with portfolio. This will increase the number of ministries to 21.

At the same time, we are presently reassessing all the various projects in order to absorb the shock of any possible increases in the cost of oil as expected, and also to transfer what we call the current expenditures or the expenditures for housekeeping in government to capital expenditures, including road-building.

In road-building I wish to announce that the shift now is from national roads to barangay roads or feeder roads, or the farmer’s roads, as we call them here in the Philippines. In relation to this, I am happy to announce that the Philippines has just procured $52 million worth of road-building equipment which shall be now distributed to the 14 or 13 regions of the country, to be used exclusively for the construction of roads which are classified as barangay roads.

I hereby also create seed capital amounting to P300 million from which shall be drawn funds for the constructions of barangay roads. Let me explain what the term “barangay” means to our guests from abroad. Barangay is the smallest political unit in our country. It could be translated into village, but in our country barangay means a cohesive unit: it is an extension of the family or the clan. It is a small tribe as of old, and therefore, it is a self-sustaining political unit. It is the basic unit of political action, also the basic unit for socio-economic reform. When we want to spread the gospel of family control or population control, we go to the barangays, and they constitute the means and the agency of reform. Thus today, as we move from national road building into more barangay road building, we now give the means and wherewithal by which the barangays can build their own roads, without having to run to Manila, the center of government — for ours is a strongly centralized government. They don’t have to come to Manila in order to have both the money, the equipment and expertise, for we have district engineers, city engineers, and regional engineers who will now help the barangay build their own roads.

In the construction of national highways, I also hereby announce that henceforth government estimates will be reduced by seven percent in the awarding of bids, so that we can cut down our expenses to levels dictated by our economic funds in anticipation of any possible recession; or shall we say, a plateau of economic movement in the world in the next year or two.

Now that I have made all those announcements for local consumption, let me proceed with my speech of welcome. That is, to assure that whatever I say in this meeting will at least get on the front pages of tomorrow’s newspapers, and thus give importance to this really significant conference of the experts in road building.

If then we look upon the last five years as a time of laying the foundations for regional collaboration and exchange, so must we look at the next five years as a period in which we should eminently advance and develop the mode of exchange, the degree of cooperation, and the quality of our collective efforts for the advancement and development of our societies.

We should be in a position now to fully share with one another technical expertise and advances in road engineering and related fields.

We should know even better now how developing countries can benefit from the technical advances of the developed ones, beyond merely “borrowing” from them.

We should be in a position now to expand the already salutary effort to involve educational institutions and research organizations in the practical problems of development engineering in our region.

We should be able to work together on improving the overall level of management and planning of road development in our countries.

We should be able to make new and exciting innovations in our design techniques, and in our construction practices in keeping with the new demands brought on by the times and the conditions we live in.

And we should finally be able to open ourselves to new vistas, to relatively new areas of exploration, with the same view of accelerated development.

Your conference, I suggest, is an opportune forum for our peoples and our societies to interact creatively in the making of their future.

Your conference is a workshop in which the elusive quest for development and modernization of our peoples may find a creative ally and instrument.

There is an apt parallel in almost every other sector of development effort to what is taking place in your specialized field. You are all aware of the new collaborative spirit in the area of trade, of industrial development, of cultural exchange, of regional security, of political stabilization, which have marked this decade as a time of building for the future in Asia.

While there may be new dangers, new perils, we cannot dismiss, but must rather rejoice in, the new fraternizing zeal within our part of the world. Southeast Asia must move in. For Southeast Asia today is the setting of a major regional effort by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Beyond Southeast Asia, we see interaction between East and Southeast Asia, between Communist and non-Communist countries, between Asia and Australasia, and between our regions and the rest of this great world.

Here in your Association and your conference, this collaborative spirit is fittingly epitomized in concrete and practical effort that will have the greatest impact in our future.

I pray therefore that this conference will succeed in advancing its ambitious agenda, and result in fresh initiatives from your sector.

Once again to each and everyone of you, welcome and best wishes for success.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].