Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Pasasalamat Sa Bagong Lipunan

The Voice of the Small People

COMPATRIOTS, in this election, I have noticed that our opponents are reverting to the evil deeds, the evil habits of the Old Society — slandering, cursing, filth coming from their mouths. And one of the things they criticize and mock is our tourism industry workers – waiters, bellboys, chambermaids. In the Old Society, if the small, poor, and powerless were criticized and cursed, they would humbly remain silent and their voices would not even be heard. But under the New Society, what I see and observe is that my fellow small and poor people have awakened and united. And now they are letting the whole world hear the strength of their voice, which cannot be oppressed by anyone powerful and rich, which is why you are here now to hear your resounding voice and what you are shouting is KBL, KBL. That is the answer to the slander of our opponents in this election.

But what I witness in our election this time, this is true in all fields, because just recently we were there and faced representatives of workers, teachers, fellow unfortunate people and in various places and depressed areas, slums, in Tondo you can hear the cry of the small people, fellow unfortunate people that they are hoping for only one thing, which is none other than the New Society.

My heart overflows with joy to see that our citizens have awakened, especially the small and the poor. Our fellow poor, small, and weak have awakened, opened their eyes, and they are now uniting, bonding, and from there will come the true power that will give our country true peace and progress under the KBL.

You, our opponents in this election, if you are not at the Folk Arts Theater, watch the actions and listen to the cry of these small people you oppress and curse. Listen to them and they are now the powerful in our country because the important ballot is in their hands, that ballot they will write KBL on.

This is the true example, lesson, that from now on, no one in power, whatever his position, can oppress and curse our small people, our poor, our destitute, because under true freedom, the powerful are our small people, the poor and destitute, and that is strengthened by the KBL.

I, as your elected President, thank God for this event. It is good that our small people have had the opportunity to show their feelings that have been wounded by the sharp tongues of our opponents. It is good that God has given our oppressed people, people who lost their voice in the Old Society, the opportunity to now reign and rule in their own country under the New Society Movement.

So, comrades, I repeat on behalf of the KBL, I thank you all not only for your support and help in our upcoming election but for the lesson you have shown to future generations. Let it never happen again that anyone powerful and boastful leader of any political group oppresses you, my fellow small Filipinos, because I repeat, the small have awakened, the weak have opened their eyes and now we have freedom in the Philippines, freedom under the New Society.

To let everyone know, I inform the entire media, while your humble servant is President, you have an ally and you have a representative in the Office of the President of the Republic of the Philippines and I will support and help the Tourism Industry.

To all of you, the First Lady and your humble servant thank you, Let us vote for KBL, KBL, KBL.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].