Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 40th anniversary of the Fall of Bataan

[Delivered on April 11, 1982]

Once again we gather here today — in representation of our three peoples and three nations — to commemorate the Fall of Bataan forty years ago.

There is a certain imprecision in our ceremonies today because as we all know Bataan actually fell on the 9th of April 1942. But in deference to the Lenten season and our Christian traditions, we have chosen to observe this historic event on this most glorious day in Christendom, the day when the entire Christian world celebrates the feast of the risen Lord.

It is apt and perhaps symbolic that these two events — the feast of Easter and Bataan’s hour of glory — should fatefully coincide. For there is a way of looking at the battles fought on this lonely mountaintop as a story that ineluctably mirrors the rising and renewal of life after a time of suffering and sorrow.

For the Filipino people, surely, the fall of Bataan was both the Good Friday and Easter Sunday in the life of their nation. As a people, we had our Gethsemane in the mountain fastnesses of Bataan and Corregidor where many of our young soldiers almost succumbed to despair in the face of hunger, sickness and death; our way of the cross in the infamous Death March; our Golgotha in Mt. Samat on whose slopes thousands of valiant defenders lost their lives in defense of the motherland. But after the fall, there was also the inevitable rising — when at long last, and partly because of the heroic defense of Bataan, God favored the cause for which we fought and our people won liberation, freedom and nationhood.

And we may also point to yet another imperishable victory bequeathed to us by Bataan. And this is the fact that in the commemoration of all the fallen in the last war, nations and peoples who once confronted each other here as adversaries, now join together in venerating their memory.

For us to reach this point when our peoples and our nations can be at peace with another, and sovereign in everything that signifies their nationhood — this to my mind is the mark of triumph, and not of defeat, for that causes that once made Bataan so important a chapter in but in the personal way that comrades and families remember loved ones.

And I find my answer in the words of a soldier’s song that tells of a soldier who in his grave hears the voices of lovers passing:

“Are these not,” he asks, ‘the voices of them that love, that love — and remember me?”

“Not so, my hero,” the lovers say.

“We are those that remember not

For the spring has come and the Earth has smiled, and the dead must be forgot.”

Then the soldier spake from the deep dark grave: “I am content.”

In the last analysis, perhaps there is no lasting sorrow for the soldier in not being remembered for his acts of valor and sacrifice; but there is sorrow and tragedy if the values for which he fought are abandoned by those who come after him. He will be content not even to be named in the annals of war or in the resting places of the fallen; but he will grieve before the sight of a people oblivious to the scourge of war and unmindful of what was won at such great cost.

It sometimes seem that in our time mankind is most attached only to what is new, to what confers power and knowledge in life; that men set store more with the gifts of cunning and craftiness, than with the qualities of courage, valor and fortitude.

It sometimes seem — when we look at the course of the world in our time — that nations are intoxicated with the weapons of mass destruction and with power, and not with those things that build cities and ennoble the life of man.

Yet if there are indeed these aberrant manifestations of life today, I refuse to believe that the deeper and the greater values have vanished. There is still much that is heroic in our lives, and much that we as human beings are capable of achieving with courage and valor. And we can see these things too if we but look around us — in the works of so many individuals and communities who strive to rise above themselves, to develop, to improve the life around them, we feel these in the way all people, men everywhere will respond to an exceptional act of courage and heroism, to an exemplary show of leadership, or to an act of compassion and love.

For some things never die, and always remain.

And so if it should happen, if it has not already, that in the course of time, the faces of the many who fell in Bataan will more and more recede from our memory, still I will say to my comrades: “You may rest content that the world for which you fought is not lost. Freedom, peace, and the hope for betterment live on in the hearts of your people. And for as long as they believe in these you are well remembered.”

So we might all say to all our brothers birted here — that the lives we make for cur peoples and our nations today is our form of veneration of their memory.

And the greatest offering that we can make here – on this day of commemoration and this Easter Sunday — is the same pledge that we have made year after year: to hold fast to the values we have always lived by, to renew ourselves in acts of heroism and patriotism, to work for peace and never to tempt the ambitions of the powerful, to pray that we shall not be summoned again to such a test as Bataan, and if it should be that the test must be suffered again, to be ready to consecrate all to the cause of peace and freedom.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.