Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the First Anniversary of the Ministry of Muslim Affairs

[Released on June 2, 1982]

I am truly pleased to join you today in these ceremonies commemorating the first anniversary of our Ministry of Muslim Affairs.

But first let me welcome to our Hall of Heroes, the Maharlika Hall, our special guests, the Ambassadors of the various Islamic countries who have done and are still doing a most commendable job in strengthening relations between their countries and the Philippines and have helped us a lot in creating understanding by their governments of our sincere efforts to promote the welfare of their Filipino brothers in the faith. I also wish to greet the Members of the Cabinet, the Members of the Batasang Pambansa, and the Autonomous Regional Governments of Southern Philippines who are here with us today, and of course every official and personnel of the Ministry of Muslim Affairs.

Although we mark today only the first year of the Ministry of Muslim Affairs, this occasion calls to mind not just its birth of Presidential Executive Order a year ago, but a much longer history of effort on the part of our government to respond effectively to the situation of Muslim Filipinos and other cultural communities in the country. And once we look upon that history we can also immediately see how the sense of concern of our government for these communities has manifestly grown over the decades, and how today it occupies a central place in government policies and programs.

So if this Ministry is indeed young in years, it is tasked with a very old agenda of government. And it has antecedents in various commissions and agencies which since the recovery of independence in 1946 have tried to implement our government’s policy of integrating Muslim Filipinos and other cultural communities into the mainstream of our society and of harnessing their contribution to the tasks of nation building.

Behind this continued effort to reorganize and revitalize government responses to this issue, one will readily see the ineluctable rationale that led us to the creation of the Ministry of Muslim Affairs. More and more we had come to realize that the issue needed priority attention to be dealt with fully, and in the thrust of events and developments in the south during the past decade, it became both urgent and necessary to gather all government efforts on behalf of our Muslim brothers under the aegis of a single ministry.

Now as we gather here today to mark the first anniversary of the Ministry of Muslim Affairs, it is only fitting that we review how the agency is facing up to its charge: which is the implementation of the firm policy of our government to hasten the integration of Muslim Filipinos in the mainstream of our society with full regard for their beliefs, customs, traditions and institutions; and to secure for every Muslim Filipino equality of stature, dignity and opportunity with the rest of his countrymen.

We may perhaps already say this early that this ministry has been applying itself with imagination and vigor to the fulfillment of its awesome responsibility. Earlier, we had the opportunity to hear Minister Romulo Espaldon discuss in some detail the work and programs of the ministry during the past years. I was pleased by what I heard because, in normal course of things, a new office hardly gets beyond the organizational phase during its first year of operation. And yet you have already worked on certain key program vital to the strengthening of our Muslim communities and strengthening some important Islamic institutions in the country. I refer particularly to your efforts to improve the workings of Shari’ah Courts through the conduct of seminars and the successful conclusion of the first Madrasah policy conference wherein the proposal to integrate Madrasah-type education into the Philippine Educational System was thoroughly discussed with the active participation of Muslim leaders and educators.

I attach so much importance to these programs, so much so during my visit to Saudi Arabia I took the opportunity to discuss with King Khaled possible areas wherein our two countries could cooperate in improving the Islamic educational and legal systems in the Philippines. For along with our many programs to modernize our Muslim communities, we must provide every Muslim Filipino the opportunity to practice and live by his Islamic faith freely, meaningfully and fully.

We have always stressed that man is the sole object of development. And when we speak of human development, we mean not only his material advance or even the full development of his human potentials but also his moral and spiritual development. Thus in all our programs, the spiritual welfare of every Filipino—Christian, Muslim, or unbeliever—has always a place along with his material advancement.

By its work during the year just passed, the Ministry of Muslim Affairs has made an auspicious beginning. But even as I congratulate all of you, I would urge you to continue to work with the same urgency of purpose on your programs so that we can accelerate the process of integration of our Muslim brothers and enlist their active cooperation in the task of nation building.

Recent developments fill us with great hope that our decade-old problem with the Muslim separatists will be brought to a successful resolution. Abroad, we have gained the complete understanding of Islamic governments and organizations regarding our uncompromising stand on the issue of secession. My recent trip to Saudi Arabia not only resulted in broader and stronger relations between our country and the most influential Islamic Nation today, we also secured the firm assurances of Islamic leaders that they will withdraw their support, moral or material, from any group that works for the dismemberment of any part of our republic.

At home, the steady stream of rebels coming down from the hills to lay down their arms and pledge allegiance to the republic has gradually eroded the base of the Moro National Liberation Front. The sporadic bombings, ambushes and kidnappings that happen every now and then in certain parts of Mindanao are nothing more than the final, desperate gasps of a dying rebellion.

The end of the rebellion, which we hope will come soon, should signal the further intensification of our efforts to bring modernity into every home in that troubled part of our country. For with the peace we hope to restore, we will only be buying time, and we have to make full use of that time to eradicate the many causes for grievance, the roots of the rebellion

That have brought us so much grief and anxiety during the last few years. Another explosion of anger and resentment could very well prove unmanageable and fatal. Hindsight prompts us now to step up our efforts to make our Muslim brothers full participants in the tasks and rewards of development.

While our program for the accelerated development of Mindanao requires the full participation of every agency of the government, the Ministry of Muslim Affairs will surely continue to play a critical role as the guardian of our Islamic heritage and the protector of the welfare of Muslim Filipinos. A year its creation, this office has become the most visible symbol of the government’s concern for the welfare of our Muslim brothers and our earnest to preserve for posterity our proud Islamic legacy. It is our hope that in the years ahead you will continue to be faithful to the trust our people have given you.

Thank you and good day.

# # #

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.