Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Rural Media Congress

[Delivered on December 2, 1981]

I am greatly pleased by this opportunity to address the Rural Media Congress of the Philippines. I have been informed that no less than 1,000 media practitioners representing 126 provincial newspapers and 248 radio and television stations as well as correspondents of the Metropolitan dailies along with other communicators based in the rural areas are present in this gathering. As purveyors of news, information and knowledge in the very areas where the majority of our people are located, practitioners of art and science of communication through the mass media are truly indispensable partners in the cause of national development.

It is therefore quite significant and timely that you have chosen the theme “Rural Media: Its Responsibilities and Freedom” for this congress. For this somehow reflects how most of you situate the mass media in the overall perspective of our national life. As with other sectors of our society, mass media today, both in urban and rural areas, have developed a commitment that is premised not merely on the traditions identified with the profession, or with just making a go of the business. Rather, mass media’s maturity can be gauged in their efforts to render themselves relevant to the needs of national growth, and to make known to our people what directions this growth is taking and which aspects of it need to be commended or otherwise reviewed.

There is, however, another significance to this theme of your congress. In a sense, it may be indicative of the confusion that continues to bother the practitioners and the institutions of mass media, ten months after the lifting of Martial Law and five months after the inauguration of the New Republic. With the changes which have swept our political system as background, it appears that the mass media have yet to fully grasp aid adequately adapt themselves to the realities of our national environment. Not that we blame the mass media for it. To sure, these and other changes have been so profound that it perhaps must take the passage of more time to become fully understood. Nonetheless, the fact remains that as a result of external and internal developments, these realities have become increasingly complicated. For as long as the mass media are unable to fully grasp, in their entirety, the implications of these changes, the longer will it take for media to exploit the advantages, opportunities, and challenges that the situation offers.

There are others, of course, who will fail or simply refuse to see reality. There is, for instance, a long-running and ongoing debate among media practitioners themselves on the matter of press freedom. While the exchanges of views have been lively, the language colorful, and many protagonists involved, the debate has in some cases released some of the most ridiculous propositions which can be summarized in the filing that no such freedom exists. Nonetheless, these same propositions have been given wide coverage by the media, refuting in the process the very allegations that the freedom of expression in this country is being curtailed. Given another set of circumstances, the publication of such negative views may have just not been possible. Still, our detractors, for reasons only they can explain, persist in belittling the capabilities and prerogatives that are available to mass media, which ironically they utilize to give vent to their imagined fears and frustrations. If for nothing else, they at least make of themselves the sort of spectacle that some people find amusing and even entertaining. But that debates of this kind should continue through the mass media is a fact that has disturbing implications.

You and I know only too well that the mass media is sustained by a business that is cost-intensive in the extreme. The fact that the process of delivering information to millions of people is a highly intricate and expensive one is not too widely appreciated. Almost everyday, the cost of production inputs, whether in the print or electronic media, are escalating. Newsprint, power, equipment as well as labor costs have been increasing at such a rate that the business and editorial planners of many media organizations are compelled to exercise greater judiciousness and selectivity in the use and allocation of resources, if only to minimize on these cost factors. While ideas and information are relatively cheap, the cost of disseminating them is becoming prohibitive even for the most resourceful.

These cost increases exert pressures that are felt both in the commercial and information aspects of mass media. Informational items are increasingly being made to compete for space and time allocations with materials that generate income for media organizations. While this development is certainly unfortunate, in view of the mass media’s primary role, it cannot be denied. In a period of scarcity, the mass media must learn to be selective in the kinds of information that they transmit. They have to learn more efficiently and more effectively allocate increasingly scarce resources. The more positive aspect of this turn of events is that it compels media planners to approach the problem of which news or information to disseminate with a stricter and more relevant order of priorities that must clearly and specifically establish the informational that would result in the best benefits to the majority of their readers or audiences. For instance, if the current cost-pinch pattern persists, it should become obvious that the mass media can no longer afford to lend itself to concerns, issues or viewpoints that have little value to the intellectual and material improvement of readers and listeners. Long winded debates on mythical issues constitute just one category. If present cost trends continue, it is obvious that we cannot tolerate further the use of precious newsprint on which to publish gossip and other trash, or airtime to broadcast programs which subvert or corrupt socially accepted notions of morality.

In this effort, other media practitioners have much to learn from their comrades in the rural areas. Interestingly, it is the rural-based media that have best adhered to mass media’s primary role of disseminating relevant news and information. For instance, in a country where four out every five farming households own a radio, provincial radio stations have consistently broadcast programs that introduce and explain and popularize more productive and efficient agricultural methods. In a country whose national culture is steadily being diluted by foreign influences, provincial newspapers and broadcast stations have preserved the language and the other cultural facets of their readers and audiences. In a country where the natural barriers of geography are formidable, the rural mass media have made their readers and audiences feel that they too belong to the national community, that the concerns of government extends even to the most remote barangays.

Anthropologists often speak of an idea environment whenever they analyze any social system. It is this idea environment that has spelled the difference between greatness or subservience, dynamism or stagnation, in various societies. It is this environment that explains why a small, poorly endowed country can achieve worldwide economic and political importance, and why a large and resource-rich nation can wallow in underdevelopment.

We are a country striving to create an idea environment where initiative, industry and resourcefulness are encouraged and rewarded. Our efforts at education and cultural development are aimed at giving our people the the assurance of national identity and the confidence of national purpose.

In this effort, the mass media assume a pivotal function. Those media practitioners who operate where the majority of Filipinos are situated are in the best position to help create the kind of idea environment that would make our people more responsive to the national call for productivity growth.

It is perhaps opportune that this congress should be held when we are in midst of initiating the National Livelihood Program, or Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran. As many of you may well know, the key concept behind the Kilusan is the hastening of the economic and social development of the entire country by transforming the nation’s 42,000 barangays into self-reliant productive communities through the establishment of various livelihood projects or enterprises to be owned and managed by the community residents themselves.

The KKK, however, is more than just a development program; it is more precisely a mass movement whose success rests on the enterprise, initiative and dynamism of people at the community level, and not on government alone. The KKK is the effort of one group of self-reliant Filipinos being replicated by another group. It is the success of one barangay being emulated by another barangay. Because of its mass character, the KKK has adopted a basic strategy designed to motivate, encourage and develop private entrepreneur ship in the barangay.

This is where the unique persuasiveness of the rural media must be made to operate. The rural media are in the best position not only to disseminate the movement, but also to reflect in a broader range the particular features and needs of the area where the KKK is being applied. I therefore encourage the rural media to take upon themselves the role of clearinghouses, through which information from either direction can be channeled and delivered to the right parties. Even as it disseminate the promise of the National Livelihood Program, the rural media must monitor its implementation and to commend what ought to be credited, and to call attention to inadequacies so that they may be quickly remedied.

The immediate challenge for the rural media is nowhere better embodied than in the KKK. We often hear the saying that the story of development is a most exciting one to tell. But, to be a part of that story, to actually be a factor in development is far more gratifying.

In looking to our national life today, it is here in being part of the exciting process of development—of being both participant and observer—that rural media will find their essential role and responsibility. And it is here too, I submit, where they will find their freedom.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.