Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the presentation of the “Tawid” Awards for 1973 by the Ilocano Heritage Foundation

[Delivered at the Cultural Center of the Philippines, July 25, 1974]

The Meaning of the “Tawid” Award

IT IS MY great pleasure to be associated with these ceremonies in honor of our ten outstanding brethren.

We pay tribute tonight to these exemplars whose achievements have ennobled both our life and the public service.

To them we offer not only the “Tawid” awards, but our lasting appreciation for the invaluable contribution they have made to society.

Our awardees constitute a distinguished roll of honor. Justice Fred Ruiz Castro, Dr. Andres V. Castillo, Dr. Salvador P. Lopez, Dr. Mauro Baradi, Commissioner Juan Agcaoili, Secretary Jose D. Aspiras, Don Santiago Fonacier, Dr. Santiago de la Cruz, Prof. Domingo Paguirigan and Prof. Nicolas Zafra — these are men who have brought honor both to the Ilocanos and to the Filipino race.

In honoring them, we ask our fellow countrymen to follow their examples. We do not ask of course that every citizen duplicate their deeds, but simply to match their qualities and values.

Achievement assumes different dimensions. There is the act of valor on the battlefield, the triumph of discovery in the laboratory, or the writing of an epic. But there are also acts of quiet achievement, such as the capacity to improve one’s self, the exercise of extra effort on a job, the passion to live die useful life, all of which may not seem dramatic but which nevertheless lead to self-fulfillment and contribute to the betterment of our fellow men.

The Ilocano is said to be the most frugal Filipino. He is reputed for his industry and pioneering spirit. We look around and we see that these and other virtues have become part of the national character. We have done away with the negative habits of the past to become a more purposeful and dynamic people.

This transformation is timely and necessary m we embark on a new era of nation-building. We have inaugurated a new season of develop it that reflects the authentic demands of our people rather than the interests the axis of old society politicians and economic powers.

With the founding of the New Society, we have forged a new national will and purpose. We have reordered our priorities and mobilized all resources to support our urgent programs. But the key factors in our undertaking are not only natural resources and capital wealth. We have to strengthen our national character, firm up the collective backbone that is necessary to carry out the agenda for reforms.

There are many expressions of the transformation in our moral and spiritual infrastructure. The lives and deeds of our honorees are one. I think they encapsulate the new achieving spirit of the Filipino. Our honorees are a reflection of the new ethic.

We must go on perpetuating this ethic. We should sing and celebrate this temper in the same manner that we seek to preserve our beloved dallot , which is a dying tradition. I hope that the example set by the awardees will inspire our youth to lead lives of excellence and industry.

I am also pleased that tonight we shall again hear the dallot . I note mat the Ilocano Heritage Foundation, in addition to recognizing excellence in fields of specialization, is also interested in the promotion of art, culture, literature and history.

I commend the Foundation for its interest in these concerns, in preserving — in this instance — Ilocano folk art and traditions. Even as I call for national unity and concord, I have taken the position that our ethnic and cultural practices should be preserved and protected. I have sought, for example, the fullest promotion of Muslim art and culture. We can achieve brotherhood even in the diversity of our customs and traditions.

I believe, therefore, that the Foundation itself deserves an award. Perhaps we can extend this honor on another occasion. But speaking of the ‘Tawid’ awards, I would like to believe that we are giving these out tonight not only to the honorees themselves, but to the new breed of Filipinos who have made reforms and changes in our society possible. Beyond being individual awards, the ‘Tawid’ awards are a recognition of the finest and best in the Filipino.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1979). Presidential speeches (Vol. 5). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].