Campaign Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Cebu Rally

History, Geography, and Culture have conferred upon the province and city of Cebu a unique place in our national life as the second capital of the Philippines, after manila. Cebu is a formidable center of national affairs in her own right, gathering together great forces and concerns in our country, and dispensing as well the lights of commerce and culture to the neighboring regions of the Visayas and Mindanao.

Of her importance, I have always been aware both as a man of government, and as a seeker of the political support of our people. If today I have come here in the course of my campaign for the presidency, I shall not, I hope be accused by my brother Cebuanos, that I have remembered to come here only because of politics. For this is certainly not the first time, nor will this be the last, that I shall be the guest of this city, this province and this region.

It has been suggested that in this presidential campaign, I really should not exert myself too much because there is little opposition to my candidacy. It has been suggested that since my re-election appears to be fated by the political situation prevailing in the country, I could put my time to better use by preparing myself instead for the work ahead.

The confidence of my supporters and my critics is warming and comforting. But I have always believed that there is more to these elections than winning, and that behind this political exercise, we are in fact not only electing a president, but deciding upon our future as a nation.

We need to raise our sights in this campaign high above the personalities of the men aspiring for the presidency, and touch the strands and paths of future national endeavors. For only the candidate and the party that truly address these themes, and persuade us as to the rightness of their dreams for the nation, deserve the mandate of our people. And only a mandate indicative of national directions will truly suffice as a platform with which the future administration can begin its work.

I have often said in this campaign, and I will repeat it here, that it is our mission today — of all of us within the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, and of you and I belonging to the generation living now — to recover the dignity of the Filipino, and to stop once and for all the exploitation of our race by our own people.

We do not stand here in order to advance selfish, personal, or even party interest. The Kilusang Bagong Lipunan is not just a political party. The Kilusang Bagong Lipunan is not just a group of men seeking political power or political position. No, it is much more than these.

To be worthy of its aspirations to direct and govern the affairs of the nation in this exciting time of ferment and challenge, it must ever stand, as I believe it-has always stood, as a movement to redirect the course of our history as a people, to redeem the promises that have been failed so often and to put people and country on the road to its true destiny.

For four centuries we were colonized–for 377 years under the Spaniards and another 48 years under the Americans. During this period, no group of Filipinos succeeded in changing the trend of our history. And what was that trend? Exploitation and colonization. We were colonized by strangers. But they used Filipinos. too, in colonizing us. Let me ask you. When we speak of Diego Silang, the question that arises is, who killed Diego Silang? Filipinos. Who pointed to the hiding place of Gabriela Silang in Abra? Filipinos. Who killed Andres Bonifacio? Filipinos. Who killed Luna? Filipinos. Who brought the Americans to capture Aguinaldo in Palanan? Filipinos. All throughout the revolutionary period, there always appeared to be a quarrel among ourselves diffusing our struggle against oppressors. Even among the politicians of 1902 and 1907, when the Philippine Assembly was established; even in 1916 when the Philippine Senate was organized; and even in the 1920s when Filipino parliamentary representation in the American colonial government became fact — we, our leaders, were prey to the politics of faction. Osmeña and Quezon fought almost throughout the period of American tutelage. What were they fighting about? Powers. And then came the Commonwealth, the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, the Tydings McDuffie Law. After the Commonwealth came the declaration of independence. Commissioner McNutt brought down the American flag, and we raised the Philippine flag. Then came the fight between Osmeña and Roxas. The liberal party was created. What was its platform? Was it to change our society? Emphatically no! And yet by that time it was quite clear that the exploitation and colonization of our people were not being done by aliens alone but by Filipinos also, Filipinos who had acquired alien faces, Filipinos who were privileged to participate in the exercise of political authority as early as 1902 and who exercised that political authority not for the good and welfare of the entire Filipino people but for the attainment of their personal and perhaps party interests.

This is what this present presidential campaign and the elections must not leave unresolved.

At the very least, it must be asked of the candidates and the parties seeking the people’s mandate how they stand on this indelible theme in our history, and how they might decisively transform it.

It would indeed be very sad if during this campaign our people will look at the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, our party, as one standing for nothing but selfish political partisan interests. For this is declaratively not the case. our party is more than just a political party.

Throughout our history, we have been the captives of a historical trend bearing us irreversibly towards division and failure. All throughout, we have been the prisoners of a generation of leaders professing service but in fact only substituting for the colonizers who had left.

It is humiliating for us to own to these weaknesses and deficiencies. But we must face up to reality. Political parties have from the beginning been convenient instruments not for the public welfare, not for change, but only for the attainment of political power and public office for selfish ends. This is the truth borne to us by a study of our past.

The Kilusang Bagong Lipunan stands before our people today as a movement to reverse the currents and the trends of this sad story. The Kilusang Bagong Lipunan stands before the Filipino people with this pledge: that it shall utilize whatever power shall be delegated to it, not to advance the personal and partisan selfish interest of a few leaders, or of an elite in our society, but to redeem the Filipino, especially the Filipino common man, from colonization and exploitation by his own people.

This is the core of our philosophy and our program of government. This is the reason why we are so adamant, so resolute.

Our movement stands contrasted to those other parties bidding for our people’s support, which because of their poverty of vision, can only cavil about the work of others, and can only replay once more the discredited politics of the past.

It is incidental, my friends, that I lead this movement today. The fundamental and important point is that it is not one person who seeks your mandate, but a party and a program for change. I, as President, can give way to others, provided that the essential directions for change is kept intact. Provided that government energetically addresses itself to changing the course of our history. And provided too that out of these labors, we shall in fact recover and enrich the dignity of our people in our own land and in the world.

If the public official is honest, if the public official patiently and diligently works at his job and performs his task of serving the people, if a public official goes out as an agricultural extension worker and increases the production of a poor tenant-farmer and helps him obtain credit without collateral and, at the same time, improves upon his irrigation system, these, as much as the actions of the president, form part of the battles that we fight in time of peace to change the trend of our history. If we show concern, if we show care for our weak and oppressed, if we show that we are capable of granting justice where justice is due, then the tide of change begins to turn in favor of our future as a nation.

And this is why we stand before our people today — because we believe that in establishing the new society, we have made an important beginning in altering the course of our national history. And because we believe that the work must continue at an unrelenting pace.

And this is why we have come here to Cebu today — to bring the message to our countrymen as we did in other places in the course of our campaign.

For we shall not be content with less than an emphatic mandate from our people for the new course that we have laid. Without our people’s understanding and endorsement of the KBL’s platform of government, these presidential elections would be no more than a futile and sterile exercise. After the long time I have served our government, I also feel tired. Forty years already. But the duty that rests on my shoulders, I cannot simply abandon. And that is what we started in 1972. We cannot just stop it and say, I am tired; I would like to rest, I would like to enjoy the company of my family now before my children make their own families.

The truth is, my friends, I am deeply anxious that the present political exercise may turn out to be just another political campaign. I fear that our people do not realize yet the critical and historical significance of the things that we are doing today.

If it is true, and I do believe it is, that one of the responsibilities of leadership is to articulate the vague and groping yearnings of the people, to give them shape, dimension, color and purpose, then it is my obligation to do so in this campaign. It is my responsibility. I must draw from each and every thought and mind, from every heart and every spirit of every Filipino those ideals, those thoughts, those dreams and those visions that make the entire body of Filipino ideology and turn them into matters that can be understood and, therefore, can be worked for, fought for and, if necessary, die for. This is the work of men who understand the purpose of their lives. This is the work of those who offer their very lives and thoughts for our people. And this is our responsibility today.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.