Commencement Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the  Mariano Marcos State University

[Delivered in Batac, Ilocos Norte, April 25, 1978]

A University in the North

SECRETARY MANUEL, THE SUPREME bishop of the Philippine Independent Church, Monsignor Ga, the Governor of Metropolitan Manila, who happens to be my wife, the secretary of this College, President Mangasep, the Governor of this province, my fellow administrators in government, particularly the Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary Tanco, who is here for a purpose. I invited him so that he can check on the agricultural qualifications of the graduates and students have his “pick”‘ for employment. That is a strong hint that he should pick the graduates of this college.

Some of the new members of the interim Batasang Pambansa are here. We have our representative of the educators in the KBL ticket for Metropolitan Manila and that is Dr. Waldo Perfecto, executive director of EDPITAF, the education reform implementing agency. At the same time, we also have the former governor, former congressman of Ilocos Norte, the new kagawad or member of the interim Batasang Pambansa, Sison. We also have the president of the Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila, Dr. Blanco, who of course, is one of our outstanding educators. She is from Paoay, Ilocos Norte. We have many other members-elect of the IBP.

You know, I have had the idea that this campus should now be worked and planned properly by a development planning engineer. So I brought with me, upon the suggestion of the Metropolitan Manila governor, a new member of the interim Batasang Pambansa and the most outstanding of the graduates on development engineering and development planning, a doctor from Stanford University—Dr. Jolly Benitez.

We have also the new IBP member from Bicol who is a management and economics man, Delegate Villafuerte of Camarines Sur. You will find out later why we have invited this team to come and take a look at this campus. Well, I may just as well announce now why they are here.

Before you, I once again go through the ceremony of signing Decree No. 1270 which converts this college into a university. We will announce the officers of this university later on because we would like to plan this as well as we can. But in your presence, I am going to sign this—may I invite the guests to come and join me, including the president of the College, the Secretary of Education and, of course, the master of ceremonies, members of the board of regents and the team that will make this study.

I would like to announce that this is an example which will be replicated in all the regional universities that we are putting up throughout the Philippines.

This program is designed to decongest Manila and to transfer specialization as well as most of the liberal arts education from Manila to the various regions of the Philippines. And we are starting with this particular program here in Ilocos Norte.

I wish to say that it is an honor for me to be able to come, especially since this university is named after my father. I hereby announce that henceforth, this educational institution shall be known as the Mariano Marcos State University.

Inasmuch as the program is addressed to the less affluent members of our society who may not be financially able to attend a university, and because of participation in hard work such as farming in our region may not attain scholar ships under the wide-ranging scholarship program of our government which gives 7,000 to 8,000 scholarships every year, I also hereby sign in your presence a new decree which widens the study-now-pay-later program. I hereby sign this presidential decree creating an Educational Loan Fund which shall amount to P14 million and will be handled by these financing institutions: the Philippine National Bank, the Development Bank of the Philippines and the Land Bank of the Philippines—which shall set aside P8 million each. The Government Service Insurance System as well as the Social Security System will also set aside P8 million each. I sign this in your presence and announce that in the next school year, the available amount which can be borrowed by the students and paid after he has graduated and after he has found employment shall now total P14 million.

I have always dreamt that someday we would be able to establish a university in this part of the country. First of all, I must apologize for delaying your graduation. I was incapacitated for more than two days. And so I had to hurry up, catch up on my schedule. But I do not accept any more speaking engagements at graduation ceremonies. It is only here, it is only on this occasion that I have made an exception.

This is therefore historic. It is historic because this is a commencement ceremony of a college that you did not know was already a university at the time you were still studying. Actually I think it is necessary that a continuous study be done by the group that we now have brought together to convert this practically non-existing building into the university. We have to finish the acquisition of the land. Three hundred hectares would be just right.

And so, I wish to say, for and on behalf of the members of the Marcos Foundation that we are proud to have named this institution after my father, and we feel safe to continue to entrust his honor and his name to this institution’s new future and destiny. Rest assured that while I am President, I will continue to support this university. And rest assured that it is my intention to see to it that this university becomes a model, a model for other regions throughout the Philippines.

We must, therefore, start out by improving the quality. There are specializations which we must now bring to the university. This specialization will require augmenting the size and quality of the faculty. We will make provisions for a faculty house for the members of faculty especially those who are not resident here. Because I intend to invite from government offices as well as from other universities the specialists that will be able to transmit to our students the specializations that are necessary for the modernization of our country.

There is much we have to do. I therefore direct the Secretary of Education to now organize this special team to make these studies. And I ask Executive Di rector Jolly Benitez to now study the development and plans for the university. And likewise the other members of the team, like Dr. Waldo Perfecto of EDPITAF to now participate in the effort at upgrading this college into a university.

The relevance of an institution to a region will depend upon how very deeply we have studied the requirements of the region as well as the requirements of our nation.

There is a lesson that we have learned from our experience in human resources development in the Philippines during the last ten years that I have been President. It is the lesson that socio-economic development must receive and accompany any concerted effort of educational development. I repeat: socio economic development must receive and accompany any concerted effort of educational development.

The findings of the now internationally acclaimed project known as Survey and the Outcomes of Elementary Education has confirmed again the now accepted dictum of an educational development strategy: that unless the people have attained a certain level of socio-economic development, no amount of educational input in terms of buildings, modem materials and competent management can successfully overcome the handicaps of poverty. In other words, the building of roads, including nutrition, clothing, water facilities are as much a part of educational development as are school buildings and for that matter, the setting up of colleges and universities.

For this reason, we have sought over the last five years to effect a two-pronged strategy for educational development. While we have made every effort to build more school buildings to provide better teaching materials, trained teachers as well as to provide better incentives for them, we have also invested large amounts of money in roads, bridges, hospitals, markets, irrigation and electrification. In short, we have sought to improve the basic quality of life of the people in the urban and rural areas because we believe that socio-economic development, as we have said earlier must accompany educational development.

In Northern Luzon, for example, where we are establishing the National Research Center for the study of the tobacco industry because of our conviction that the results of this study on the problems of the tobacco industry will bring about significant changes in the social and economic life of the people in Northern Luzon many of whom depend upon this industry for their livelihood. The same thing is true with respect to cotton, onion as well as garlic.

Great men, we are told by the philosophers are not so much the result of what they know as what they love. The world, in spite of all its advances in science and technology, is not an inspiring spectacle for us and our children because of the continued presence of war or the threat of war, of economic injustices and social inequalities. It is because by and large, our institutions of education—and this includes the family, the churches, the government, the mass media—have failed to develop the will in addition to developing the mind. The cardinal virtues of prudence, temperance, fortitude, justice have been conspicuous by their absence.

It is my hope that here in Northern Luzon, this is not true. And as I look at the graduates, as I feel the firmness of their grip, I realize that they have become taller than my generation, more healthy than my generation and I hope, also more mentally capable than my generation. But more than anything else, that they have also acquired a greater capacity to love their people and their country than did even my generation that fought and bled and died in order that our country may be free and prosperous.

You know, when there is a tragic absence of love of country and for people, for prudence and this feeling of justice, this feeling of oneness with humanity, we are witness to a world where technology may have an ableness to travel farther, to cure the diseases of the body and yet even to manipulate the behavior of people. But our institutions of development, because they have not paid sufficient attention to the development of those virtues that I speak of have not succeeded in alleviating the miseries of fear and want and malice.

It is my fervent hope that the graduates of this university now and in the future will all be imbued with a passion for justice as they are with the necessary skills for development.

It will be then my joy and pride, and the joy and pride of the parents, of our people to know that we have established in this northern outpost of our country a university true to the dreams of all those who have died, including the man after whom the university is named, my father, and true to the historic and universal traditions of every university worth its name, a place from whence our leaders of the future will come, men and Women who can thus rule others because they have learned the basic precept of learning first to rule themselves their emotions and their passions. That true university, after all, is the school of discipline where the mind, the will and the spirit of men may be enabled to achieve and to create in the image of his maker; who are born or who live in this northern region who must rely on human, rather than material resources have need of this kind of university to transmit the virtues of the older generation to the young, to institutionalize the transmittal of this virtue — from one generation to the other.

I hope and pray that this shall be the Mariano Marcos State University.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].