Commencement Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines To the Philippine Military Academy

[Delivered on March 27, 1982]

Among the yearly chores of the presidency, there is perhaps none more pleasant and satisfying than the annual appointment one makes with the graduating class of this premier institution for military training in our country.

It means a lot, of course, that the Philippine Military Academy is situated up here in the nation’s resort capital, where I, workaholic that I am, can find a brief moment of respite. But let me also say in all seriousness that the duty of welcoming you at this commencement to the service of our people and country, is one which I must gladly perform, and most earnestly covet.

There are many illustrious schools in our country that maintain a high and distinguished tradition of leadership, and which have eminently distinguished themselves as a source of national leaders. Yet always there will be this special distinction for this academy, that in no other does the successful completion of one’s training summarily thrust the graduate into a position of immediate leadership and service to the nation than here.

And nowhere else it would seem is it truer to speak Disraeli’s famous words, that “youth is the trustee of posterity.”

Our concept of the military rests on the fundamental premise of our political system of civilian supremacy over the military. The underlying meaning of this is not as some sometimes mistakenly believe a skeptical view of the military man, but rather an affirmation that the use of the armed forces of the state must be dictated by civilian decisions and policies. It comes from the very same principle of “power to the people” which fundamentally guides the conduct and character of government. The employment of whatever power of the state must derive from consent of the people, and it is in this sense that the use of military power must spring from basically civilian interests.

No organized state can dispense with the soldier in society, given what William James once called in 1904 and what we have no reason to doubt since, “the rooted bellicosity of human nature.”

The historian Barbara Tuchman, in a revealing defense of the profession of soldiery, observes: “it is not the nature of the military man that accounts for war, but the nature of man. The soldier is merely one shape that nature takes. . . As a student of the human record, I can say with confidence that peace is not the norm. Historians have calculated that up until the Industrial Revolution belligerent action occupied more man hours than any other activity except agriculture.” And we may rightly add that history since has unhappily failed to provide us with any compelling evidence to revise our this estimate.

However we look at the issue, there is no avoiding the recognition that a nation to defend itself must look to the vigil by an armed force. And nations finally differ only in the uses it puts its armed forces into: whether solely for the purposes of defensem as in our case, or for the purposes of aggression as well, as in the case of many nations and armies of the past and the present.

It is a fact never to be forgotten, that the charge given to an armed force by civilian will implies responsibilities and controls that would not be there if the civilian government is not supreme. It implies for instance that the military power must always be subject to supervision by the civilian authority. It suggests that the broad policies for action must ever be shaped by the government. And it finally connotes that the military as a whole must hone rigorously to a life of allegiance to the state it serves, and must in practice live a life as much of discipline as of vigilance.

The only way whereby such a liberal conception of the military role can be imbedded deeply in the traditions and codes of a military corps is through the building of an effective tradition of training for both officers and men. And I will stress that the training of officers is the more important, because it is from this that the discipline of armies finally stem.

In Colonel Heinl’s Dictionary of Military Quotations it is interesting to note that fully one third of the entries are placed under the three related subject headings: namely, “command”, “leadership,” and “generalship.” And we can easily understand why there is so great a focus on the role of leadership. With the possible exception of the field of politics and government, no other human activity as the military life has the singular capability of determining at a given time the life or death of thousands, and sometimes the fate of nations. Soldiery without leadership is but a naked force without mind to guide it. And an armed force that is not served by high qualities of leadership and command sooner or later degenerates from being a guardian of the state into an enemy of it.

Not without reason therefore do we demand of the officers of our Armed Forces the highest quality of preparation within the gift of the nation.

On the one hand, we seek in training to develop those qualities of personal leadership which in whatever situation is capable of turning a legion of soldiers into a fighting force. This is most tested in combat, but it is equally needed in a time of peace. These qualities come under many words — courage, resolution, judgment, steadiness under fire — but they probably are reducible to the single concept of the ability to command.

The quality of command rests principally on the degree of faith that an officer is able to inspire in his subordinates. And perhaps the most succinct statement of this is given by Shakespeare in Julius Caesar: “when Caesar says, ‘do this,’ it is performed.” If soldiers believe that this superior or commander knows what he is talking about and that what he orders is the right thing to do given the situation, they will do it, because most people and not only soldiers are always relieved to find a superior on whose judgment they can put their trust. This indeed is the difference between a leader and a follower.

But alongside this important quality of personal leadership, the military man must also possess a high quality of professional training. This encompasses the variant abilities to decide on objectives, to plan, to organize, to direct, to deploy personnel. It covers what in school you call the business of military strategies and tactics. And it is in this realm where the military officer becomes substantially different than a civilian. And it is in this sense that soldiery becomes a profession, not to be attained without training, formal or otherwise.

Personal leadership combined with professional ability form the core of our idea of what our officer corps in our Armed Forces should be like. And it only therefore remains to understand the nature of the challenges which the nation and our Armed Forces must face, and to shape the policies requisite to the challenges, in order to fully embody the program for which all must function.

The profound problem which we face in the sphere of national security remains still the challenge of insurgency and rebellion. We have lived through a long period of grave crisis and danger to our Republic, and we have successfully surmounted this, yet we have only arrived at the profound realization that the vigil does not stop, that insurgency continues in our land.

In various parts of the country, we witness many forms of assault upon the safety of people and communities. And though we can indeed perceive these as no threats to the stability of the state, we cannot and we shall never be unmindful of the cost it is taking of the security of life and property in the affected areas.

We see ourselves as engaged on two fronts: one which is essentially pacification and maintenance of peace and order; and another, which is the more long-term effort of building the capacities of local communities for development.

It is not to be that we should perceive the insurgency problem as a purely military one, though indeed the energetic operations of our police and armed forces will repeatedly be called upon.

History has time and again shown that the security of a state becomes untenable where the welfare and livelihood of people are not attended to. Rebellion and insurgency feed upon the anxieties and miseries of people, and they offer the promise, however false, of an ideology that will right grievances and fulfill expectations.

I believe that we are seeing today the climacteric of our long struggle against insurgency, in which the terrorism of today signifies desperate measures to destabilize our national life and deform our legitimate achievements.

In Mindanao, where our development efforts and our diplomacy have succeeded in turning the situation around, the secessionist movement has turned into a virtual marauding force with inchoate objectives and terrorist tactics. The situation excites our alarm insofar as these threats to peace and order must not be allowed to continue.

In other parts of the country where the NPA is the main antagonist, there is today a desperate effort to regroup and marshall anew anti-government resistance. Occasionally, this too has expressed itself in terrorist tactics.

What is needed at this time is forthright military and police action that will decisively reduce and contain the depredations of these groups. Our knowledge of guerrilla warfare and insurgency instructs us to prepare for what is likely to be a long struggle, in which insurgency forces can wane under the impact of responsive military action and government measures, but will not in the end give up the ghost of communist takeover of our government.

This necessarily implies that the soldier who would lead in this kind of struggle must fully understand the nature of the force they are fighting against, and that based on that knowledge, he must develop along with his fellow officers and superiors the necessary strategy which will not deny him victory.

This implies too the military’s involvement in development endeavors — in even larger and more creative ways, so that what was demonstrated at the height of crisis government will ever be fact: the reality of the bond between our military and our people.

Men in uniform do not play a role in our national life only in the event of extreme crisis and danger to the nation. They are not called only when there is disorder and strife.

You are in the truest sense of the word participants in our struggle for the national destiny, in the business of turning a time of peace and order into a time of growth and change.

Now as ever, there is need for our soldiery to perform its signal service to the nation, as a force to defend our Republic and to promote the highest of our purposes and aspirations.

As you enter the service therefore, I will add to my welcome and congratulations the fervent prayer that you will lead with vision and dedication.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.