Drafts Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines

[Released on February 14, 1984]

SELF-RELIANCE THROUGH SELF-HELP

INTRODUCTION

Two years ago, we launched the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran – a movement that marked the genesis of awareness in our minds of the true meaning of self-reliance and the essence of community involvement.

The thousands of livelihood projects that were embarked upon by our people all over the country are in fact an actualization of the New Republic’s soul-the economic liberation of a people in its most elemental manifestation.

Through their KKK projects, we were able to demonstrate that we can indeed take control of our own economic needs through mutual cooperation in reshaping our environment into one of productivity and enterprise.

This spirit of self-reliance, which for me is the most important task of the National Livelihood Program, needs an intensification as we now face greater economic challenges.

The stabilization of our economy lies in our own hands, in our innate tenacity as a people to surmount all forms of struggle, and in our vast reservoir of natural resources awaiting our utilization.

Our National Priorities

This government has always advocated self-reliance in fulfilling the basic needs of our people. Today, national priorities dictate a greater need to be self-sufficient in three major areas of concern: these are food, energy and shelter. Indeed, the significance of these three areas become all the more pronounced as we struggle for economic liberation and ultimately strive for a better quality of life. Needless to say, we have been dependent on external sources for a greater portion of our requirements in energy and in food, though to a lesser degree.

While gainful strides have been achieved in making the Philippines self-sufficient in rice and has in fact become an exporter of this commodity, we are still deficient in other food crops. Total food importation amounted to $561 million in 1983, notably dairy and beef products, indicating the magnitude of potential foreign exchange savings in this area. Increased production of beef to supply domestic requirements should be accelerated. Locally processed beef accounts for only 60% of domestic demand which is ironical considering that cattle feed mainly on grass and hence do not require imported feed grains.

However, we must be more ambitious and look beyond mere foreign exchange savings and further to exporting our domestic food produce in order to generate valuable dollar receipts for the country. The export potentials of Philippine fruits like bananas, pineapples and mangoes as well as its processed variety like banana chips, dehydrated pineapple, and mango puree remains to be fully tapped. Papayas also face brighter prospects in the export market. Let me therefore emphasize that the agricultural sector is the major and most resilient contributor to foreign exchange earnings and every effort should be exerted to capitalize on the national production capability vis-avis international demands.

In the area of energy self-reliance, I am proud to say that substantial headway has been attained. Statistics show that in 1972, we were 95% dependent on imported oil. Because of our determined efforts to reduce the vulnerability of our economy to the vicissitudes to the global oil crisis, we have whittled down this dependence to 68% in 1982 and further to about 65% in 1983.

Again, let me reiterate, that while credible gains have been posted in the development of alternative energy sources, much can be done, even at the household level.

Energy savings by the household sector will mean a substantial impact on our total oil bill considering the fact that household usage accounts for 14% of total energy demand. Even a 5% reduction of our oil bill which averages $180 million a month will definitely help ease our BOP difficulties, help prevent a standstill in industry and at the same time cushion inflationary pressures. A concerted shift by each household to indigenous sources of home energy like ipil-ipil and charcoal will put us all in a stronger position to surmount these trying times. Farming trees for fuel in generating the power needs of the country through dendro thermal plants shall create employment, enhance ecological balance and prime both agriculture and industry.

With respect to shelter, there is a need to continue the momentum we have achieved under the National Shelter Program. The housing backlog, estimated at anywhere between one million to three million units, can be addressed with the production of indigenous and low-cost housing materials. The People’s Forest, an anchor program of the Kilusang Sariling Sikap, will not only provide food and energy but also raw materials for the shelter industry. Moreover, on-going thrust to utilize woodwastes, if expanded under this movement, will further enable us to provide cheaper homes for the homeless.

And as we prime the construction industry, the attendant increase in sectoral productivity and income and employment generation spills over to the numerous industries linked to construction, thereby significantly boosting national productivity.

The impact of food, energy and shelter on the economy cannot be underestimated. All combined, these three items constitute more than 60% of the total family expenditures. Therefore, by attaining self-sufficiency in the home, family purchasing power effectively increases, enabling the household members to afford what could have been otherwise beyond their means.

Emerging Movement – Kilusang Sariling Sikap

The goal of self-reliance through self-help can only be attained through a continuing movement utilizing a wholistic, grassroots approach. Therefore, the Kilusang Sariling Sikap or Self-Reliant Home Movement recognizes the skills and ingenuity of 52 million Filipinos, the richness and vastness of our natural resources and the sincerity of the National Government in finding solutions to our problems.

Whereas the National Livelihood Program, implemented through the KKK, and the National Shelter Program have attacked our economic problems by providing low-cost financing for business or home building, the Kilusang Sariling Sikap relies on practical technologies using idle resources to augment income. Increasing livelihood opportunities and developing alternative energy sources are some of the most visible and tangible benefits of the program. However, over and above such considerations, is the primary task of transforming denuded idle and underutilized lands into productive enterprises and mobilizing settlers, forest occupants and the landless in an integrated farming scheme. The country’s comparative advantage in terms of land and labor are thus efficiently maximized.

The Kilusang Sariling Sikap therefore focuses on man’s most basic and elemental needs: food, energy and shelter. Food sustains his body, shelter allows him to have a decent life while energy provides fuel for the home and industry. However, the satisfaction of these human needs is being pursued relentlessly not simply to provide him with his physical sustenance but more importantly, to plant the seed of self-respect and self-pride in the individual, make him a productive member of society and the nation as a whole. The Kilusan shall therefore reinforce the foundation for individual commitment and participation in nation building and national survival. And as this dynamic movement we are launching today, radiate to every household, we can collectively avert the effects of the rising cost of living, open new opportunities for increasing national income and generating employment for displaced and marginal workers.

People’s Forest Program

The People’s Forest was conceptualized to serve as the anchor program of the Kilusang Sariling Sikap. It is a food and energy campaign designed to propel the nation towards attaining self-sufficiency in food and shelter materials, the generation of alternative sources of energy, and the production of raw materials for industries through collective action.

Under this Program, idle and denuded lands all over the country shall be greened and reforested to meet the nation’s need for food, fuel and shelter.

The People’s Forest has an initial target of 73,000 hectares which is actually less than 10% of the potential ten million hectares of barren and logged over areas of the country.

Specifically, the People’s Forest Program shall serve as:

a. a base for the production of primary food crops and raw material inputs for food processors and other industries;

b. a nursery for seed germination;

c. a demonstration area for integrated farming technologies; and,

d. a trading and commodity exchange venue for household produce.

I have mentioned earlier, three critical areas to which we have devoted full and undivided attention, namely: food, shelter and energy. Under the People’s Forest Program, these three will be tackled simultaneously. For instance, the ipil-ipil variety is a good source of food, fertilizer, animal feeds, energy and building material. Its seed can be soaked overnight and cooked like mongo beans. The leaves are excellent feed for livestock because of their high protein content of 27% to 34%. As a leguminous plant, it is a good source of organic fertilizer. The younr ipil-ipil is suitable for the reforestation of denuded, dry, nitrogen-poor tropical soil. On top of all these, ipil-ipil is a renewable and indigenous source of energy. Its abundance and adaptability to the Philippine climate augurs well for the country’s Dendro-Thermal Program.

The Dendro-Thermal Program will be given more impetus with the establishment of People’s Forest in every province of the country. It aims to construct 70 power plants with a total generation capacity of 200 megawatts before the close of the decade. A total of 70,000 hectares of tree farms is required to meet the fuel wood requirements of the 70 power plants. By generating 200 megawatts of electricity, we can reduce our oil importations by 2.0 million barrels. The cost of producing power from dendro thermal plants will also be cheaper than from diesel-fired thermal plants. An interesting fact is that because wood is a rural-based product, it is cheaper now and is likely to become more so in the future. This means cheaper electricity for the rural consumer.

Today, we are finding once again that the economics of wood-based energy is attractive. This led to the development of the gasifier for fueling irrigation pumps and transport vehicles. What are the implications of these trends? An alternative means of fueling irrigation pumps was designed to sustain the state of national rice self-sufficiency. The transport sector is accountable for 31% of our energy demand. Hence, the impact of gasifier equipped vehicles on displaced petroleum demand is significant.

With the rising cost of imported fuel, charcoal is emerging as a cheaper source of cooking fuel both in the urban and rural settings. The expected expansion of the charcoal market requires therefore more tree planting activities.

The People’s Forest is also expected to enhance the availability of wood materials for the National Shelter Program. The ipil-ipil tree, as we all know, is a good source of lumber, posts and even floor tiles. Other building requirement such as floor boards and wooden components can be coursed from a wide variety of wood species to be planted in the People’s Forest. In fact, wood waste materials can be processed into lumber and this will actually be done in the construction of the Kasipagan Model Homes.

Home Consumption Program

Another component of the Kilusang Sariling Sikap is the Self-Reliance Home Consumption Program. The Ministry of Human Settlements has designed two model households, known as the Kasipagan Homes, one suitable for an urban area and another for rural communities. This experimentation led us to realize and appreciate that a family on a 300 sq.m. patch of land can produce its food requirements including medicinal plants.

A specially-designed kit on home consumption will be disseminated pinpointing seven critical areas wherein a Filipino family can attain self-sufficiency. These are:

a. Kitchen-Garden – Growing fruits and vegetables in a backyard can stretch the family’s budget.

b. Household Food – Processing and preservation techniques of food is another area wherein a family can save on food costs.

c. Household Health – A family’s health can be maintained at least cost by growing herbal medicinal plants for common ailments.

d. Household Improvement – This home technology shall teach a family simple housecare and maintenance.

e. Household Mechanics – This shall be used for the maintenance of household fixtures.

f. Household Energy – This technology entails the Production of alternative energy sources for the home.

g. Household Recycling – This shall teach how a family can recycle waste materials and other renewable resources in the home.

Evidently, the family becomes the building block of this Movement as it is in society at large. Thereafter, the family becomes part of communal farms whose outputs will be processed by strategically situated processing firms or anchor firms to be established by KKK.

In launching a massive movement like this, there must be a mechanism which will supervise and monitor proper implementation against the policy guidelines set. Organizationally, a National Coordinating Committee shall be established which will be the policy-making body of the Program. The Minister of Human Settlements is the Chairperson of this Committee. The Committee’s membership includes the Ministers of the following participating agencies: Ministry of Natural Resources, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Agrarian Reform, Ministry of Public Works and Highways, Ministry of National Defense and Ministry of Education and Culture (and other related agencies). The Secretariat for this Committee shall be lodged with the Ministry of Human Settlements. I hereby direct all concerned agencies of the Government to extend the necessary assistance and make available their resources and expertise for the implementation of this Movement.

Ambitious as it may seem, this Movement will be funded primarily out of the savings to be generated by the government arising from the mandatory reduction of 10% in operating budgets of all ministries, offices and government corporations from the national down to the provincial level. Furthermore, the Shares in Kabuhayan, under the KKK Integrated Land Resource Management Scheme, shall be floated as equity issues against previously unmonetized landholdings. Investors who will subscribe to the shares will be given the opportunity to participate in the profits of projects undertaken through this scheme while being secured by guarantees as to principal values.

At this early stage of the Movement, I would like to take the liberty of setting some basic policy guidelines. Firstly, equitable distribution of the fruits of development shall be promoted. This will assure the individual a commensurate return for his labors. Secondly, maximum participation of beneficiaries in project planning and management shall be mobilized. And thirdly, ecological balance should at all times, be considered.

The success of this Movement rests on your support and commitment as leaders of communities. I earnestly enjoin all provincial governors, mayors, barangay captains and each and every Filipino family to rally behind this noble cause.

By producing even a portion of our home requirements in food, energy, shelter, we help free or mobilize financial resources for more critical uses.

Amidst these difficult times, we must solidly demonstrate the national will for survival, our resiliency and self-reliance.

By harnessing and mobilizing our vast natural resources, there is no reason why we cannot surmount the challenges we now face.

The prosperity that lies in our lands and waters equals only the vast reservoir of strength and courage that lies in our fiber as a people.

Let this decade see the birth of a new generation of Filipinos proud of his own labours. Let this new work ethics be the foundation of our advancement under the New Republic.

Thank you for your concern and Good Day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.