Draft speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines For the 7th Philippine Business Conference

[Delivered at the Philippine Plaza, November 5, 1981]

Two weeks ago, I left the country to join the leaders from twenty-one developed and developing countries, in Cancun, for two days the world waited with concern and anxiety, as we addressed a moral problem that exists in the world today . . . a problem that is the outcome of lost opportunities, of mistrust and discord among nations, of a progressive decay of the fabric of international relations.

We went to Cancun, with one objective, one goal for mankind, . . . to restore harmony among nations, to establish once more the willingness of countries to work together, to re-emphasize the realization that ours is a closely interdependent world, a world where long-term growth is not possible for any group of countries unless other nations are given the same and equal opportunity to participate in that growth. Cancun, for developing countries like ours, was an opportunity to impress upon the developed countries of the north, the need to redefine “fairness” in international relations, to evolve a definition that stresses equity and emphasizes mutuality.

I went to Cancun not only for our people but for ASEAN, for our neighbors and brothers with whom we share dreams of advancement in a region where cooperation prevails, where regional concerns are attended to and accommodated even as national interests are respected.

I went to Cancun for the many millions of people in developing countries, in the poorest of nations, for the people who are too pre-occupied with survival. They needed, more than anyone else, to be heard in Cancun, so even as I took the journey with our people foremost in my mind, I took it too for ASEAN, for the group of seventy-seven countries whom we hosted in Manila and whose concerns I have had the honor to articulate in Nairobi. I went to Cancun to try and free man not only from hunger but from the cruel starvation of the spirit.

I went to Cancun, skeptical that the summit will accomplish much; I left Cancun very hopeful and with great optimism. For in Cancun we made the first step. We discussed in detail the needs and concerns of developing and developed countries, to arrive at a more comprehensive understanding and a deeper perception and awareness of each other’s aspirations and problems. In Cancun, we were able to prepare the groundwork for more thorough and definitive discussions and negotiations on how our ideas and our concerns for the welfare of man, will be translated to actual programs and services, in Cancun, the developing countries discussed vital issues particularly in the field of food production, cooperation in energy development, the international monetary system and world trade. We also took time out for bilateral talks to forge a commitment to work together, in international fora, to strengthen our resolve and argue our cause more effectively.

And in returning, I am truly happy to tell you that we are hopeful for we see in Cancun an affirmation of the humanism that will allow us all to survive and prosper.

I am glad to be with you here today, to be among the pillars of the business community of our country for I see here a local version of what we had in Mexico, in Cancun. My confidence that this undertaking will yield more decisive and immediate results is even greater . . . For in the years I have served this country, on mandate of our people, I have never wavered in my trust in your humanity, in your concern for your countrymen.

My confidence is magnified even further because this is the seventh Philippine Business Conference and seven has always been a lucky number for our country. Like Cancun therefore, let us herewith resolve with firm determination to make a decisive start, a steadfast commitment to improve the quality of life of our people.

I would like to stress on this 7th Philippine Business Conference that if developed countries of the north are to continue with their own growth, they must provide for and assist in the growth of the developing countries of the south, the same principle is true in every country’s pursuit of economic development. The growth of all our sectors must be pursued parallel to each other. We must realize that long term development is possible only if no sector advances at the expense of other sectors; that the rich could not get much richer if the poor continues to be poor that industry could not grow and profit indefinitely if consumer welfare is not adequately and responsively served.

Let this business conference seek to demonstrate and emphasize that the limits to our growth will manifest itself much sooner than later, when a sector’s development is made at the expense of another and when we fail to recognize the reinforcing relationship among sectors.

Let this business conference seek to demonstrate and emphasize that the principle of balanced development and concurrent growth applies to geographic regions as much as it does to economic, commercial and industrial sectors. . . that Luzon could not grow independently of the Visayas and Mindanao, that Metro Manila cannot grow independently of her surrounding rural Hinterland.

Let this business conference seek to demonstrate and emphasize that, corollary to the need for coordinated growth of all sectors and regions, is the acceptance that the true test of our country’s development must be the extent to which the common man shares in the benefits of progress, that development must be measured on the extent to which such development improves the quality of life of our poorest.

Notwithstanding the turbulent international economic situation, the uncertainties caused by the unpredictable movement of oil prices that has threatened to erode the economic gains we have so painstakingly earned, we have posted significant achievements through dynamic and effective management of our economic resources, we have increased the capacity of our economy to provide meaningful employment to our ever growing labor force in this country, turning the tide of unemployment and reducing the number to 5% as compared to about 7.5% in the sixties. If we consider that every year we see an additional six hundred thousand seeking employment for the first time, and if we consider further that the area for expansion for agriculture has a finite limit which is being rapidly approached, the reduction is a cause for great satisfaction.

In addition to providing jobs, we have increased the earnings, the effective take home pay, particularly of our wage workers by more than 300% of the 1970 level thereby assuring greater purchasing power for this group, even more important, whereas the private incomes of the poorer 50% of our people was only 17.6% of total income in 1971, we now see the same segment of population taking 20.5% of the total value.

Self sufficiency in basic commodities, particularly food, has been achieved even in this turbulent period. The land reform and the Masagana 99 programs have transformed the country, traditionally dependent on rice imports, to a respectable exporter of the staple. The Biyayang Dagat more statistics loans credit program for small fishermen, launched in 1979, augmented the total fish catch by an estimated fourteen thousand metric tons a year later in 1980 thus contributing significantly to government’s nutrition program which has identified the shortage of protein food as a major problem.

The efficient delivery of health services and improved nutrition have added four years to the life expectancy of Filipinos, from 58 years in 1970 to 62 years today and significantly reduced infant mortality from 80 per thousand to 66 per thousand for the same period.

We have also embarked on a program to provide decent and adequate shelter and housing facilities, not only in the key cities where the shortage in housing is critically felt but also in the rural areas where we also need good housing facilities. The human settlements approach that incorporates the provision of employment opportunities and facilities for culture and recreation has benefited around 350 thousand individuals in the communities and livelihood centers established by the government. In addition, the government has established the Pag-Ibig (the home development mutual fund) with a present membership of approximately 700 thousand.

Availability of education to the population has increased resulting in an enrollment of 12.4 million in school-year 1980-1981, about 3 million more than the school-year 1970-1971 figure.

The government has also invested in infrastructure facilities to link farms to markets, to physically integrate our archipelago and to encourage regional dispersal of industries. As of 1980, government built more than 129 thousand kilometers of roads or very close to twice as many roads built in 1970, a ratio maintained in almost all other projects in ports, bridges and irrigation.

We have considerably reduced our dependence on imported fuel oil, as well as saved substantial foreign exchange from our oil import bill, a most sensitive matter from the national political and economic security points of view, from 95% in the early seventies to about 83% today. We managed to do this through the implementation of an accelerated energy development program which gives balanced emphasis to oil exploration, development of non-conventional energy sources and energy conservation.

Inflation which has been seemingly uncontrollable in most other developing countries was controlled at 11.1% today, as compared to a high of 23.8% at the end of the first quarter last year.

We have recently experienced and survived one the most trying financial crisis in our history. Having learned painful lessons from the disturbances that rocked our financial system, we could rest assured that efficient management could now allow us to pursue a more vigorous development effort, with greater financial stability and assurance.

We can say that we have managed to endure and grow in spite the economic aberrations of the last two years.

And yet, we can ill afford to take a pause and rest in these accomplishments. . . for there are still herculean tasks that must be done. Even as we cite statistics, the same statistics are changing, requiring from us the persistence to continue in our struggle, to improve tomorrow on the figures we cite today. We must measure up through courage and creativity, to the exacting demands of national development in a dynamic global environment whose waves of change continue to lash our shores.

I have on many occasions, discussed the policies and measures that we in the Philippines are taking in the area of commerce and industry, in reaction to the prevailing world wide economic uncertainties and difficulties.

Let me do so again today before this important forum.

Our industrialization policy for the 1980’s and the decades after, shall emphasize the need to establish an industrial sector which is world competitive and which will build on our strength and consistent with our national economic objectives.

Selectivity shall be emphasized in choosing the sectors we will promote and whose development we will aggressively pursue, for we are a country blessed with abundant natural resources, therefore, rather than spread our investments precariously thin with the intention of producing all that we need, we should put our resources and skills in industries which we can operate with comparative advantage, in sectors and projects that would put to good use our highly literate and trainable labor force, in sectors and projects that would process indigenous raw materials and resources from our soil, mountains and seas for the local as well as the export market.

Complementary to this, we are undertaking an aggressive but focused export promotion program that is product and market specific, we will promote exports aggressively to earn the foreign exchange we need to offset our growing import bill, disturbingly inflated by the escalating foreign exchange requirement for oil imports, and to better service our foreign debt so we may expand our capacity to borrow for our productive investments needs.

It should be properly understood however, that while we need to earn foreign exchange, the government’s insistence on world competitiveness for local industry stems primarily from the commitment to make available to the millions of Filipinos the goods and services they need, at the right price and quality.

The welfare of our people should always remain the paramount consideration, the focal point of each and every policy and program we choose to undertake. We would have accomplished nothing if we finally industrialized this country at the expense of the Filipino; if we earn foreign exchange by forcing our people to subsidize our export sales. Let exports therefore be a natural consequence of our insistence on competitiveness, not its primary purpose.

We intend to make the presence of the Philippines felt in all major trading centers in the world through the establishment of an international network of overseas trading offices. Our product specific and market specific strategy, together with the aggressive export promotion program is envisioned to result in a more stable and diversified package of manufactured products sold to a far greater number of markets, thereby reducing the country’s susceptibility to the unpredictable swings of commodity prices and economic disequilibrium that cause certain markets of certain commodities to cyclically weaken and slump.

To allow small and medium scale firms to participate more extensively in our export drive, to encourage entrepreneurship among our people, to promote specialization for greater productivity, our government will encourage subcontracting operations between large companies with small and medium ones. Our large companies must earn the trust and confidence of the small and medium industries. They in turn, through their performance, must earn the respect of the large companies.

As part of the over-all program of strengthening the industrial sector, government shall put equal emphasis on manpower development, to improve on the productivity of both labor and management thereby enhancing the most significant resource of our country, to preserve our comparative advantage not only in labor intensive operations but to assert our capability in skills-intensive industries as well. Productivity must be improved that we may increase the earning capacity of our labor force without adversely affecting the ability of industry to expand and assure even more generation of employment.

I have studied and consulted the cabinet on the proposals you have compiled from your members on problems that concern you and on the administrative reforms you wish government to undertake. Your workshops during the last two days, I am sure, have yielded more proposals for the consideration of government, many of these require further study to see how best to ensure that all sectors are given the same treatment, to design and plan how best to implement them.

Let me respond to some of the issues you have raised.

While government needs to continue assuring consumers of a steady supply of food at affordable prices, it also recognizes that price ceilings must be flexible enough to adequately serve the interests of the producers and traders.

Government is decided to assign the operation of public utilities largely to the private sector and will supervise the sector only to ensure that the level and quality of service are adequate for the public needs.

Government will actively support research activities and programs in science and technology, to serve the needs of industry in the development of appropriate technology, and innovative products, utilizing to best advantage our indigenous materials.

Government will put greater priority on the improvement of communication facilities in support of the industry dispersal program. And to improve access to business information so critical to industrial development.

Government will continue to evaluate its own policies and programs, as well as its administrative mechanism; that they may be made more relevant responsive to business.

We call on the private sector to suggest and offer ideas as we believe that you are in the best position to tell government the assistance you need.

So today, as you call on government for assistance and support, for guidance and direction, we lay before you programs which we intend to pursue for a balanced and coordinated development of all sectors and areas in this country.

The implementation of the national livelihood program, the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran is a top its social dimension priority of the new republic. It shall revolve around the popular mobilization of entrepreneurial initiatives at the grass roots, to bring to the barangay level, productive undertakings that will direct industries, both large and small, to disperse and provide employment opportunities to our people in the countryside, and encourage the needed link-up between our agricultural and manufacturing sectors.

The successful implementation of the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran depends on the ability of a great number of sectors to work together to complement rather than to compete with one another. To succeed, we must effect a realization of oneness, of inter-dependence between the farmers and the manufacturers, the producers and the l consumers, the labor and the management groups; financing firms and entrepreneurs, the big and the small firms, the local and national governments and finally, effect the realization of the oneness and the close inter-dependence of the people and the government.

The First Lady, I was informed, has met with you on the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran. What remains for me to emphasize therefore at this point is that, just as I had to go to Cancun and just as the world must agree to evolve a new international economic order, we need to forge an alliance for our people, to jointly pursue our goals and objectives, to undertake and implement our programs hand in hand, shoulder to shoulder and with one mind, with a common vision or fail dismally as individuals who refuse to recognize our inherent inter-dependence.

Therefore even as we look back to Cancun, even as we look forward to future international negotiations and Fora that will pursue our initiatives in Mexico, even as we await the time when our more advanced partners realize that in helping us, they are only helping themselves, we must look to ourselves and to each other with greater resolve to work together. Before we could hope that nations will learn to trust each other, we need to know how to trust ourselves.

We have in the country today, a government we evolved ourselves; patterned after the accepted principles of democracy, but a Filipino government, because it is designed by Filipinos to suit the Filipino temperament, to serve the Filipino aspirations, and to manage the Filipino character.

We have in our country today, a government never more vested with the mandate of the people; never more composed of individuals whose commitment and capabilities are equal to the demands of the time; never more willing to accept the challenge of direct accountability, to be judged by their intentions and accomplishments.

I come here as the leader of that government, as a representative of our people, just as you are the chosen representatives of our business community. I come here in the spirit of dialogue, with only my ideas for national development, my commitment to our people and my dream of greatness for our country.

I call on the private sector to share in this vision, to take up the challenge and give a hand in support of our development thrusts. I call on the private sector to break away from timidity and lead in taking the risks with foresight, in avoiding stagnation by concentrating less on apprehensions and more on initiative and imagination.

I call on the private sector to assist government in establishing a new business code of ethics and in disciplining and policing its own ranks.

I call on the private sector to direct their energies to promoting the common good rather than in pursuing parochial interests. We ask you all these for we are looking to you as a vital partner in nation building.

Government can set the direction but it cannot do nor should it do everything. Only one thing could guarantee success in our effort, active support and cooperation.

I trust that the Philippine chamber of commerce and industry, in leading our business community, and having defined “the challenge of growth in the new republic” will make this 7th Philippine Business Conference a milestone in our country’s economic history.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.