Extemporaneous Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the First Manila International Film Festival

[Delivered on January 18, 1982]

Master of Ceremonies, Mr. Jack Valenti, Your Excellencies, the Heads of the Foreign Delegations, Your Excellencies, the Diplomatic Corps, Foreign Guests, Fellow Administrators in Government, Countrymen, My Friends:

Allow me first of all to extend the gratitude of the entire Filipino people to our foreign guests who have come from all corners of the globe to participate in the Film Festival under the sponsorship of the people of the Philippines. I am certain I speak the sentiment of all our people when I say to them we give not only the usual greetings of Mabuhay but the gifts of hospitality and affection from our hearts which extends the message to them that it is our hope that their stay in our contry will be both pleasant and productive.

I must extend special gratitude to Mr. Jack Valenti for his generous words for me and the First Lady. I do not deserve his accolade but all modesty aside, I believe I can join him in extending congratulations to the First Lady for having finished this imposing building where we hold the ceremonies for this Film Festival. I could not believe and up to now I cannot believe that we are actually holding this opening ceremonies in a building that was been finished a few hours back. Mr. Jack Valenti, I understand, threatens to import the First Lady to the United States to help finish some of the unfinished projects in that great country. On this matter, we may draw the line.

But at the same time let us also recognize and give appreciation to the men and women who have contributed their share of devotion and hard work to accomplish this impossible task – the engineers, the architects, the foremen, the craftsmen, the workers and the thousands who are part of this great achievement.

You may wonder what a politician is doing in a film festival. First of all, it is imperative that a national leader has to take deep interest and keep step with the dominant popular art. Of course, this is probably the reason that my Economic Ministers have taxed the film industry so heavily as your industry has stated. Rest assured, however, that the matter is under constant and serious review. In years past politicians had to master the art of theatrical histrionics and oratory but now audio visual – basically film art – is the medium for the entertainer and the politician. As some observers say there really is not much difference between the two. You are well aware that ignorance of or incompetence in your art has been fatal to some otherwise great politicians.

Civilizations as you know are characterized by their technologies. I need not tell you how the plow, the wheel, the steam engine, the splitting of atom has revolutionized man’s way of doing things. Much to our subject the printing press which was invented in China in the 9th century and became known in Europe as the Guttenburg Revolution in the 15th century started the democratization of knowledge and communication. Before then, knowledge was the privilege of the elite, mostly the priestly and imperial elite. It must be said of printing that it paved the way for the French and Russian Revolutions. Now that the 1839 invention of the Frenchman Daguerre has further revolutionized communication we can certainly ask what revolution in turn will this art precipitate.

But I would like to think that it will reinvigorate or recreate societies rather than destroy them; reconcile social classes instead of pitting one against the other and that it will unite rather than divide human beings and nations all over the world.

There is perhaps in our time no medium more powerful or immediate and pervasive in its impact on human society as the cinema. It is the great paradox of art and literature that what is accomplished in solitude and even in seclusion from the public must also be the most public of all creations.

The historian Barbara Tuckman not long ago suggested that if we pause to record mankind’s greatest moments against our present despondency and pessimism, we must count among the milestones of man’s achievements, his ingenuity to entertain and amuse himself and to create works of great brilliance and delight. And she regards entertainment and art as among mankind’s greatest achievements, which balance what sometimes appear as the severities of human experience today.

And what is the relevance of film festivals to our despairing world? No one believes though it would be nice if it were so, that the very first international film festival to be held in what is sometime referred to the Third World, will do anything revolutionary to the art of cinema in our time. Art we are always reminded is not impressed by awards. In fact genius, so the writer reminds us, scoffs at man-made honors, titles and awards of recognition.

But as in all activities cinema is inhabited by humans with all too human needs, the need of filmmakers and craftsman, artists and financiers for some kind of recognition that their work touches the life around them;

It is for this and for nothing else, that film festivals may be said to have relevance and meaning in our modern world.

It was the historic role in ancient and modern society for the leader to interpret experience and to help people understand the purposes of human activity and their objectives. Thus the leader or medicine man had to be the big orator and facile writer to articulate the vague groping yearnings of the mute and silent multitude. They had to interpret into recognizable and acceptable terms the hazy dreams of nationhood, of unity and integration. They had to draw in inspiring form the victories of the past so they may gain pride and dignity as a people; to create in palpable form the visions of achievement and even greatness.

This has been taken over by the creative writer and artist and now by the cinema and it could well be that our time more than any previous era, our world with all its challenges and burdens, its anxieties and presentiments has never been in greater need of the creative artist to provide illumination and insights. Otherwise the world might dissolve into virtual incoherence and confusion.

More and more, for good or bad, whether we like it or not, we see the cinema shaping human destiny.

But then perhaps what politicians and statesmen have failed to attain in their exercise of national and international authority uniquely in its own pervasive way the cinema will achieve.

By establishing the common denominator of cultures and civilization; by setting values acceptable to all peoples and races; by making aspirable all the hopes and dreams of all the peoples including the less fortunate and making universal the inspiration, enlightenment of all men, the cinema may yet fulfill man’s dream of a united world. This Film Festival may therefore be the proper prologue to an industry and art that transcends the boundaries of nations and belongs to all humanity. Of what better proof is there than that gathered here in our humble city of Manila are the creative artists, geniuses, talents, producers, craftsmen, writers and the film makers of the world, come to speak the universal language of art and culture.

May they attain this dream!

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.