Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the 80th Foundation Anniversary of the Philippine Army

A History of Valor

I did not expect to be among those receiving and awarding medals tonight. Many of you don’t know it, but I have always felt that Major General Abat came into the Army under fraudulent enlistment. This, of course, is a background. During the guerrilla days, if you remember, I was operating in eastern Pangasinan, Mountain Province, and Nueva Vizcaya. And one of my guides was a young man. Upon investigation, he turned out to be 17 years old. Yet, he had enlisted in the Armed Forces of the Philippines claiming to be an 18-year old. That young man is now the commanding general of the Philippine Army, Major General Abat.

I think that he wanted to turn the tables on me tonight. I have always ordered him around. He kept running back and forth between the units. I used him as a guide, a messenger, and a courier. Sometimes, he was my cook.

Now, he awards me this Kagitingan badge. I was looking at the other major service commanders during the presentation here. We, of course, were nostalgic about the beginnings of our military history. Of course, only the Philippine Army has a long history of 80 years. However, there is a footnote in Philippine history which says that the Philippine Navy was jointly organized with the Philippine Army. So the Philippine Navy should better watch out.

I don’t know how many units the Philippine Navy had. Probably, it had two scows. I happened to know about this because the capitan-heneral of the Philippine Army was Artemio Ricarte whose nom de guerre was Vibora. He happens to be a relative from Batac, Ilocos Norte.

So I know, more or less, what happened during the organization of the Philippine Army. What did they call it? The “Foot Army” in 1897.

But let me come back to this Kagitingan badge. This is given me while I am wearing the barong. Am I to wear this with my perennial uniform, the barong?

I am indeed honored. I accept this award for and on behalf of all those men and women who have gone ahead of us, who have made it possible for us all to be here today to celebrate the 80th anniversary of the Philippine Army.

I go all all the way back to the many years when our lives depended upon the friendship and loyalty of many unknown and unnamed Filipinos.

I see General Fred Santos. He and Colonel Fidel Cruz brought me out of Manila in the uniform of a Philippine Constabulary officer in August of 1944. Brigadier General Argawi was in command of the company in Bulacan. I and so many others hid in Bulacan. It is for these men — unsung and unknown — that this award has been given.

You referred to the medal of valor given to me. I think the only reason it was given to me was that there was nobody else left among those who fought beside me.

I am deeply honored especially in the presence of all these courageous warriors who have demonstrated the capability of Filipino soldiers.

I am indeed very happy to come on this occasion notwithstanding the very critical days ahead. I did not realize that Major General Abat had this presentation all prepared. Otherwise, I would have asked him to wait for the arrival of the First Lady. Certainly, this rivals the Kasaysayan ng Lahi.

I am certain that when the First Lady comes back, she will ask to be shown this presentation. I do hope that they have taken a video tape of all these proceeding.

This is, of course, the oldest major service in the Armed Forces of the Philippines. The problem is that when I look around me, I notice that most of us belong to the Philippine Army — Undersecretary Crisol, General Espino (although he occasionally flies now and then), and I.

So we must hold back our feelings whenever we see the troops of the Philippine Army making good. They have certainly made good in the past, and they continue to make good in the present.

Therefore, when we celebrate eight decades of the Philippine Army’s history, we honor a tradition of valor in arms and we pay homage to the memory of a great number of our soldiers who are no longer with us – Ricarte, Bonifacio Aguinaldo and the heroes of Bataan and Corregidor. The men whose deeds are written in the annals of our nation and who made history before us. For the history of the Philippine Army has been the history of our nation.

In every period of that national history – from the revolution to the present time – this service has had to face may special challenges. To every challenge, it has returned the response required by the times – courage in the face of adversity and uncertainty; resourcefulness, flexibility, compassion in periods of relative quiet.

In the turmoil of revolution, our people sowed the beginnings of the service. We remember only dimly the character of our revolutionary army, the faces of officers and men who were very young when they joined. The quality of their arms was something which marked the need to make up with courage what they lacked in equipment. It is to the lasting glory of that band of soldiers that they established by valor the first national republic in all of Asia.

Denied the fruits of national sovereignty, they took to the field once more in a war against a new foe. And only the superior forces of the enemy, and ultimately the voices of those who sought peace instead of war, enabled silence to prevail in our countryside.

It took more than three decades for our people to be granted the right to maintain a new army. And when at last it was organized during the Commonwealth, it was swiftly drawn into battle once more — this time side by side with the Armed Forces of the United States against the forces that would invade our land. The early stages of the war, of course, inflicted tremendous losses on the defense forces, but the .entire nation during the war lost a million men and women. Darkness enshrouded our country, but just the same, our loyal sons raised the flag of intransigence in many a hilltop, and the soldiers of long ago now had to repair once more to their revolutionary origin and resist the invader through guerrilla warfare. Resisting alone, with the allied forces engaged on other fronts in the Pacific and in Europe, our soldiers maintained the struggle, and it was not long afterwards that the country was liberated. It is a part of our history that throughout Southeast Asia, perhaps, it was the Philippines alone that maintained the continued resistance to the invading forces during the entire period of the Second World War. This is part of the history of the Philippine Army.

In more recent times, the Philippine Army has had to maintain its flexibility as an armed service. It was required to fight in Korea. It has undertaken civic action in Vietnam. It has put down a rebellion in Central Luzon. It has worked on developmental measures. It has the painful task of confronting our brothers engaged in secessionism in the South. It has been required to dismantle the apparatus of rebellion and secessionism and to join in nation-building.

In peace or in war, at home or abroad, in the North or in the South, under colonial auspices or conditions of national independence, the Philippine Army has maintained its creative tradition of coping with the changing challenges before the nation to fulfill its supreme and unchanging mission.

Today, we find the Philippine Army confronted once more by challenges as momentous as those that it had been confronted with throughout its eighty-year history. For the first time perhaps since the national Revolution of 1896, the country looks toward a time when its military capabilities will be sufficient to maintain national security regardless of the scale of assistance extended by other nations.

Today, I just granted the Presidential streamer to the 32nd Battalion. Its performance has been outstanding; it is perhaps the most decorated unit among all the operational units in the Philippine Army.

At the same time, I have awarded the Presidential Unit citation to the entire Philippine Army and the symbolic unit citation badge to its commanding of the Philippine Army, from this day forward, are entitled to wear this symbolic unit citation badge.

We are presently engaged in a task to reconcile and unite with our brothers in the South. You are well aware that we have had a little crisis because of the stalemate of the negotiations in Tripoli. You are well aware of the Tripoli agreement of December 23, 1976. I need not go into the antecedents of such an agreement. Suffice it to say that we have the generous intervention of the nations belonging to the Quadripartite Committee of the Islamic Conference — Egypt, Senegal, Somalia, and Saudi Arabia. We have also the generous intervention of President Khaddafy, the great leader of the People’s Socialist Libyan Arab Republic.

We have been able to obtain an agreement as of December 23, 1976 and a ceasefire. There had been a stalemate and the negotiations were recessed. Undersecretary Barbero came here for consultations. There was no possibility of a resumption. There was a threat of the resumption instead of hostilities.

Intervention in the highest possible level became necessary. Inasmuch as I was unable to leave, we sent, as our ambassador, the First lady.

I would like to announce that the First Lady has just left Tripoli at 4:45 this afternoon. And I would also like to announce that by virtue of the generous intervention of the brilliant and great leader of Libya, we have come to a tentative solution for the peaceful settlement of the Mindanao conflict.

It is still subject to further determination of the various details But I received on the 18th of March a formal proposal from President Khaddafy of Libya by cable, which he confirmed that same day by telephone. He personally called me up to inform me that because of the intervention of the First Lady and because of his desire that there now be peace in a friendly country like the Philippines, he believed he should not allow those who would like to see us fighting once again to succeed. He, therefore, submitted a proposal which I am approved.

This, of course, will be subject to further negotiations with the rebel groups and with the Quadripartite Committee of the Islamic Conference. But I am certain that inasmuch as President Khaddafy has led in the negotiations for the peaceful settlement of the Mindanao conflict, we will finally be able to bring peace to Mindanao, Basilan, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi.

I have awarded these streamers because the men of the 32nd Battalion have fought well. It is my hope and prayer that there will be no need for men like you to continue fighting for the honor and integrity of our country. And that there will be unity in our land.

This is my news for you today. On the occasion of your 80th anniversary, it may no longer be necessary for you to fight in Mindanao.

May God grant that peace to continue.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1979). Presidential speeches (Vol. 7). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].