Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Philippine Heart Center for Asia

[Delivered on February 14, 1975]

Like many of you today, I see the Philippine Heart Center for the first time. What I see is a surprise to me. And one of the great pleasures of living lies in being surprised. With. Mrs. Marcos, I must confess that it has been one surprise after another. I am amazed at the magnitude, scope and sophistication of this Philippine Heart Center.

I therefore extend my congratulations to all those who have participated in establishing this Heart Center, to those who have inspired it, to those who labored on it, from the unskilled laborers to the scientists and technicians, from the planners and designers to the architects, from the great minds who have conceived of such an institute, from the Heart Foundation of the Philippines that started work on it two years ago, to the Organization led by Mrs. Marcos in bringing about the realization of a dream.

For and in behalf of the Republic of the Philippines and the people of the Philippines, I accept with gratitude this offering of the Heart.

Allow me also to articulate the gratitude of the 42 million people of the Philippines to our distinguished visitors all pioneers and outstanding men not only in cardiology but in medical science whose presence at the opening ceremonies have not only clothed these ceremonies with elegance and prestige but now opens a well spring of inspiration for those who will seek to follow in their footsteps in this Philippine Heart Center.

As We look at this Heart Center, different images and visions come to my mind. In my case, I see it as a long, torturous and difficult road that we have travelled from ten years back when I first became President of the Republic. In 1965, when I was first elected President, I ordered a medical survey of the Visayas and Mindanao and I discovered to my dismay that 60% of those who died in 1964 had never seen a doctor or nurse throughout their lives. And today, we have the most advanced and sophisticated medical center specializing on cardiovascular surgery. The impact of scientific technological discoveries on our every day lives is so staggering and mind-boggling that there have been suggestions from some quarters for a moratorium on the escalating advance of the natural and physical sciences. Biologists, for example, speak of the discovery of DNA, the principle of very life itself, of biological computers and robots, of cryonism and conning, or the multiplication of human beings. The knowledge, about the universe is growing with precision. Even to specialists, I am told, these continuing discoveries of natural and physical science are formidable.

To us, therefore, the ordinary minds whose grasp of physical and natural sciences must of necessity be limited, these discoveries are radical and sweeping, and yet the world of common men accept them as a matter of fact.

What enters my mind today, therefore, is a sad fact that the calling to which I have dedicated myself, that of political leader or social engineer or political scientist, or as some would say statesman, is rather conservative, if not totally backward, compared to the radicalism that I see in natural and physical sciences.

The natural and physical sciences are millions of light years away from Aristotle, but the formulae of social scientists, even political scientists are still fundamentally an arms length from Plato and Aristotle.

This enters my mind as I realize that the political leadership in this country which I have the honor to lead had been compelled to perform radical heart surgery in the Philippines. We have had to replace the Old Society with all its evils, its deficiencies, anarchy, criminality, corruption, its viciousness which resulted in daily kidnappings, arson that burned among many others the International Airport Terminal Building, which resulted in the bombing of the Supreme Court Building, the City Hall of Manila and the City Hall of Quezon City and the attempted seizure of Malacañang Palace and the ambuscade of public officials, like the Secretary of National Defense, the kidnapping for ransom of such magnitude that they were no longer reported to the police, to the immobilization of the private sector and also the impotence of the Government. All these—had to be replaced with the NEW SOCIETY.

And you might call it radical surgery.

I cannot but express envy, therefore, that the people of the Western World have received your radical reforms in medical science with applause and accolade. While our radical reforms in our society which I intended not only to eliminate anarchy and save the life of the social patient but to eliminate and eradicate the causes of this illness should be met with suspicion, distrust if not outright antagonism not only by Western constitutionalists and libertarians from whose teachings we learned our knowledge of government, but perhaps also outright rejection by the common people of the Western World.

As I look at this prestigious assembly of surgeons, the question that comes to my mind, therefore, is whether the radical changes in the surgical and medical procedures have always been so welcome and accepted by the world. Or has it been accepted because of the success that followed the radical medical reforms?

And the questions that follow are, must my kind, my calling, the profession of lawyer or the constitutional list and legal thinkers, the political theorists—must they, always be conservative and reject radicalism no matter how peaceful, constitutional it may be.

Otherwise, how can the world face up to the complexities of modern problems.

For more than ten years ago, we had warned that the world was approaching a mass of such complexities that the ancient formula of the old economists and political teachers may no longer be relevant or even applicable to the situation.

The economic thinkers now are recasting and refashioning new rules in the game of affluence. The political thinkers are still in a state of shock and incapable of taking a step towards their survival.

Medical science perhaps appreciates the plaudits and accolade that is due the pioneers which are due principally to the resolution, confidence and natural talents.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1975). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.