Extemporaneous speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the proclamation of the official candidates of the KBL

The Type of Government in Metropolitan Manila

THIS DAY is set as the proclamation of the official candidates of the KBL in the various cities and towns of the Metropolitan Manila Commission. But, before I present and raise the hands of our candidates, I would like to explain about the situation of the government of the Metropolitan Manila Commission, because in truth, many of our viewers do not fully understand what kind of government we have in Metropolitan Manila now.

On February 27, 1975, we had a referendum-plebiscite and we asked the citizens this question: “What kind of government should Metropolitan Manila have?” If you remember, the administration of the thirteen towns comprising the twelve towns drawn from the province of Rizal and one town drawn from the province of Bulacan was placed under the Metropolitan Manila.

So the first thing that happened was that we had a general manager throughout Metropolitan Manila, while the referendum held on February 27, 1975 was not yet being called. In said referendum-plebiscite, we presented to the citizens various questions. For example, one of the questions we presented to them was this: “Do you want to continue the mayor and board of councilors form of government in Metropolitan Manila, or do you prefer a commission-type of government where a commission runs the entire Metropolitan Manila in accordance with what the President will prescribe?” And this was followed by another question: “Do you want to give the President of the Philippines, Ferdinand E. Marcos, the power to establish a commission-form of government under such conditions and qualifications that he may prescribe?” What was the answer to the questions we presented in that referendum-plebiscite? The people's answer: “Yes.” Or, yes, we prefer a commission-type of government and we authorize the President to establish the form, the conditions, the qualifications and limitations of such a commission-form of government.

According to the legal opinion of the Minister of Justice and the Solicitor General and also of the COMELEC, that question was not only for a referendum but for a plebiscite mandated by the Constitution that must be held before a local government is replaced. Our plan at that time was to replace the form of government, the type of government here in Metropolitan Manila. Therefore, it was appropriate to ask our citizens at that time if they agreed or disagreed with the replacement of the type of government in the National Capital Region.

So after the referendum-plebiscite and knowing that a commission-form of government needs to be established in accordance with the answers given by our citizens, I signed a decree, Presidential Decree No. 824, establishing the Metropolitan Manila Commission and other purposes. In this decree, we established the territorial jurisdiction of Metropolitan Manila. The territorial jurisdiction is, as originally established, under the manager-form of government. This includes the cities of Manila, Makati, San Juan, Las Piñas, Malabon, Navotas, Pasig, Pateros, Paranaque, Marikina, Muntinlupa and Taguig in the province of Rizal and the municipality of Valenzuela in the province of Bulacan.

The decree further provided for the creation of a Commission to be composed by a chairman or governor, a vice-chairman or vice-governor and three commissioners or board members. One for planning, another for finance and the third for operations, all of whom shall be appointed by the President and shall hold office at his pleasure.

The Governor of Metropolitan Manila is no other than Imelda, your friend Imelda Romualdez-Marcos.

In accordance with the provisions adopted by the National Assembly in establishing vice-governors and vice-mayors in all cities, provinces and towns throughout the Philippines, I signed a new decree establishing a vice-governor in addition to the governor.

The Vice Governor of Metropolitan Manila is none other than Mel Mathay. Also present here is Commissioner Calaguio, Commissioner for Finance, and the Commissioner for planning, Commissioner Einsiedel. The position of Commissioner for operations is vacant.

A question that I already answered that was asked to me again yesterday. Do we even have a Council? Do the mayors have councilors? No, because it is a commission-type [government]. But who assists the Commission and the mayors?

I would like to inform everyone that in 1975, after the establishment of the Metropolitan Commission, we removed the councilors throughout Metropolitan Manila and in their place—let me clarify so that even foreign writers who sometimes misinterpret what I say can understand— following the abolition of the council in 1975, we created the Sanggunian ng Kalakhang Maynila, in accordance with these provisions which I shall read to you:

“The city and municipal councils in Metropolitan Manila are hereby abolished and in lieu thereof, there shall be consultative legislative assembly that shall assist the Commission in the formulation of ordinances, resolutions and other measures affecting the four cities and thirteen municipalities within Metropolitan Manila which shall hereafter be known as the Sanggunian ng Kalakhang Maynila whose members shall hold office at the pleasure of the President.”

“The Sanggunian ng Kalakhang Maynila shall recommend to the Commission ordinances, resolutions and such measures as it may adopt; PROVIDED,that no such ordinances,resolutions or measures shall become effective until after the approval of the Commission; And PROVIDED FURTHER, that the power to impose taxes and levies, the power to appropriate money and the power to pass ordinances or resolutions with penal sanctions shall be vested exclusively in the Commission.”

“The Sanggunian ng Kalakhang Maynila shall be composed of the following members who shall be appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the Commission:”

(a) Two representatives from each of the 13 municipalities. (b) Four representatives from each of the cities of Quezon, Pasay and Caloocan. (c) Six representatives from the City of Manila. (d) Sectoral representatives as may be determined by the Commission.

“The members shall elect from among themselves a presiding officer and a deputy presiding officer who shall be responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting and proceedings of the Sanggunian. The presiding officer and deputy presiding officer cannot subsequently be replaced without the approval of the Commission.

“Functions of the Local Chief Executive. In addition to the present powers and functions which are not inconsistent with this decree, the local Chief Executive, who shall be elected by the duly qualified voters of his city or municipality, shall have the following functions:”

We need to read this so that everyone knows that since 1975 and 1977, I have already informed everyone that there would be an election for mayor and vice-mayor.

Many are saying that we surprised them with the holding of an election regarding this. In this decree, we clearly informed the entire media in 1975 and 1977 that there will be an election for mayor and vice-mayor for each of the cities and each of the municipalities. Our opponents cannot deny that they do not know this law or decree because it is on record.

“The Chief Executive of the locality shall have the following functions in addition to his existing functions now:

1. To implement the integration of the common essential municipal and public services approved by the Commission as they pertain to their respective local units. 2. To furnish the Commission such information as it may require and to assist in carrying out the integration of the common essential municipal and public services. 3. To perform such other functions as the Commission may direct.

The local Chief Executive shall have a term of office of six years. That is why we will choose in this election the mayors and vice-mayors who will serve for six years. This is also based on the term of office of other officials, under the Constitution, such as the delegates to the Batasang Pambansa, whose term of office is six years. The mayors will also serve for six years under the Local Election Code. Those mayors elected outside of Metropolitan Manila will also sit for that long a term. Therefore, they will all serve for six years.

After I have read the decree and you have learned about the type of government in Metropolitan Manila, what will our citizens in Metropolitan Manila choose in the next election? Some are asking if it is true that we will no longer be electing a Council. That is true. The Council is not included in the election. Why? Because the government of Metropolitan Manila, according to the plebiscite, is a commission-type of government. Who will choose? The Commission will choose and the President will appoint. Likewise, the said appointive commissioners are merely consultative.

The ones who will truly be given power are the Commission and then the mayor and vice-mayor.

Who among them have been replaced now? Some say that the faces we are presenting are all the same. The same faces because they were the ones who succeeded in the past elections. They were the ones who helped in the development of the entire Metropolitan Manila. These are the people who have been tested and can be trusted. These are the people who have a program of government. If we replace them with new faces and they have no program of government to speak of, the administration of our government will become distorted. That is why you should re-elect all the KBL candidate officials.

Under the commission-type of government, the Vice-Mayors will play a big role. Because in the absence or temporary disqualification or immobility or non-performance of duty of the mayor, the vice-mayor will automatically be the acting mayor. And it shall be the policy of the Commission and of the President to see to it that the vice-mayors shall be trained in the performance of the work of all the mayors in Metropolitan Manila.

Now the vice-mayors will no longer dream or pray for their mayors to die or wait for them to die, which is what they used to think, because they will now be given their own power by the Metro Manila Commission.

Our opponents say: “Who will now interfere with the activities of the mayors involving government expenses in public works and other projects?” The Council and our vice-mayors are there, as well as the Metro Manila Commission headed by your friend Imelda Romualdez-Marcos. These officials are our guarantee that no corruption will take place in the government of the four cities and 13 towns of Metropolitan Manila.

In this campaign, our opponents say that there is no guarantee that irregularities and corruption will be eliminated because there are no councilors. But in my opinion, it will be highly effective if our guarantee is the appointive officials in the Council that we will draw from the ranks of citizens and those serving in the government based on their ability and wisdom. And above all, the Metropolitan Manila Commission will not allow any corruption in the entire government of Metropolitan Manila. So whatever requests and complaints our citizens have regarding irregularities and corruption in Metropolitan Manila will immediately reach the knowledge of Imelda together with the mayors, vice-mayors, and also the Council for appropriate action.

Yesterday, the COMELEC, through Chairman Perez, requested me if it was possible to extend the filing of certificates of candidacy from January 4 up to January 10. This is because of the request of other candidates who were not able to file their certificate of candidacy.

What should we do about that? This is what I did. I asked how many candidates there were throughout the Philippines. According to the analysis, there are 60,000 candidates throughout the Philippines. And how many positions are being contested? The positions being contested now are 18,000. Therefore, it appears that three candidates are competing for each position throughout the Philippines. In Metropolitan Manila, 34 positions are being contested. How many candidates are competing for those 34 positions? For mayor, there are 73, for vice-mayor, there are 71. So, there are five candidates for each position. Five candidates per position should be enough. Just imagine that multitude. You no longer know who they are, whether it's Bagatsing or Cuneta. They have opponents. In my opinion, our opponents are all insignificant. But they are opponents nonetheless.

Now, what is the significance of this date, January 4? That was set by the National Assembly. Under the Constitution, the President retains the reserve power to legislate. Under the amendment to the Constitution on October 1977, I have the power to amend any legislation. But what have I declared as a policy? I have declared as a policy that unless the reasons are supervening and overwhelming, I will not use the reserve power and will allow the Batasang Pambansa to establish the policy especially in elections. And therefore I have returned to the Commission on Elections their resolution requesting an amendment with the statement that I do not believe that it is necessary to extend the period of filing a certificate of candidacy.

It is clear what that means. And we studied that matter. What is the reason why those people who are requesting an extension of the period of filing of certificate of candidacy were not able to file? The answer is they allegedly forgot. The reason given by others is that they were confused and did not know where to file. Some of them filed here and filed there, but after twelve o'clock on January 4.

That matter can no longer be remedied by a decree coming from the President. From my point of view, we will have a free and open election and, therefore, it is my considered and deliberate decision that there shall be no extension of the period for the filing of certificates of candidacy.

Comrades in the New Society Movement, after I have given the explanations regarding that matter, let us return to our most important task this morning. And that is none other than the proclamation of the official candidates of four cities and 13 towns of Metropolitan Manila.

The New Society Movement and the officials serving under the KBL still owe a great debt to all of you. Because all the powers granted from the President of the Republic of the Philippines to the assemblymen or members of the National Assembly—including the First Lady—and to the people chosen and appointed through the powers granted to the President or what is called the appointing authority, come from all of you. Therefore, we owe you a great debt.

The power and strength in the hands of your humble servant, of the First Lady, of our candidates and of the members of the National Assembly are all owed to you. Until now, we have not fully reciprocated that kindness of yours. What have we returned or paid for it? We have reciprocated your kindness and trust with successes in all fields—in health, in livelihood, in our dealings with other countries around the world.

If peace prevails throughout the Philippines, that is a response to the trust you have given to all those in office under the KBL. Your trust can only be repaid through the deeds and successes that we offer to all the citizens throughout the Philippines, especially our poor and needy.

If the KBL is now patronized by many throughout the Philippines, that is because the KBL has a program of government, a platform that it follows. That platform addresses all the problems of each of our citizens, especially the poor and underprivileged.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1985). Presidential speeches (Vol. 10). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].