Extemporaneous Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Asian Development Bank (ADB) toast

[Delivered in Malacañang, April 28, 1982]

I have been asked by my seatmates why are Filipinos so lighthearted and free.

Perhaps I can answer the question by capsulizing the Filipinos individual philosophy of life.

“Life would be worth living

If one can infuse into tyranny of routine in his prosaic life with the mystique of some deep and profound romance.

If adversity and impoverishment we can meet as some transitory trial thrown the very gods who seek to help us and accept them not with bitterness and petulance but with the grace and flair of one to beauty born.

If pain is not suffered in humiliation but rather enjoyed in ecstacy to be offered at the feet of ones muse or goddess.

And if ever one can mock to his teeth with the arrogance of laughter and the challenge of the eternity of one’s dreams.

If one can try to do all these, Then, life would be worth the living and even death be worth the dying.

But what relevance has this individual Filipino philosophy of life to the Asian Development Bank?

There is nothing more tyranically prosaic than banking. But it would be worth the effort if we were to infuse it with some mystique of romance.

And if adversity strikes and then there is no replenishment of capital funds for lending and impoverishment follows, then let no bitterness turn the smile sour but instead accept the test with the graceful figure of one who is to flair and beauty born.

Should there be setbacks in Asian Banking and pain inflicted, then let us not suffer it as a humiliation but enjoy it in ecstacy and offer it at the feet of our goddess of inspiration.

And if there should be defeat or failure then let us treat it like death—mock it with scorn and laughter and fling at it the challenge that our flesh and plans are mortal but our dreams are eternal.

– T O A S T –

Quotations are from the writings of the author himself.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.