Keynote Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On ASEAN

[Delivered at the PICC, June 17, 1981]

ASEAN: A Purpose for Unity

Your Excellencies, Delegates, Observers, Distinguished Guests, and Friends:

I join the First Lady, Mrs. Imelda Romualdez-Marcos, in welcoming you to this ASEAN city of Manila. Although she has expressed it better, in her usual warm manner, the welcome we extend to you emanates from the true sentiments of friendship and brotherhood of the Filipino people.

It is with a deeper sense of gratitude, and understandably with renewed pride and confidence, that particularly today I speak for the Filipino people, whose sovereign voice was made manifest in yesterday’s election, and which pronounced in very distinct terms the people’s support for our foreign policy.

I assure our friends in the ASEAN that in the contemplation of Philippine destiny, the role that our nation plays in the collective efforts for regional cooperation for progress, peace, prosperity, and common happiness of our peoples in the ASEAN will always be an outstanding national concern. We in the Philippines have come to regard ASEAN, together with all our partners in it, as our true effective hope for the attainment of the aims and objectives, the common aspirations and dreams, which define the very purpose of what we have since regarded as our concord in Southeast Asia.

As I join you in the hope for full and substantial success in the deliberations and decisions of the fourteenth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting, it is my unqualified wish that this success should take the form and actual substance of common benefits and tangible blessings for our ASEAN people in all the spheres of their cooperative activities.

Much of these activities have been expressly economic in character, but they are also broadly infused with social content and goals, with deep cultural significance and underlying concern for the defense and preservation of our values and respective identities as sovereign nation states of the ASEAN region.

Thus, in the past fourteen years that ASEAN has grown to its present stature and established respectability in the international community, the decisions arrived at in both the ministerial meetings and summit meetings that the association has had principally attest to the clear aspirations of the ASEAN governments and peoples to improve the conditions of material and spiritual life in the ASEAN region.

The past and common historical experience of ASEAN member states has been instructive, and each ASEAN nation state has expressed acute sensitivity to the lessons of the past. No more shall our region of Southeast Asia continue to be the setting of exploitative and oppressive action and maneuverings by imperialist powers. Developments in contemporary history, the building up and succession of crises in all regions of the world, not excluding our region in Southeast Asia, have more than intensified the common resolve of ASEAN countries to close ranks and seek better changes of common salvation in unity and more effective regional cooperation.

Events of the recent past, some as recent as a few days ago, all indicate the gravity of the world situation and the tendencies that have lately been given active expression by some countries which choose the option of force and violence in the pursuit of policies and national objectives. The events in Kampuchea, and lately the bombing of the nuclear reactors in Iraq, are dominant causes for our collective concern, even as today the ASEAN foreign and economic ministers meet to consider the overall positions and demarches which ASEAN should take in the face of these developments.

We naturally celebrate the fact of our unity and seek to strengthen further its character and purpose. I believe the time has come for us to make a clearer and more definitive conception of the tangible results that we want to obtain in common from the fact of unity, with the view to translating this into actual benefits that will affect in truly favorable terms the everyday life of our peoples in ASEAN.

The purpose of unity in ASEAN, I strongly believe, should transcend its mere political tidiness and reach the operational level of human usefulness manifested in better economic life, more humane social conditions, a more dignified political stature, livelier cultural exchanges, expanded technical and scientific interactions, and mutually fruitful arrangements in the fields of intra-ASEAN commerce and trade, both in government and private enterprise.

Implicit in this is the necessity to review our present system of operations in giving or in trying to give full implementation to our goals and agreed objectives. This requirement springs from the now common criticism that ASEAN, having passed what was described as its “declarative stage,” should now aim more seriously at attaining a higher level of cooperation by adopting new systems that can guarantee better operations and more effective results from all the cooperative efforts being expended by member states of ASEAN.

One such innovation might be the adoption of a system that shall allow authority to encourage initiative for certain agencies that might need to be created in the implementation of many vital ASEAN undertakings and particular projects. This will perhaps entail certain measures of political will.

ASEAN, as I earlier pointed out, has earned recognition as an important and constructive force in the global equation. As a group, we are listened to and our common initiatives in international fora, particularly in the United Nations, are given the weight we collectively deserve. The most important example of this, of course, is the forthcoming international conference on Kampuchea, which the United Nations has overwhelmingly decided to convene upon the instance of ASEAN and the support of many U.N. members.

It is evident that the outcome of this conference will not only affect the configuration of future peace in the region but will also affect, in a most direct manner, the peace of the world.

In economic and development cooperation, we may be said to have moved forward in establishing closer links among us. But there remain greater and perhaps better opportunities that we have not fully tapped. As there appear more far-reaching benefits not only for the present but also for the future generations of the peoples of ASEAN, I consider it an urgent need that we adopt new and innovative approaches to economic cooperation. We should surmount the temporary difficulties encountered at negotiating tables and move on to higher forms of regional cooperation.

This is an attractive option — that is, greater economic cooperation among ASEAN members themselves — because of recent developments characterized by world economic crises, the rising protectionism in many of ASEAN’s major markets, and the continuing stalemate in the North-South dialogue.

The presence here of our friends should give us occasion to re-state that the proper kind of concern and assistance for ASEAN should be manifest in the terms of trade. Stability and justice in ASEAN societies will depend in large measure on their ability to build up their economies through trade. Upon deeper analysis, this also affects our capacity to meet internal threats to our nations. We hope that the United States, Japan, Canada, our friends in the first world, would come to terms with this reality.

On the other hand, in the field of industry, the fruits of ASEAN cooperative action are now manifest. The regional projects of Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand are already in advanced stages of implementation. We are happy to note that the economic ministers last month agreed to allow three projects per country to be considered at any one time.

This new procedure will allow a more speedy consideration of ASEAN industrial projects. Today, we shall witness the formal adoption of the basic agreement on industrial complementation. As you all know, this is the first ASEAN activity where there will be direct and substantive participation by the private sector. We believe that our future industrial endeavours, if they are to be meaningfully relevant to the life of our peoples, should provide for the active participation of the private sector.

Indeed, ASEAN countries recognize that co-dependent with the goal of peace and security for the region is the promotion of economic development of the member nations and the region as a whole. It shall then follow that a stable region of Southeast Asia, in terms not only political but more importantly economic and social, responsive to the cultural, spiritual and intellectual needs of its dynamic populace, will prove to be the best source of stability, enduring peace and long-term well-being for the ASEAN peoples.

An ASEAN living under these conditions of peace and productivity, of dynamic inter-actions among its peoples and outside, will certainly serve the wider cause of global peace and the search for deeper values of humanity.

I see no better purpose for our precious unity than the consecration of this unity to the attainment of these ideals.

In wishing you Godspeed and full success in your important task in this conference, it will serve to remind us that given the present world we live in, our common ideals can only be valid when our corresponding determination to attain them, through our ASEAN unity, shall be strong, persevering, and hopeful.

Ladies and gentlemen and friends, we shall continue to hope!

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.