Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: 

It is a great honor and privilege for me to address this distinguished body on the occasion of the opening of the International Association for Educational Assessment World Congress. I am particularly pleased that this important gathering is being held in Manila, a city that has always been known for its hospitality and its commitment to education. 

As you know, educational assessment is a critical component of any effective education system. It provides us with the information we need to make informed decisions about curriculum development, instructional practices, and student learning. Without accurate and reliable assessment data, we cannot effectively monitor the progress of our students, identify areas where they need help, or ensure that they are receiving the quality education they deserve. 

Sa madaling salita, ang pagtatasa sa edukasyon ay mahalaga sa pagpapabuti ng kalidad ng edukasyon. Ito ay nagbibigay sa atin ng kakayahan na sukatin ang kaalaman at kasanayan ng ating mga mag-aaral, at upang matiyak na sila ay handa para sa mga hamon ng kinabukasan. 

This Congress provides a unique opportunity for educators and assessment experts from around the world to come together and share their knowledge and experiences. I am confident that the discussions and presentations that will take place here will be of great value to all of us. I encourage you to take full advantage of this opportunity to learn from one another and to collaborate on solutions to the challenges facing education today. 

I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the International Association for Educational Assessment for choosing Manila as the site of this World Congress. I also want to thank the members of the local organizing committee for their hard work and dedication in making this event possible. 

I wish you all a productive and successful Congress. Maraming salamat po at mabuhay tayong lahat!

That you honor my country and my people by choosing Manila as the first venue in Asia for your annual convention is a distinct privilege. That you have invited me to keynote it is a personal honor.

So I shall begin by expressing to you our deep appreciation and gratitude.

It is always a learning experience for all of us to participate in a conference of distinguished leaders in a particular field, such as this Congress. You come from distant lands all over the world to share your experiences and insights on the crucial issue of educational assessment as a tool for the broadening of opportunities in education. This too is a major concern of my country.

There is no need to present here the case for constant evaluation in the field of education. No other field touches so deeply and so critically the lives of peoples and nations than the cause of learning and training. None forms so important a priority in a nation’s quest of its destiny and its future.

In a developing country like the Philippines where we fundamentally recognize that education is the most effective means for social mobility and change and the most potent means for enhancing national development; assessment becomes not only imperative but truly urgent. For like any other human enterprise, there is continuing need to monitor and assess the performance of the educational system if it is to fully and effectively contribute to the overall development goals of the country.

This is why, when the crisis government was established on 21 September 1972, one of the first Proclamation I made was Presidential Decree No. 146, promulgated on March 9, 1973. In this Decree, I directed the development and implementation of the National College Entrance Examination for all high school graduates from both the public and private schools who aspire for tertiary level degree programs. This was designed to upgrade the quality of education and to maintain a healthy and viable balance in the manpower stock of the country. Two years after the promulgation of PD 146, I directed the reorganization of the educational system of which the promotion of research, assessment, and evaluation was an integral component. To implement this, we established the National Educational Testing Center of the Ministry of Education and Culture to perform the lead role in the testing, research and evaluation efforts of the country.

Results of studies have shown that the rationalization of enrolment and the redirection of educational programs are today major assets of our educational system and to the country. NCEE data have been extensively used in educational policy making. And the records show that there are better quality students now being attracted to universities. More students are now being retained in tertiary level programs. First year pass-rates can now be increased by as much as 3 percent without lowering standards. Furthermore, the failure rates have stabilized and so larger proportions of students proceed into the second and higher years. This has resulted in substantial financial benefits for the nation as a whole and also for the student’s families.

The concern for periodic evaluation assessment has guided policy decisions in other ways, also. We fully share your conviction that in a democratic society the principle of equal educational opportunity cannot simply mean that everybody should be encouraged to pursue a university career. A democratic educational system has to open its educational opportunities to everybody but it should not just leave everybody at the open door. A democratic educational system needs an admissions service to enable our young to rationalize career choices.

One of the objectives of educational development is to shift the locus of planning and effective control of the student’s educational and life choices to the students themselves. It is, therefore, imperative that guidance and counselling services be strengthened. Since the Ministry of Education and Culture has an office like the National Educational Testing Center, equipped with a vast information gathered from the National Testing Programs it handles, we have recently directed the Ministry of Education and Culture to expand the service component of the National Educational Testing Center to allow it to monitor guidance programs on a national scope. Our students need to be allowed to participate in the decision to be made about their future on the basis of information gathered from researches and testing programs.

Sometime; in 1976, I required our premier state university, the University of the Philippines, to adopt the democratization of its admissions system, to take cognizance of the disadvantages of freshmen from poor families who failed the tests, and to provide them with a variety of compensatory educational activities without lowering standards. Academic excellence is not incompatible with democratic open admissions. With some effort and goodwill, systems can be developed to democratize access to university education without sacrificing standards.

And beyond the formal educational system, we believe with you that learning must go on outside its sheltered environs. It is now fashionable to talk of “lifelong education” as an integral part of educational goals. A good number of students drop out of schools every year but we know that their learning does not cease. It is therefore possible to develop a system of recognizing this learning and to integrate these so-called “drop-outs” into the formal education system. Thus can we convert educational wastage into a new promise of educated manpower.

In 1977, we in the Philippines began the implementation of a program through the National Educational Testing Center for the accreditation of learning acquired outside the formal education system. This was later formalized as the Accreditation and Equivalency Program, the first of its kind in Asia. It is noteworthy that during its first year of operation, the NETC was able to serve 10,000 out-of-school youths who dropped out of school due to poverty and placed them in their proper grades. There were 22,000 who availed of this program in its second year of implementation.

The clientele still to be served is estimated at about 50,000 every year. In line with this, we intend to further expand the Accreditation and Equivalency Program. Considering the present educational thrust in our country to improve the quality of educational output especially in the grade schools, I am happy to note the announcement of Minister Onofre D. Corpuz that the testing efforts of the National Educational Testing Center will be expanded to include the elementary grades.

We believe that testing is a very delicate and complicated matter which affects the very lives and futures of people. We would therefore want to bring the best minds of our country to cooperate in addressing these issues. For the sake of economy and efficiency, I would like to consider the possibility of integrating now the testing efforts of the country.

My friends, I am not a dyed-in the wool educator. I can only speak straight from the heart on basic convictions that I believe are primordial considerations in a world which we are all trying to make more human and humane. We are educating our youth for a society in the making that is forging new landmarks and challenging us with new dimensions and perspectives. Out concept of education reflects our concept of the good life, the good man, and the good society. Invariably, we seek a people-oriented social order.

Your role as noted world leaders in the field of assessment, evaluation and research is very vital and crucial. Your work and your conference relate deeply to the hopes of two-thirds of the world’s population who seek to benefit from expanding opportunities and services in the field of education. Beyond the simplicity or sophistication of your designs and assessment procedures are young promising futures from all walks of life which you have the privilege to shape and re-direct.

I once said that we have grieved at the death of many of our dreams. But the aspiration that all of you together have envisioned in this convention we can not allow to die.

And so, I close with my best wishes for the success of your convention, knowing that its success will be ours to share in.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library