PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION

That you honor my country and my people by choosing Manila as the first venue in Asia for your annual congress is a distinct privilege. Considering the fact that you are gathered here at this particular time is a significant flourish of this peculiar period in our history. As many of you are aware, we are engaged once more in re-examination, or to enlist the words of Thomas Jefferson in another context revision.

I was about to say that I have interrupted my presidential campaign in order to be with you today. But since the election that I am facing involves, in the final analysis, an assessment of my government’s performance, it is but proper that I should face an audience composed of expert evaluators, indeed, men and women with trained critical minds. The propensity to criticize now is, of course, a common facility, but the ability to criticize, that is a rare faculty. Everybody criticizes this. But can they criticize? That ability does not assume anything as sacrosanct: it is not impressed by authority when it has no basis or by tradition when it has merely become accustomed habit. Wisdom consists in knowing the difference, for in knowing the difference lies the failure and success or every human enterprise.

It has been said that the end of learning is not knowledge but action. I would venture that this would be the ultimate purpose of all education, provided, of course, that we do not fall into the popular misconception that action is opposed to thought, rather than a consequence of it. Still, for all the simplicity of the statement, this should provoke some arguments, for even now, there are a number of respectable scholars who ask whether a philosophy of education is possible. The reason, perhaps, is that philosophizing about education demands a certain precision that the subject may not be willing to yield. A philosophy of education invites a theory of values, and, above all, a theory of knowledge, so that when we consider education as the transmission of knowledge and values, we are confronted with various epistemologies. But in spite of the fact that societies with different ideologies necessarily impart different epistemologies through education, we are still able to compare one educational system against the other. How are we able to do this? By measuring objectives and their achievements, whatever the objectives may be, or, in short, by effectiveness? In this manner, we count the schools and the number of students pursuing different studies, and, however much we profess ourselves against materialism, by their contribution to the prosperity of society. We imply, by this very measure, that, say, the purposes of education in American democracy, as stated in 1938, which are, if I remember right, self-realization, human relationship, economic efficiency, and civic responsibility—are not merely so important as the rising GNP.

This seems to be the focal point of all educational systems, for self-realization, human relationships, economic efficiency, and civic responsibility, are abstractions concretely different from the American, the Russian, the South African, South American and for the Asian. We come once again to the matter of values. Perhaps, we can go deeper than this. The seventeenth century scholar, John Amos Comenius, coming across reports of human infants, having been reared by animals, developing life-patterns closer to that of animals, argued that the true task of education is to lend form to the human potentialities with which we are born, in order for us to be men. But, again these human potentialities depend on our thoughts concerning value, reality, and knowledge.

When, therefore, these thoughts on values, reality, and knowledge, are embodied in a system or form of education, which is transplanted from one society and culture to another, particularly as a consequence of conquest, we encounter the phenomenon we have learned to call cultural colonialism. Thus educators and scholars of the Third World speak of cultural imperialism, while a few would point to the West as the manipulator of “captive minds” in former colonies. The logical conclusion is that to have an education is to acquire a western or westernized view of reality, which may or may not be effective in the Third World country that one lives in.

I am not sufficiently expert to say whether this is true of science and technology, is part of the modernizing of traditional societies, it may also be necessary condition of cultural colonialism.

These thoughts come to my mind in our reflections on Philippine history. For in some ways, the last eight years of our national life have been a meditation of history and, necessarily, on colonialism. Before the colonial conquest, we had, of course, no educational system nationwide to speak of. It was the Spaniards for four hundred years and the Americans for less than a century which introduced education to the Filipinos—quite successfully, it must be added, for the Filipinos have since valued the acquisition of an education as the highest good. When you look around us, you see all kinds of families both affluent, middle class and lower class, are ready to sacrifice everything in order to send their children to school. The lower classes sell their last carabao, their last piece of land for their eldest son can go to college. We should now correct the impression that the Americans were more serious about educating the natives than the Spaniards; the latter were simply inept, or rather they were merely following a colonial policy. But not so inept as not to produce the likes of say, Rizal, the great Malayan, the man who wrote those books that established a moral basis for our great revolution of 1869. And Mabini, Luna. General Luna, whose brother the painter became recognized as the greatest painter from Asia and the Far East exposition of 1870. American education can count more, considerably more exemplars. Educators, scholars, writers, painters, sculptors, and architects are recognized by the western world. However, let us note that it was the rebellion of Rizal, Mabini, Luna, Lopez, Jaena, and Del Pilar which made them educated Filipinos.

This statement needs elucidation. Colonial education imparted such values as discipline, hard work, punctuality, and a regard for truth. But in the social context, to be disciplined was to be like a Spaniard and to be punctual was to be punctual as an American. There was no sense that this native was a disciplined Filipino and that one was a punctual Filipino, rather than “being like” his colonial master. You would call this “a loss of identity” through education, which is terrible for the individual and disastrous for the nation.

I say this without denigrating all the skills and facilities that we have acquired through the educational system of our recent colonial past. I say this with objectivity and without bitterness. But it does appear that the skills, the facilities and the institutions were exercised and enjoyed without that consciousness which makes a man truly free, and if freedom is also a value in education—and we know it is—colonial education simply produced more efficient, more knowledgeable, shall we call them, slaves.

We have not the time to go into the question of whether it was society which influenced the education or the other way around. We can say, however, that in the interaction between society and the educational system, there was established in the Philippines an essentially feudal society maintained by an oligarchy in which democratic thoughts and institutions were not only the class privilege of only a few but also the means for its perpetuation of the elite.

Through wealth and the power that it commanded—and the education that it could buy—a small group of Filipinos colonized the rest of their countrymen. This small group, this oligarchic class, was strengthened by the approval of richer nations for their “democratic beliefs,” in spite of the puzzling fact that in a country with so many democratically-oriented and educated citizens, the society was immersed in poverty, ignorance, and disease. No one looked into the structure until crisis after crisis occurred and till finally the great crisis exploded and threatened the very existence of our Republic.

It was only through the exercise of political will that we were able to save ourselves from being victims of our—to use the word, advisedly—education.

We arrive at education therefore, as a “phychological event” in the life of an individual and the life of a people, the colonial fact inexorably characterizes the education of a population parenthetically. I might add that the legal profession is somewhat free of this influence, for the lawyer knows he cannot automatically practise his profession in another country. Let us recall too that it was Mabini, a lawyer, who became the “brains” of the Philippine revolution. But take the doctor, the nurse, even the social scientist—the native anthropologist unconscious that he is the continuing subject of his study—imbibes alien values, except that he is not alien to them but to his own people. Somehow, in the course of colonial education, the colonized mind accepts the notion that it is the other country—not his own—which offers fuller rewards for his long years of study.

The social consequences are immeasurable. There, in that psychological conditioning, one may trace the roots of political atomism, the seeds of national alienation. Western thinkers would blame tribalism, they would say that decades of tutelage have not united the tribes, when, in another sense, education has, in fact, subdivided the race and maintain the differences between tribes, and is it not after all the primary strategy of colonialism is to “divide and conquer?”

It should come as no surprise to you, therefore, that our reformation of the Philippine educational system would be focused on access, on the one hand, and content, on the other. We are in the process of redefining our values, rediscovering and claiming ourselves, and that re-orientation is a general and all-embracing process with the educational system as the core and the center. So far, we have made structural changes in the system, notable among which is the national educational testing center, whose services we have decided to expand. But this, along with the democratization of admissions in the university of the Philippines, is but a first step in instituting a Filipino education for Filipinos.

Lest anyone regard this as (merely) chauvinistic, let it be just pointed out that the social, economic, political, and cultural achievements of the last eight years were made possible by the accepted proposition that we, Filipinos, were making sacrifices not for everybody else but for each other and for one another. Nationalism in action, in other words. Necessarily, there was opposition to our having discarded “democratic” but properly translated, alien values for the national endeavor. But the record is clear. What has been done in eight years had not been done in the previous twenty-two years of exciting and freewheeling democracy of the few or for that matter for the many centuries before that.

Now that we have lifted martial law and called for elections, the same so-called democratic voices are heard once again and re-echoed in their favorite forums, the foreign media, which for most of our lives have been our education about the world and ourselves. The media are, indeed an educational problem with all of us—as they are, I think, with each and everyone of you. Fallacies which cannot pass an elementary class in logic, unsupported assertions and fabricated facts which will outrace a history teacher, become testaments to the truth when printed in media. It has been said that the amount of book-reading in a society is inversely proportional to the gullibility about media, but would depend on the quality of book-reading. Most bestsellers—certainly not all—and media are one and the same in their miniscule contribution to the knowledge and understanding about the world we live in.

But of course, we know that media are most valuable—and, indeed, generally function honestly,—in the societies that sustain them. However, they are not so fastidious and sensitive about other societies especially the society of the Third World. This is probably more of a cultural fact than a result of malice, except that we tend to be more malicious about societies and cultures alien to ours. The intellectual level and integrity of media is an educational concern of all humanity, of all society, most particularly, of course, of the Third World society, where the masses have yet to have access to books. And their only source of information is the media. No professional would use the method of media of arriving at the truths of his profession, but for most of us, it is not the method but the arresting phrase, the headline, the exciting distortion, the glittering generality, the exaggeration which makes media most appealing. Indeed, education for media is, I think, another topic for educational assessment. I think you should take into account such a study in your present convention. For certainly, we can neither dismiss nor ignore this modern phenomenon, this powerful means of influencing the ordinary mind, the popular mind.

Media have learned to make news rather than merely report news, “celebrities” or persons known for their well-knownness, ultimately present us with facts that we cannot and do not verify that we do not understand, but they are accepted for facts because they come from celebrities and they come from the welfare-media. The nightmare of educators is a media-educated population and that nightmare is occurring right now in the Third World as well as in the Western World.

Imagine the nightmare of the political leader, particularly that of a Third World country, balancing the actual capacity of a nation against the expectations of a people prodded by a kibitzing mischievous media. I have no quarrel about media militancy over cruelties of some governments committed against their people. I support human rights. We support the sensibility about individual rights that are enshrined in our respective Constitution. But I am most disturbed as many Third World leaders are disturbed, about facile assertions that things should be economically better in societies which cannot develop to the point of exploiting its people. Economists know the difficulties—and impossibilities—but media, most of the time, disguise dreams as probabilities and fanciful wishes as tangible objects. And worst of all, the people in foreign media are not as belligerent to their societies as they are those in a Third World. And thus suggesting that they come to the Third World countries not as objective observers but superior judges of our civilization.

Who elected them? To whom are they responsible?

These questions are being asked not just by the Third World countries.

They are asked in the western countries. Private powers and private authority without responsibility to anyone is irresponsibility of the highest degree.

I am reminded of Plato’s proposal in the Republic of taking children out of the corrupt society in which they were born and educating them in another place in the ways of the ideal society. Education would include expurgated literature; I imagine Plato had in mind the media of his own day.

Now that ideal society has been mentioned, we arrive at the crux of our political education. It is true, of course, that our political contentions are couched in rhetoric which unrealistically suggests that the antagonists can bring about the ideal society. In this manner, peoples are aroused and disappointed. There is a need, therefore of imbuing educational values with a deep sense of realism, which incidentally, does not negate a sense of idealism; the only thing to guard against is dogma, intolerance the final word on everything on earth. A keen appreciation of limits and possibilities, notably in collective life must be the primary mission of modern education, for the lack of appreciation is at the bottom of our social discontents. The specific consequences are the difficulties thrown in the way of the democratization of wealth. As we have learned, distribution is obstructed by the fact that the wealthy would not have less while the poor had need of more; surely, any reasonable man can understand why the cult or abundance has to give way to the demand for the alleviation of the poor. But society, it seems has yet to learn to be reasonable. This fundamental difficulty—a phychological obsession with consumption—also holds the answer to the question of the restructuring the international economic order. Materialism has made some countries prosper and most countries remain in poverty.

And so it is that we, the whole of humanity, are now at the threshold of crisis graver than we have ever known before. It seems that the entirety of education in another age has not prepared us collectively for this current crisis. Do we have time for a quick study, do we have time for an accelerated education? Do you have time to objectively, dispassionately determine the options, and alternatives that are available to us? Do we have time in the resources for the confrontation with this unprecedented situation? I leave that question to you while I go back to my people in search of their own particular judgment on me.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library