Labor Day Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines

On every Labor Day, since I assumed the presidency in 1966, I have not broken my commitment to you—to the working class. Some of my advisors say that I am the only President in the free world who faces the workers every Labor Day to listen and respond to their grievances. They say I no longer need to face Labor Day, especially when the livelihood of the whole world is difficult and many are losing their jobs. In America, more than ten million are unemployed. In Western Europe, sixteen million. In the Philippines, more than one hundred thousand in 1981.

In effect they want me to be a fair weather President. No, my friends, it is especially during times of great adversity that the workers need their President to strenthen their faith in themselves and in their country. The courage to face adversity and to master it is the hallmark of character, whether of men or of nations.

As a matter of fact, today, being the anniversary of my marriage, I should have devoted all my time to my spouse. A wedding anniversary is an opportunity to atone for sins and make up for shortcomings within a year. As a matter of fact, I haven't wronged the First Lady despite what some gossips say. I don't know about you labor leaders, I heard that many of you enjoy forbidden pleasures. Since the First Lady is beautiful, just looking at her is enough to make my young heart happy.

I also feel that any public official must regularly meet with his constituents and address those issues which affect them, squarely, candidly and in their presence. It is important for all leaders of the country to account for their programs and policies. This is also something that Mrs. Marcos follows. On Tuesday, Mrs. Marcos called me from Kenya and said she was coming home. I said I was truly sad that she wasn't here but I understand that she needs to rest even for a moment after many things I had entrusted to her in the countries she visited. You know that, the First Lady works about 15-18 hours here and doesn't charge overtime pay so I'm already giving her vacation leave. But as she said when she called on Tuesday, she needs to come home now so she can catch the Labor Day celebration. That's why we are here now, my wife and I, paying tribute and greeting you all. Long live the Filipino worker!

All these years, I have joined you in the celebration of Labor Day and all these years, these annual meetings have been marked by friendship and candor. I recall those years when almost annually, during Labor Day, we have decreed increases in the wages or in the allowances of workers. We have decreed additional wages at least eleven times during the past ten years. Earlier, Brother Dinglasan read the manifesto of the workers, I heard him mention again the possibility of a wage increase. If it is necessary for the wages of our workers to increase, that Marcos sign a decree, I would have done it a long time ago. But you know and I also know that now, more than in the past, we need a thorough and careful study of any policy with implications for the welfare of the whole country.

There is no question that the world is now going through some very difficult times. Our principal trading partners are in recession, unemployment is rife everywhere in both rich and poor nations, pockets of political tension characterize the global scene and we still have to resolve some of the nagging problems that accompany national development. The effects of these external forces find manifestation in slower growth, fewer jobs, business reverses that aggravate our growing pains. It seems to me that we are now witnessing a major transition in human history, one which I hope will eventually result in a flowering of mankind’s potential and fulfillment of most of his dreams.

Meanwhile the ordinary worker, the man on the street, does not have to be told of the difficult times. He comes to grips with it daily. Everytime his wife goes to market, everytime he rides a bus, when he pays his children’s school fees, when he pays his electric and water bills, he knows that times indeed are difficult. Ang yet through prudent economic management, we have averted the worst and mitigated adversity by bringing down the rate of inflation from a peak of 22% in 1980 to only 11 per cent at this time. Inflation is the most notorious enemy of the workers and we have held the enemy at bay. That is not a mean achievement when we know that there are many countries where the inflation rate is several hundred per cent.

During times like this a blanket approach in wage policy will endanger many thousands of jobs. We appeal to all firms to hold on to their work force and preserve jobs and incomes until better times. When the world is falling around you that is the time when you most need the anchor of a secure job. But workers must also cooperate

I have followed the labor scene very closely. I know for instance that compared to the 1981 totals, the past eight months have seen fewer strikes. You will note, of course that the past eight months refer to the period during which we have seen in effect Batas Pambansa 130. What is significant about the past eight months is that while there have been fewer strikes during this period, these strikes appear to have been longer in duration and involved more workers resulting in more manhours lost than in the entire year of 1981. These statistics alarm me and they should alarm you too because they come at a time when we can least afford it. Some businessmen I know say, Mr. President, why don’t we revive the old strike ban? Why don’t we decree a moratorium on strikes? My position is that while this may be desirable in the short-run, normalization requires that we resolve our problems without resorting to extraordinary solutions. Government seeks among others the promotion of mutual agreements between the industrial partners with its intervention limited to the provision of facilities or opportunities for threshing out difficulties. This is a policy clearly spelled out in Batas Pambansa 130 and the Cabinet Bill 49 and other related legislative proposals which the Batasan hopes to resolve in a special session starting May 19.

These proposals do not immediately make like any easier for the ordinary worker. He may therefore, as many of you have done, strike for greater economic benefits. In these difficult times, of course, it isn’t just the workers who are hard-press. During recessionary periods, business would have its own problems too. Because both partners perceive that they are fighting for survival, the resulting conflict becomes bitter, protracted and in some cases, violent. The hostilities are exacerbated and there eventually develops a no-win situation with not only business or labor suffering but the national community as well. The only point I am trying to make here is that as we go through a trying period in our life as a nation, can we close ranks and attempt a reconciliation instead of blaming each other for our difficulties? I am saying that where business perceives labor as simply being difficult by refusing to recognize its inability to respond to certain demands, it may in fact be losing sight of the fact that labor is essentially reacting to environmental pressures. Similarly, when labor fails to make any headway it its demands, it may not be that management is simply being intransigent; it may also be reacting to an environment which does not allow it to be as generous as we hope it would ordinarily want to be. We assume good faith here on the part of both sectors which some people may discount. But we would always assume absence of malice, under these circumstances.

At this point, I wish to commend for your consideration the possibility of setting-up social contracts—or social compacts, if you will, that may serve as mutual terms of reference during this crisis period. You know of course that nations sign treaties of amity, peace and understanding to govern their relationships. Might we not undertake the same between labor and management, outside of the usual posturing that accompany collective bargaining? Might we not come to mutually agreed guidelines such that once a certain threshold is reached, whether this be a favorable or unfavorable threshold, then both parties would undertake to do for the other what might be necessary for their mutual survival? I am particularly interested in seeing these kinds of agreements forged in the so-called endangered or distressed industries and I direct the Ministry of Labor and Employment to make available all the facilities and resources at its command to ensure that the forum for reaching such a social compact is made available to labor and management.

I put the greatest possible faith in the power of democratic dialogue. And yet this is possible only when the broad parameters of debate are previously agreed upon. For example, all parties must believe in the Constitution and in the rule of law. Where some elements reject the Constitution and actually harbor conspirational designs against the state, there can be no meaningful dialogue.

We know that there are elements in the labor management who advocate the use of violence and defiance of law, who seek to turn collective bargaining into a bloody civil war, who utilize just grievances as a weapon to destroy the very fabric of law and society. To them we say; We are not intimidated by you; you want to squeeze the sweat and tears of the poor to stab the heart of the Philippine state. You cannot deceive the workers and the government. I will hold you accountable for your deceptions.

I was listening to Brother Dinglasan earlier. Acting TUCP President Dinglasan said that our theme now is Unite or Perish. I believe in that. I know the problems facing the labor movement today. Unity is truly needed. I would also like to offer you a theme that I think is appropriate for all of us, not just labor, management or the government. I think you need to consider that we are all in this together, together towards tomorrow, as they say. Together for the future. A future that will be beautiful and bright or sad and dark based on our unity and cooperation. And as a pledge or proof of the government's commitment to promoting the general welfare, let me state the following:

As I said earlier, Cabinet Bill 49, which seeks to clarify the provisions of National Law 130, is now in the hands of the National Assembly. I reiterate, before you, that I will do everything in my power to pass this Cabinet Bill into law as soon as possible. I expect your active participation in the debates and public hearings that I have called to make the public discussion of this proposal free, broad and complete. Let me also announce here the increase in benefits under the SSS and Employees Compensation Commission. Before you, let me reaffirm the 20% increase in pensions for retired workers in the SSS and the 20% increase in ECC for death and disability benefits for those injured or dying while serving whether in government or the private sector.

To minimize deaths or disabilities resulting from construction accidents, I also direct the Minister of Labor to revise existing safety regulations under the Labor Code. Specifically, I would like to see improvements in construction practices and technology including the prohibition of the use of wood and bamboo scaffoldings beyond a certain height, to be determined after appropriate study.

I also inform you that we will increase the benefits for deceased workers in the sugar industry. This will come from the P2 social amelioration fund collected on each picul of sugar. To this end, I direct MOLE and Philsucom to organize the rules regarding this additional benefit. Likewise, we are setting additional funeral benefits for Filipino sailors coming from the Welfare Fund for Seamen.

Let me likewise request the Central Bank of the Philippines to look into the possibility of expanding the loan facility of Republic Planters’ Bank for rural workers association, from the present P20M to P100 million.

I also direct that the secretariat of the KKK, under the leadership of the First Lady, coordinate with the Ministry of Labor and Employment, including representatives of the unions here in the Philippines, on how workers can more actively participate in the KKK and how labor unions can be given priority in KKK loans. I expect a report on this within the next thirty days.

I also direct Minister Ople, as Chairman of the National Manpower and Youth Council, to ensure that of the $40 million dollar loan from the World Bank, workers who have lost their jobs due to the current economic crisis are given priority in government assistance through vocational training and skills upgrading. This is also in line with giving these trainees priority in job opportunities abroad.

I’d also like to direct Minister Placido Mapa and Minister Ople to pursue our negotiations with the Saudi Arabia Development for a concessional loan of $110 million for the purpose of training our Muslim brothers for productive employment.

I direct GSIS Manager Roman Cruz and SSS Manager Gilberto Teodoro to study the feasibility of establishing a sports and recreation complex for workers in an area near Manila, so that our countrymen who want to spend time on Saturdays and Sundays will no longer bathe in Manila Bay.

I would also like to direct Ministers of Education and Labor and the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission to work out a system for identifying deserving workers who may be granted baccalaureat degrees or civil service eligibilities on an equivalency basis and to receive on a continuing basis applications or recommendations relative to workers.

In your presence, let me also sign the directives:

– To the Minister of National Defense, to constitute a task force to clear meaningful spaces for subsistence fishermen in the Laguna Lake and to immediately remove all illegal fish pens in that area. To the Director of the Bureau of Rural Workers to extend all possible assistance to the lakeshore fishermen and their families.

– To the Philippine Coconut Authority and the UNICOM, to study the setting up of a coconut workers’ amelioration fund from the proceeds of the coconut levy.

– To the Minister of Labor and the Minister of Social Services to set up a joint program for the families of overseas workers with financial assistance of P1 million from the Welfare Fund.

I would also like to endorse to the Batasang Pambansa ILO Conventions 129, 135, 142 and 143 for possible ratification and the consequent passage of enabling legislations.

Convention 129 provides a system of labor inspection in agricultural undertakings to secure the enforcement of legal provisions pertaining to the conditions of work and protection of workers.

Convention 135 provides protection of workers against acts of anti-union discrimination in respect to their employment particularly against acts prejudicial to them including dismissal.

Convention 142 provides for the development and adoption of a comprehensive and coordinated program and policies for vocational training for employment.

Convention 143 provides for the adoption of measures against organizers of illicit movements of migrants for employment.

I would also like to sign in your presence an Executive Order that seeks to further rationalize existing structures in the Ministry of Labor and Employment so that the delivery of services particularly to its labor clientele may be more efficient and effective.

Among the features of this reorganization—restructuring is the integration of all overseas employment agencies into one organization. We shall now have an Overseas Employment Administration where a worker can go to for any and all questions about overseas employment.

We are also upgrading the positions of conciliators and med-arbitrators so that you may have more skilled and better qualified people to take care of settling labor disputes.

We are creating a Bureau of Working Conditions that will look into the improvement and enforcement of labor and social legislations, particularly as regards conditions of work and wages.

We are strengthening the Rural Workers’ Office by elevating it into a bureau and giving it the necessary resources with which to pursue its employment and workers’ protection program for our countrymen in the rural areas.

In your presence, let me sign this Executive Order and the appointment of those people whom I shall hold responsible for seeing to it that you get the best possible service you deserve from your government.

May I, at this point, thank all of you, for once more giving me this opportunity to share this day with you. I hope that next year, we shall meet under more favorable world conditions and therefore the problems that we face today will have receded in both magnitude and significance. Again, happy Labor Day and long live you all.

# # #

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.