Notes for speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Proclamation Rally

[Delivered on May 4, 1981]

1. Once more we shall seek the mandate of the Filipino people. We have done this three times in the past– in 1965, in 1969, and in 1972 — and three times the Filipino people have resoundingly given their support. It is true that on the third occasion, in 1972 when I declared martial law, there were no elections. But the various referendums and plebiscites made their mandate very clear. It is true, of course, that there was opposition to martial law–but then there was opposition to us in 1965 and 1969 as well. But the minority — the opposition– is a fundamental fact of political life, especially in a democracy. What is important, however, is the prevalent will of the majority. For, indeed, today’s minority may be tomorrow’s majority. As to when and how– the answer lies in the will of the people. And so it is what whatever the outcome of this presidential election, the real winner will be the Filipino people!

2. This is a fact lost on those so-called opposition leaders who have abandoned the political minority in the country which is opposed to our leadership. They have relinquished their right to lead, now they can only follow the Nacionalista Party, which, I hope most sincerely, has been resurrected from the ashes of the past.

3. We all know it is of the past, as the Liberal Party is of the past and wisely no more–because most of us at one time or another belonged to either of these political parties. They were, we must say, indistinguishable from each other. Their platforms mouthed the same platitudes, both betrayed the same colonial mode of thinking, while one wagged nationalistic slogans. To be fair, they played their historic roles. Now they are all played out.

4. I am speaking of the historic record of both the Nacionalista and Liberal parties. In all the decades of their alternating leadership of our nation, they sanctioned the parity amendments, the onerous conditions of the Military Bases Agreement with the United States, obstructed the industrialization of the Philippine economy, and pursued a foreign policy which pretended that more than one-half of the world’s nations did not exist. It was our party, the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, a party born out of democratic revolution, which put an end to parity and established the condition once and for all that the military bases were on Filipino and not American soil. We all know–those of us who still remember–that the Nacionalista Party considered the sovereignty of our country a debatable point where the bases were concerned. Neither the Nacionalista or Liberal Party, either in program or performance,–not even in pretension–held up land reform as the key to the restructuring of Filipino society, indeed, as the focal point of social democracy. It remained for this leadership to eradicate this feudal curse in the life of our race.

5. Through the decades, the Nacionalista and Liberal parties stood as the unmistakable institutions of our colonial bondage. Our highest leaders listened respectfully to pro-consuls, even welcoming them as campaign and administration advisers. The irresponsible opposition– or, shall we say, the unaccredited opposition — continues this tradition. They beg America to help them to regain power– they want the United States to cut off military assistance to the Philippines—they ply American congressmen with condemnations against us– and consider this mendicancy a form of legitimate opposition. It is clear that they equate the interests of the Filipino people with their own colonial self-interests. If this is, then, the extent of their patriotism, why don’t they join Mr. Cabangbang’s statehood movement and thus be open about it? I find in Mr. Cabangbang more honesty than I find in these so-called leaders who cloak their betrayal with patriotic sentiments.

6. We are going to the people and tell them of the long history of their betrayal. But then it will be asked, “Why you, Ferdinand Marcos, you were part of these parties– you became president under one of these parties– you are equally guilty of their betrayal?” And I will say to them, “I was a captive–not a participant, I wanted to be president and I would never have been if I had revealed myself too rashly and too quickly. I waited until I could be in a position to pursue and realize my vision for our country. And so it was, when I became President, I made the first independent presidential act by refusing to send fighting troops to Vietnam. I started the machinery for renogiating the bases– until I succeeded in establishing our rightful sovereignty, so that now the United States is a tenant and not a possessor of our territory. In the end, when decades of dependence threatened chaos and destruction in our land, I used the colonial weapon of martial law and turned it into an instrument of liberation of the Filipino people. “Yes, I was in these political parties in the long period of betrayal but I was determined to survive and prevail in order to restore to our people the pride, the independence, and the glory of being Filipino!

7. The colonial and boisterous minority will go to the people and convince them that I am wrong. That is their right. They can say to the people that in eight years of martial law, Marcos has not turned the Philippines into a paradise–even if I did not promise paradise–although foreigners call our country a paradise–even if I had asked instead for heroic efforts, unity, and a determined, concerted movement to build a new life for our people. They will say that Marcos is the cause of high prices– as if Marcos owned the oilfields of the Middle East and the seven companies of the world which control the distribution of oil. But the Filipino people know better, they have better memories than the noisy minority. They remember that in eight years of martial law, there has been more economic growth, there has been more sensitiveness to injustice, there has been more hope and pride than in the twenty-six years of alternating Nacionalista and Liberal Party leadership. Indeed, the Filipino people have shed their Nacionalista and Liberal colors, theirs is now the color of the KBL–the color of achievement, pride, and hope. For the opposition, whether party or group, can only promise the past, but the KBL gives the present and offers the future to the Filipino people.

Note for the President: This will be followed by a recitation of the achievements–social, economic, etc.– to be found in the texts from Minister Tuvera & Yen Makabenta.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.