Philippine notes for speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Proclamation Rally

1. This will be the fourth time I approach the Filipino people in the coming election. They say they are already tired of me, according to our opponents. But there must be a reason why our people have embraced me three times – in 1965, in 1969, and in 1972 when we saved the entire nation from troublemakers who wanted to overthrow the government through martial law. Our opponents say there are those who oppose our methods. But that is the reality of true democracy. I did not get the vote of the entire nation in 1965 or 1969—there were also those who voted for the other party. However, the decision of the majority is what matters. No government has the full support of the people—no government in this world can say that. A minority—the dissenters—is needed, but through proper means, not through violence, but through reasoning with the people. This is what the leaders of the opposition have forgotten or are forgetting. Whatever the outcome of the coming election, the Filipino people will still triumph!

2. What are the parties opposing the Kilusang ng Bagong Lipunan (New Society Movement) today? We know their record—we know that their positions are not different—positions of the past. They represent yesterday—the KBL represents the present and the future, now and tomorrow.

3. Their platforms are colonial in mindset. In the twenty-six years that the Nacionalista and Liberal parties existed, they accepted the parity amendment to the Constitution, which gave the citizens of a foreign nation the right to seize the wealth of our country. They accepted the unfavorable conditions in our Military Bases Agreement with America. They hindered progress—industrialization—of our economy. They followed a foreign policy—or dealings with other countries—that pretended that half the world had no history. A colonial foreign policy. But our party, the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, was the one that stopped parity and raised the Philippine flag at the American military bases, because the ground they stand on is our land. Even though the times demanded it, the Nacionalista and Liberal parties did nothing to liberate millions of laborers and farmers from slavery through land reform. Sad—shameful—is the history of the Nacionalista and Liberal parties. As the youth say, “Kadiri to death” (Disgusting to death)!

3. They say they are patriotic, according to our opponents. If they are patriotic, why do they want foreigners—the Americans—to rule here? Even though the Americans are our friends, they have no right to rule in our country. But our opponents often beg the Americans to stop helping us so that they can overthrow Marcos and return them to power. Cabangbang is even more loyal to them, wanting us to become a state of America. This is what patriotism is now, according to the opposition—to auction off the Filipino race! Disgusting! Kadiri to death!

4. But this can be thrown back at me—”You, Marcos, weren’t you also part of the Liberal Party and then the Nacionalista Party? You were also a member of the Old Society and a deceiver of the people.” True, I was a member, but as a prisoner, not as an accomplice. I wanted to become president to stop their methods, but they ended me prematurely when I revealed my intention was not the time. I first became president and when they elected me, my first decision was not to send Filipino soldiers to fight and die in Vietnam. I began correcting the conflicts in the military bases and when we were placed in a situation of doubt, I used martial law to redeem our sovereignty. Yes, I was with the parties that trampled on the people, but I chose to succeed in order to restore the dignity, freedom, and courage of our race to all Filipinos! My membership with them was just a method because I was sure that when the time came, I would be able to fulfill my goal—my dream—to elevate the Filipino race again!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.