Proposed Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On meeting with Filipino Contract Workers in Saudi Arabia

I am pleased to convey to all Filipino workers currently serving here in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia the warm greetings and salutations of our countrymen. We are happy to meet and be with all of you on this occasion. With so many Filipinos gathered here, it almost doesn't feel like we've left our country, and it feels like we're just in Plaza Miranda. If I'm not mistaken, many of you I have already met at various meetings. We also know that many of you want to meet with us again to convey to our government the problems troubling Filipino workers here in Saudi Arabia and throughout the Middle East.

Although the main purpose of our trip to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries, we also want to know the condition of Filipino workers striving to earn a living here. Your government is concerned with nothing but the welfare of Filipino workers. I probably don't need to emphasize that you contribute greatly to our country, especially to our national economy. It is only right that the Philippine government defend the dignity and interests of Filipino workers wherever they are, at any time.

There are now over 150,000 Filipinos working in this kingdom, the largest concentration of Filipino workers in any part of the Middle East. This fact alone is indicative of the special character of the of the ties between Saudi Arabia and the Philippines. And the uniqueness of our relations with this country and her people underlies my mission at this time. It is a mission of friendship, whose main objective to make even stronger what for us is a vital international link. I perhaps need not emphasize the invaluable contribution of this kingdom to our nation, especially to our economic life. Much of the fuel that we require to sustain the momentum of our economic growth comes from Saudi Arabia. While we have been engaged in a massive program to lessen our nation’s dependence on imported energy sources, we cannot escape the reality that for the present and in the immediate future we would have to have access to foreign energy fuels. However, I must stress that these purely economic imperatives are not the only bases for our desire to maintain and further our friendly relations with the kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

More than four million Muslim Filipinos look to Saudi Arabia as the spiritual leader of Islam, which was introduced by Arab missionaries to our shores in the14th century. Were it not for the tragic accident of western colonialism and imperialism, our entire nation would perhaps have embraced the religion which teaches, among others, the brotherhood of all men.

In these modern times, our two nations are asserting a different type of brotherhood that is best expressed in our comradeship in the third world movement. As nations aspiring for the blessings of full development, the kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Philippines are united in the desire to liberate themselves from the chains of limited growth that has been imposed upon us. We are firm in our belief that only the world’ s developing peoples can truly extricate themselves from these impositions. We are firm in our belief that the world’s developing nations are confronted by common adversary and as such, our hope lies in strengthening mutually beneficial relations among ourselves. It is in this light that we must view the presence of thousands of Filipino workers in this kingdom so distant from our land.

I would like to think of your work here as proof of the Philippines’ earnestness in pursuing the objective of third world brotherhood. While each of you may have travelled to this land for a variety personal reasons, you are in the process helping to build an industrialized society, whose dreams are not much different from our own. We too share the same aspirations. We too would like to benefit from industrial growth. And, in behalf of the Filipino people, I must express the appreciation of the entire nation to the thousands of Filipino workers stationed overseas. The foreign exchange generated by Filipino workers overseas has helped cushion to a substantial degree the adverse effects of recent economic dislocations that have bedeviled the world economy. Your contributions to the national economy have served to reinforce our people’s confidence that objective of development and economic growth is still within our reach and fully attainable.

It is because of the indispensable role that you, the Filipino overseas workers, play in our national economy that your government has been especially conscientious and vigilant in protecting your interests and safeguarding your welfare in addition to broadening our ties with host countries to overseas Filipino, labor. This policy was articulated as early as 1974 when the government took a positive step in encouraging overseas employment with the creation of the overseas Employment Development Board and the National Seamen Board. Six years later, this policy was pursued even further with the promulgation of Decree No. 1691 which amended certain provisions of our labor code. among others, it vested on the OEDB the authority to service and enter into recruitment agreements with foreign government ministries, agencies and entities. As the state placement agency, the OEDB began to function as the conduit for the hiring of Filipino workers by foreign government employers. However, there remains the need to safeguard the welfare of Filipino overseas workers at the jobsite as well as to market Filipino service packages abroad. It is for these same reasons that a Middle East Regional Center is being set up by your government, through the Ministry of Labor and employment, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Ministry of Trade and Industry, to open up new markets for Filipino skills and entrepreneurship. At present, we are coping with these demands through four labor attaches, two of whom are based in Jeddah, one in Kuwait and another in Iraq.

Nevertheless, your government still feels strongly that much more must be done to strengthen and institutionalize the presence of Filipino entrepreneurs and service workers in the Middle East. After a thorough review of the prevailing system of government support to Filipino overseas workers, we have found that the attache machinery has become inadequate in dealing with the demands of recent developments, especially in the area of servicing the needs and extending protection to the continuously growing pool of Filipino labor overseas. We expect these needs to become even more critical this year.

Current projections are that by 1982, the Philippines would have deployed more than a quarter of a million workers in various foreign destinations. Combined with our aggressive corporate manpower export strategy, the country expects to generate a total of three billion dollars from the activities of Filipino overseas workers like yourselves.

These projections are not the result of wishful thinking. The long-term development plans of many Middle Eastern countries, including the kingdom of Saudi Arabia, indicate that this area will continue to be a major livelihood source for Filipino overseas workers and contract entrepreneurs. From consultations with officials of the various Middle East Governments. We have found that the bulk of contracting work will still be in Saudi Arabia, which seems every bit determined to pursue its program of laying the foundations for a modern, industrialized society. We have been informed that the Saudi government’s 1980-1985 development plan has set aside a total expenditure amounting to around 235 billion dollars, with an additional 50,000 million dollars to cover inflationary adjustments. Investments in infrastructure will constitute a full 30 percent of total state expenditures. For Filipino overseas workers. These hefty outlays should mean that the Middle East, particularly the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, will continue to be a bright prospect for for livelihood in the near future.

The Philippine government, however hopeful it may be of such favorable prospects, has not been blind to the difficulties which a number of our compatriots have been experiencing. We know only too well that our program for the overseas employment of Filipino workers has been confronted by a wide range of problems. We fully realize that some Filipino workers have been victims of substandard accommodation facilities, contract violations, unfavorable working conditions, discrimination in pay scale relative to other expatriate workers as well as the continuing inability of Filipino contractors to successfully compete with multinational contractors for Saudi Arabian projects.

We have also learned that some groups opposing our government are exploiting these problems to recruit members for their movement here in Saudi Arabia. Although only a few of our countrymen are deceived by them, we are worried that if these groups continue their nefarious activities, our program to help Filipino workers working abroad will be endangered. Perhaps, we don't need to explain further that the government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia follows a strict policy regarding troublemakers. Filipino workers are currently highly regarded in this area because of your diligence and efficiency in work. But if Filipino workers start trouble and unrest in society, expect the Saudi Arabian government itself to take steps to stop this movement. To our countrymen with different beliefs, we appeal that they do not endanger the livelihood of thousands of Filipino workers serving here in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. For them and their families left behind in our country, the issue of livelihood recognizes no ideology.

Nevertheless, we recognize only too well the seriousness of the problems now confronting Filipino workers, not only here in Saudi Arabia but in other countries as well. In response to these conditions the Philippine government, in coordination with the officials of the concerned foreign government, is initiating several measures which are aimed at resolving problems and difficulties. In this area, for instance, we are proposing that a joint team of Saudi Arabian and Filipino economic planners conduct a survey of manpower and service requirements of the development plans of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This team will determine how surplus manpower in the Philippines can be most efficiently deployed in an envisioned employment program involving Saudi Arabia. As in other similar undertakings, it will be pursued on the basis of mutual benefit and respect.

We also intend to promote bilateral labor relations between the kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the republic of the Philippines through protocol agreements and organized exchanges between our two countries. From these protocol agreements we expect to formulate and finalize the general agenda for cooperation in the field of labor, employment and manpower development between Saudi Arabia and the Philippines. A principal item in these agreement will be the protection and the enhancement of the welfare of Filipino overseas workers. Like ourselves, the government of Saudi Arabia is just as concerned about alleviating the difficulties and problems faced by some of our workers. With the adoption of these agreements, we shall have established the mechanism that will facilitate the safeguarding of the rights of our workers, and the assurance for their continued and beneficial employment overseas.

Towards this direction, the establishment of the Philippine Labor Center in Jeddah is a first and important step. Your government plans to put up similar centers in other areas in the middle east where there are substantial concentrations of Filipino workers, such as the industrial cities of Riyadh and Dubai. These centers will function on a semi-government basis, tasked with the primary mission of extending protection to Filipino overseas workers against exploitation and injustices that may be committed against them by foreign employers. The absence of such a mechanism in the past partially explains the inability of the Philippine government as well as the governments of the host countries to fully safeguard the welfare of our overseas workers. Since these centers will coordinate their activities with the relevant agencies of the host governments, they are also expected to upgrade our diplomatic presence in the middle east and promote bilateral or protocol agreements trade, investment, contracting and employment.

We have also received a number of complaints regarding the prevailing methods of salary remittances. We would like to assure all of you that our government is currently finalizing a package of financial incentives designed to maximize the income-generating capabilities of Filipino overseas workers in this area.

Your government and the entire Filipino people recognize the struggles of Filipino workers working abroad. Our countrymen are proud of the skills of Filipino workers like you. The reputation you have created in places like Saudi Arabia is also a result of your good example, which gives hope to other Filipino workers to improve their lives. The entire Filipino nation also recognizes the sacrifices you make for the good of your families and the entire country. You are model citizens; Filipinos who are willing to work hard and sweat to achieve a brighter future for our country. On behalf of the entire Filipino people, we pay tribute to your efforts.

Long live the Filipino worker! Long live the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia! Long live the Philippines!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.