POPULATION GROWTH: A MATTER OF GRAVE CONCERN

BY PRESIDENT FERDINAND E. MARCOS

(Proposed speech at the inauguration of the Population Center Foundation Building, South Superhighway, June 11, 1974)

About two years ago, on April 21, 1972 to be precise, we gathered around these very same grounds to lay the cornerstone of this magnificent building. Today, we celebrate its completion and the start of the foundation’s population program. There is much to be proud of and thankful for. To those who have worked for the completion of this building, my congratulations. And to those who have assisted us, my sincere gratitude.

Rapid Population Growth Cancels Gains

On an occasion such as this, I feel it is appropriate if not necessary restate the vital issues that stem from the problems of growth and national development, the policies and the direction we must pursue to overcome the pressures and strains of a rapid population growth rate.

We cannot overemphasize the fact that our rapid population growth erodes the economic gains we have painstakingly worked for and earned. Attrition of our economic and social growth will continue unless effective and appropriate measures to control population growth are instituted and made an integral part of national planning and development.

The problem that faces us is the problem of inadequate resources coupled with the uncontrolled increase in the number of consumers of these resources. We can do either or all of three things first, improve technology; second, improve land utilization or, if possible, increase the land area; and third, decelerate population growth.

We are in fact doing all these things. Through technology we are improving the productivity of both agriculture and industry. Through more rational land policies, we intend to make better and more efficient use of our land. And of course through this foundation and the Population Commission we are engaged in a massive effort to arrest our population growth.

Social and Political Pressures

But it is not sufficient to say that population growth merely strains our economic growth. It is productive of other social and political pressures that threaten the social well-being of our people. It is for these reasons that I have always regarded our national population program with deep concern.

The Context of our Population Policy

However, in the pursuit of solutions to our population problems, I have always stressed that these problems should be perceived in the context of our own necessities, resources, culture and socio-political structure. Whatever may be said of population problems of other developing countries, particularly of developed countries may not always be true of our country. It is essential that we adopt strategies that are relevant to the traditions and ways of our people. This delicate and personal problem is deeply rooted in tradition and culture and requires measures that recognize and respect the beliefs and convictions of our people. Thus, we have and will continue to adopt a non-coercive policy. And I enjoin all concerned in our program, those in the government, private and religious sectors of our society to uphold and safeguard this fundamental policy. It is the Filipino way. I take this opportunity to dispel all fears, if there are any, that this program will in anyway enroach on the individual’s right of freedom of choice and self-determination.

Effective Integration

I have also pointed out that the approach to our population problem should be a total approach. An approach that considers all factors germane to it. Consequently, we must continue to integrate population and family planning into all our development programs: education, health, labor, community development, agriculture, welfare and above all in national planning. Only through a process of effective integration can we expect to achieve a sustained and comprehensive effort that will yield meaningful gains. The problem of population cannot be viewed in isolation of other problems. It is essentially related to development, to human development and all its facets.

The Role of the Private Sector

Corollary to this, no one institution alone or even government itself can provide sufficiently are effective measures. There must be the total involvement of everyone. And I am pleased to see the private sector take up this challenge. The Population Center Foundation, a private institution, is pledged to support a more vigorous and expanded participation of the private sector, it is precisely this type of cooperation and working relationship that government seeks of the private sector in its effort to attain national prosperity.

To Reach the Barrios

Finally, a reassessment of our performance shows quite clearly that we must redouble our efforts to increase the outreach of our family planning services. We must zero in on the youth and on young couples.

It seems that the conventional methods of providing family planning services must be augmented by more practical and effective delivery systems. Despite the fact that we have established 2,500 family planning clinics, I felt it was necessary to authorize through Presidential Decree 79 paramedics to provide the family planning services that have heretofore been furnished by doctors. The barrios must be reached. Since most of our doctors are found in urban centers we must field paramedics to the barrios where the need for these services is critical.

A simultaneous and equivalent effort to inform and educate our people is a sine qua non of effective family planning practice. Unless we enlighten and educate our people in the need and benefits of family planning, our efforts, in the main, will fall on barren ground.

A Grave Responsibility

These are the directions we must pursue with vigor and determination. The responsibility is grave and it rests on everyone. Again, I wish to congratulate the Population Center Foundation for its pioneering work in mobilizing the participation of the citizenry. I also wish to thank all those who helped us in one way or the other to make this foundation a reality. On my part, I shall match the foundation’s efforts to improve the quality of life of our people with equal concern and zeal.

Good day and thank you.

Source: National Library