Proposed Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the meeting with Filipino Professionals in Saudi

[Released on March 18, 1982]

Through the generosity and kindness of His Highness King Khaled and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, we are accorded this unique privilege of meeting in this ancient and fabled land thousands of miles away from home. Seeing Arabia for the first time is for us a unique and memorable experience, and this has been made all the more memorable by the experience of being welcomed by one’s own countrymen in this distant land.

Since our arrival in Riyadh _____ days ago, the First Lady and I and the members of our party have known nothing but warmth and affection from all of you. And our meeting today makes us almost think that we have never really left the Philippines. And we are truly deeply moved and grateful.

The warmth of your welcome is perhaps only surpassed by the lavish hospitality with which we have been received by the people and the officials of the Government of our host country. For this you and I are doubly indebted to the government and people of Saudi Arabia, for by receiving me as a representative of the Filipino people with so much kindness, Saudi Arabia actually honors you, our country and our people.

While I am certain that this spontaneous display of affection by our hosts springs from genuine feelings of friendship and affinity between our peoples, I am equally convinced that much of the goodwill that now exists between our governments and peoples has been generated and strengthened by your exemplary conduct and the high standards of service you have rendered in this country.

As the leader of our nation, it has been a constant source of pride for me to hear words of praise for the quality of your work, for your great skill and competence, for your diligence and industry, from both private individuals and official sources. Equally, it is a matter of great distress to us when we hear that a few of our workers soil this upright record, and we learn of violations on their part of the laws of their host country. Happily, during our brief stay, we have heard more of tribute, and less of complaint about your work. And I am proud to tell you that the highest praise has been reserved for you, the Filipino professionals, the doctors and nurses, the engineers and technicians, the managers and supervisors. By your competence and dedication, you have made us proud as Filipinos and in the process you have contributed immeasurably towards building the vast reservoir of goodwill and admiration that exists in the hearts of the people and leaders of Saudi Arabia. It is my hope that in the future you will continue to raise this image of the Filipino workers overseas through your exemplary work, for nothing finally — not even the visit of your president — can make real and strong the goodwill and understanding between our peoples as much as your high standard of professionalism, fidelity to your duties and the manner you live your own lives. Thus I have attached a special significance to this meeting with you because it provides me an opportunity to deliver in person this message of congratulations from our Government and our people.

In meeting with you today, I have also come to fulfill another important mission from our people and perform the most solemn obligation of the president to look after the welfare of every citizen no matter what his station in life and in any place he may be. In the case of Saudi Arabia, a personal assessment of the actual conditions of Filipino workers has become most appropriate and necessary since this country today employs about 150,000 Filipinos of varying skills, education and personal backgrounds, and several thousands more can be expected to seek employment here in the near future as the Saudi government continues to accelerate its development programs. By this I do not wish to imply in any way that the problems of Filipino workers in the many cities of this country have reached such alarming proportions that your president has felt compelled to make personal representations with our host government in behalf of the Filipino workers. On the contrary, I must express extreme gratification over the efforts of the government of Saudi Arabia to create the most favorable conditions for our workers whom they graciously acknowledge for their substantial contribution to the development of this country. Nevertheless, there have been quite a few cases of misunderstanding between employers and employees on matters relating to compensation, working conditions, accommodation and other terms of the work contracts.

To minimize and possibly eliminate the causes of misunderstanding and discontent on the part of both the workers and the employers, we have initiated several measures which we hope will be adopted soon. We will begin by looking closely into the development plans of Saudi Arabia with the view of determining the manpower requirements of the plans which could be appropriately filled by Filipino manpower in excess of our own domestic needs. We have proposed that the study be conducted soon by a team of Filipino and Saudi Arabian experts.

Secondly, we have drafted several protocols on labor relations between our two countries covering the broad field of labor, employment and manpower development as well as employer-employee relations to assure faithful compliance with the terms of employment on the part of both parties for their mutual protection.

Thirdly, we shall maintain a stronger presence in the Middle East through the establishment of a Middle East Labor Center which will be based in Jeddah to coordinate the activities of labor attaches who will be posted in key cities in Saudi Arabia and other Middle East countries. The labor center will not only help Filipino contractors secure contracts and broaden the opportunities for employment of more Filipinos, but even more importantly it shall assume the principal responsibility for promoting and protecting the interests of Filipino workers in the Middle East.

All these measures I am sure will have the full endorsement and support of the Saudi Arabian government which is of one mind with us on matters affecting the welfare and interests of Filipino workers in this country. Saudi Arabia realizes as much as we do that the creation of a wholesome atmosphere for Filipinos to do their work unhampered by problems and difficulties is a basic requisite for the smooth implementation of its development program and the maintenance and expansion of mutually advantageous relations in the area of employment and labor exchange.

Let me assure you that your government will never tolerate having anyone among its citizens deprived of any part of his just wage and compensation. I have therefore given strict instructions to the Ministry of Labor to closely scrutinize every contract entered into by Filipinos so that the terms of employment are clear and specific on every point and thus not subject to misinterpretation. I have also directed the Ministry of Labor as well as the Ministry of Justice to act with dispatch on complaints about irregularities and violations of contract on the part of Filipino recruitment agencies. We will not only cancel the licenses of those found guilty of such irregularities but we will also apply the full force of the law on those involved in fraudulent labor transactions.

I am determined to do all these and anything that would protect the interests of all Filipino workers overseas because I know the sacrifice you have had to pay in your quest for professional and material advancement. You have left your homes, your families and your loved ones in order to secure for them and for yourselves a more comfortable existence in the future. You have borne with patience the hardship of your work and you continue to suffer in silence the loneliness of separation from your loved ones in the hope that some day soon you may be reunited, assured of a brighter future. It is but just that such sacrifices and your labors, of course, should be compensated in full measure. And our government and I personally will see to it that you receive what is due to each of you.

As we strive to secure and strengthen the various arrangements for your overseas employment, we in turn hope that you will ever strive to uphold and protect the good name of our people in the course of your service both in turns of competence in your work and in your deportment and conduct as guests in a foreign land. For all of you, Saudi Arabia today is a land of opportunity and hope; it will continue to be so to the extent that you all keep faith with her laws and her traditions and give the best of service that you can give in your line of work.

It will perhaps be of consolation to you to know that your many sacrifices and your labors are not only appreciated; they have also begun to bear fruit in our homeland. The signs are everywhere, in our cities and the countrysides. They come in varying forms: the new passenger jeepneys being operated or driven by members of your families, the new homes being built everywhere, the healthy faces of your children, your brothers and sisters who can now pursue higher education in our universities and colleges, and the many little luxuries every member of your family can now enjoy–all these they now have because of you. And I bear to you their message of gratitude and their assurances of their enduring love and affection.

They have missed you in a very personal way. And your country has also missed your services. But as with the members of your family, your leaders feel reassured by the thought that this is but a temporary phase in your lives and the life of the nation.

We began to seriously pursue the policy of marketing our surplus labor overseas at a time when we were in the midst of serious economic dislocations brought about by the oil crisis and a severe world recession. At the same time, Saudi Arabia and other oil-rich nations started their plans for modernization. We were quite fortunate to have been among the first countries tapped by our friends in the Middle East to supply the expertise and manpower that they required for their development programs.

But any realistic appraisal of the development plans of Saudi Arabia and other Middle East countries inevitably leads to the conclusion that demand for foreign workers will soon come to an end. In the near future we foresee the further expansion of demand for foreign workers, but it will eventually taper off. But before that happens we should be prepared.

So even as we pledge to help in the development of friendly countries like Saudi Arabia through the continued supply of the expertise and manpower that they need, we are already laying the groundwork for the future when Philippine labor may no longer be required by other countries.

We are now undertaking several programs that will ensure the growth and development of our country, among which I will mention but two: the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran, the National Livelihood Program which is designed to create employment opportunities particularly in depressed communities and the 11 major industrial projects which should launch us on the road to industrialization. I need not bore you with the details regarding these projects, but let me say however that all these projects have been conceived to assure every Filipino, including those like you who had been compelled by circumstances to seek their fortune overseas, a decent and progressive life.

Through these programs, we hope to cushion ourselves against any adverse developments that may affect our economy and nation in the future and require unusual measures such as we had to undertake in recent years.

We will consider these programs to be a success only when the time comes when no Filipino will feel forced to seek his fortune in a foreign land.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.