Radio-TV Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines

Second Address to the Nation Under Martial Law

My countrymen, today marks the thirtieth day since the proclamation of martial law. By virtue of that decision, history has changed, perhaps not only in our country, the Philippines, but throughout East Asia.

First of all, we have averted a clear danger to our Republic, but beyond that, and more importantly, we have raised the flag of a new society that, day by day, is building a strong foundation for the future of democracy in our country.

So now, comrades, the whole world is perhaps witnessing a rebirth here in the Philippines. They see the Filipino people uniting today in building a new society, a society that is prosperous, peaceful, and just.

Perhaps, in the eyes of foreigners, a miracle is happening in the Philippines. Finally, Filipinos have discovered social and national discipline that they have long sought but could not find. At first glance, this may be attributed solely to martial law, but the truth is that this trait is rooted in the heart and conscience of every Filipino. What martial law and your humble servant have addressed is to revive that root and help liberate the qualities of the Filipino race.

My countrymen, I think it is very appropriate that on this day, the thirtieth day of martial law, we gather here to witness the signing of an important document. On this occasion, we will declare the emancipation of the Filipino farmer.

We will sign the document transferring the lands cultivated from the hands of landowners or proprietors to the hands of the farmers who till them. This means that we have dedicated the full power of martial law to the emancipation and freedom of the farmers, who constitute the majority of our people. It can be said that there is only one principle of the New Society: prioritize the welfare of the nation, the welfare of the small and ordinary citizens.

And this is the principle that is being entrusted to the entire government.

I have written in my own handwriting this document, Presidential Decree No. 27, decreeing the emancipation of tenants from the bondage to the land they till. And I read: “Inasmuch as the old concept of land ownership by a few has spawned valid and legitimate grievances that gave rise to violent conflict and social tension, the redress of such legitimate grievances being one of the fundamental objectives of the New Society; since reformation must start, as a foundation, with the land and with the emancipation of the tiller of that land from his bondage, now, therefore, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21st, 1972 and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972 as amended, do hereby decree and order, henceforth, from this day on October 21st, 1972, the emancipation of tenant-farmers of the Philippines.”

This shall apply to farmer-tenants of private agricultural lands, the principal product of which is rice and corn under sharecrop or lease tenancy all over the ‘Philippines. They shall be deemed the owners of their land and each shall be entitled to a family-size farm of five hectares.

This particular document further establishes the mechanism and the instrument by which such ownership is transferred to the tenant-owner. The tenant-farmer in a landed estate, as well as the tenant farmer in a piece of land which may not be considered a landed estate, are covered by this proclamation. Landowners may retain seven hectares only of their land and on condition that they themselves till or cultivate it.

What will be the consideration for the transfer of ownership? The consideration for the transfer of ownership or the cause of such transfer will be the rent of which the land-owner is entitled under leasehold for 15 years, nothing more. In short, the government will be kept out of this transaction, and this will be a transaction between the tenant and the landowner, a transaction to transfer Ownership. Payment shall be guaranteed by a cooperative, and at the same time, be further guaranteed by the government but only with stocks in government-owned or controlled corporations. In order, however, that the landowner may not in turn become displaced in his own country, he shall be extended all forms of relief and assistance. This shall take the form of credit. In order that he may move into industry, taking advantage of his capability and talent in management, we shall furnish him all available opportunities for purchasing public land, undeveloped but alienable and disposable. We shall indicate to landowners the nature of the productive activities which the government and the state will encourage for them. The tenant in turn must organize cooperatives, for it is indeed clear that no matter how much land we may transfer to the tenants, if they do not band together and organize themselves into cooperatives such transfer will merely be temporary and the land may ultimately end in the hands of acquisitive individuals.

Therefore, it is also prohibited that this land be transferred except by hereditary succession. It is also made a condition that government shall now participate actively in the organization of cooperatives. By virtue of this, hereby activate the machinery for the organization of cooperatives and the training of our farmers for cooperative farming. There are now about 1,900 trainers and organizers for immediate activation. We have been training there for the past several months.

Comrades, the success of the small farmers is not the only thing that is important today, because it has been a month since I proclaimed martial law. Now we need to examine what has happened since September 21st, the beginning of martial law.

There were many among us naturally who imagined that martial law would inaugurate a vicious dictatorship in our country. This is perhaps understandable because of the very term “martial law.” Martial Law connotes something arbitrary; it connotes the apparent replacement of constitutional law with personal law or law by the Commander-in-Chief. In many states, this perhaps its common meaning and the common experience of the people.

It is one of the basic and significant developments in our country during the emergency, that we have instituted a rule by martial law that is humane and constitutional. It is martial law which, while revolutionary, is also legal, which radical in the pursuit of change, is non-violent.

I am proud to commend the Department of National Defense and the officers and men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines for the orderly and peaceful implementation of the proclamation.

No man is prouder of our Armed Forces than your Commander-in-Chief and your President; no man is prouder of this demonstration of competent discipline, dedication and patriotism that you have shown in the exercises these emergency powers of government.

But the peaceful transition to martial law is not the achievement of the military alone. It is due also to the cooperation of the entire Filipino people from the lowest to the highest man. Everywhere in our country, from city countryside, our people have shown the will and faith to see that this fateful turn in their individual and national life will usher in reforms in our country. They have placed themselves at the service of a sweeping constitutional program of reforms.

What do we seek to achieve by this constitutional revolution? Our purpose is two-fold. First, we seek to eradicate the armed force of the rebellion and anarchy that has long threatened the stability of our Republic. At the same time, we have to remove and eradicate completely the social roots of this rebellion by instituting fundamental reforms in our society, and displace the old iniquitous order with a just and progressive one. It is the second objective that has become of paramount significance to our people today. For they see now that what could not be done before, what only existed in dream and aspiration yesterday, is today taking place in our country. In this, they see clearly, in whose name this constitutional revolution is being waged.

And I say today that we shall not forfeit this chance to secure peace, justice, dignify and prosperity, for every Filipino and for our national community.

These are the basic purposes of our revolution and they underline every action of our government since September 21.

Let me now review, the activities of the government geared to the achievement of these goals.

First, in our objective of restoring peace and order throughout the country and of meeting the brunt of the insurgency, we have pursued a three-pronged thrust against this cancer in our society. Measures have been taken in the field against the insurgents and rebels in all areas where dissident activities have seen flourishing during the past months. These have been combined with measures to dismantle the apparatus of propaganda and recruitment of the insurgency movement that has infiltrated our schools and universities, and the factories and industries. At the same time, we have extended this campaign to eliminate once and for all the forces of crime and violence in our country. The private armies of politicians have been disarmed and many have been taken into custody. Criminal elements all over the country, who are suspects in various crimes ranging from murder to theft, have been apprehended. The firearms ban has been enforced to the letter, and as of this date, we have collected 30,428 firearms and 1,159,676 rounds of ammunition. In one province alone, we have collected 10,700 firearms.

This campaign continues, and I am certain that many more arms will be collected, many more criminals and rebels will be apprehended before there is tranquility in our cities and countryside. I ask for the cooperation and assistance of our people in this drive.

Second, in keeping with Presidential Decree No. 1, reorganizing the Executive Branch of the government, we have combined a drive to rid the government service of “the notoriously undesirable” with a determined effort to streamline the bureaucracy and make government a more effective instrument for the achievement of national objectives. The provisions of the reorganization plan is being followed to the letter: agencies with similar functions are being organized into one unit; the regional agencies of government are being rendered more functional; new offices to displace old and ineffective ones are being organized. Thus, we have abolished the Public Service Commission. Thus, have created the National Grains Authority to replace the Rice and Corn Administration, which has lost 1,300 officials and rank and file personnel in the purge of corrupt government personnel. To go through the statistics of dismissed employees: 237 employees from the Bureau of Posts have been dismissed; 263 from the Department of General Services; 200 from the Bureau of Customs; 192 from the Bureau of Internal Revenue; and so it goes on in all the offices of the national government today.

Third, we have taken drastic measures to make the machinery of justice in our country an effective safeguard of rights and the rule of law. For what may achieve in raising the lot of every man will have no meaning for the Filipino individual if he does not have justice, if he does not receive equal treating from the judiciary as any other citizen, no matter how rich. I have accepted the resignation of judges who are known to be a liability to government and our machinery of justice. I have accepted the resignation of all the judges in the Court of Industrial Relations except two. We have started an overhaul of the Court of Agrarian Relations.

But there is a fear raised by various sectors, that having removed too many judges, the resulting vacancies in the judiciary have to be filled up quickly if the cases are not to pile up to unmanageable proportions. In this regard, I have appealed to the bar association and the association of judges to submit to me recommendations to meet this problem.

Fourth, we have instituted measures to infuse new life into the economy have signed  a decree  that will govern and promote oil exploration development in our country. This will encourage foreign capital and company to engage in oil ventures in our country. At the same time we are clearing climate for foreign investments, in such a way that these will come in such volume as to truly aid us in funding our economic development.

The other day I just received an offer for a loan of $100 million at very concessional terms in the rate of interest and at a long-term amortization period of 20 years. There has been an exchange of notes between the Philippines and Japan for an additional loan of $75 million. We just received, a few days ago part of the $65 million project and commodity loan. Now, we are getting another $75 million at very concessional terms. In the next 50 years we pay on 3 percent interest. Never have we received offers like this. Never, never in the entire history of the Philippines.

What does this indicate? This indicates, my countrymen, that the investment now find an atmosphere in the Philippines that is conducive to investment. This shows that there is now a sense of trust, an increase in trust and confidence in our country. I have also received offers of loans to our private corporations totalling many millions of dollars. The only condition that I have imposed is that the guidelines must be followed. They must invest first in labor intensive industries because we have, for instance, 4,800 workers removed from the government. Many have been displaced from media because of the closure of several media operations. Many are without jobs because of the closure of the nightclubs and gambling dens.

There was reason for the dislocation of these people, but the fact is that they are now unemployed. We would like to absorb this manpower in industry.

Finally, we have instituted long-sought social reforms in our country. Nothing testifies more to the determination of the government to remove the iniquities in our social and economic life than this document that I have signed here today. For this decree is the bedrock of our constitutional revolution.

All these measures herald the New Society that we have pledged to build. And these are but the start of our enterprise. In the coming days, many more reforms will be instituted to give this vessel of our hopes vitality and life.

And I ask you again today, to give to this, the support, the cooperation and the faith deserved by an earnest call for social change. It will take some pain, some sacrifice, for we are engaged in major surgery. But bear with me, bear with the dreams of our people, bear with me the hopes and aspirations of generations past. For together, we will succeed in this endeavor.

We will succeed in establishing a new society.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].