Remarks of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the First Annual Heritage Award presentation sponsored by the Ilocano Award Foundation

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, May 26, 1972]

The Ilocano Heritage

I WOULD LIKE to thank you for inviting me to this first celebration of the Ilocano Heritage Foundation. Despite the unending cares of the Presidency, I consider this a rare privilege not only because we Ilocano brothers are again brought together but because of my belief in the objectives of the Foundation. I would like, therefore, to convey my heartfelt thanks to the organizers of this Ilocano Heritage Foundation, a non-stock, non-profit, non-political, civic and cultural association because of their vision in spearheading the movement.

It is my understanding that the Foundation was conceived out of our belief in the noble heritage of the Ilocano.

It is also my understanding that the main objective here is to perpetuate and nurture our own Ilocano culture which was handed down to us and which we will, in turn, hand down to our children.

We consider ourselves fortunate that we have a ready Ilocano cultural heritage. And when I say culture, I refer to the arts, literature, legends, language, history and all our other accomplishments that make up their triumphs. For here are founded the convictions, the aspirations and the soul of the Ilocano.

We are also fortunate to have had a rich and noble past which moulded our beautiful customs and tradition that will crown our dreams and aspirations as a race.

All these constitute what we regard to be our priceless heritage which we must value, cultivate and perpetuate as time goes by. And if there is something to which our heritage should be dedicated, it is this: culture is our only bridge to understanding and unity rather than the cause of our own alienation.

I am therefore reminded of the illustrious sons of Ilocandia who developed Ilocano culture and helped to make our regional contribution to national culture. In the world of the arts and literature we can include the names of Pedro Bukaneg who gave us the deathless meaning of Lam-ang; Leona Florentino, Isabelo de los Reyes, Padre Jose Burgos, Juan and Antonio Luna, Diego and Gabriela Silang, Antonia Marcos Rubio, Leon Pichay, Juan Villamor, Artemio Ricarte, Roque Ablan, Sr., Resurreccion Calip and others. From their inspiration, came our immortal melodies like “Pamulinawen” and “Banatiran”, the unforgettable legend of “Paoay Lake” and “Angalo and Aran.” Where Ilocanos gather, we still hear the “dallot” and “Pito,” the sad wails of mourners which inspired our peculiar kind of literature and which can now be considered among the rich ones in the world and our language as one of the most well known.

I admire your initiative in bringing to the fore our treasured traits and qualities as a group, such as industry, patience, thrift, courage and humility.

Our own experience, ingenuity and inborn capabilities have a bright future Because of this, the Ilocano can hold his own among his fellow Filipinos. That is a heritage of which he can be proud.

On the part of the government, I need not enumerate past and on-going projects, designed to help in the enrichment of the heritage that awaits everyone.

Through the assistance and leadership of the First Lady, I will make available all assistance, personal as well as that of the Office of the President, so that we can fully cultivate our heritage and go forward to higher levels of achievement.

This is what we came here to affirm on this occasion. We can see in the faces of these 11 fortunate and learned sons of Ilocandia who have been chosento receive the honors, the symbol of their success in different fields of learning, their service to the nation for treasuring our own culture.

I feel specially happy in seeing that old and young alike have been awarded the “Golden Heritage.” This proves that great accomplishments do not discriminate between the old and the young.

May these 11 recipients, and the two who were awarded plaques of appreciation, true examples of the sons of Ilocandia who are well-known for their wisdom, ability, and industry, serve as models for the coming generations to emulate.

I therefore extend my warm congratulations to these worthy Ilocanos.

I also congratulate those who were not so honored but who, perhaps, are equally deserving. Some of them are here today. To everyone, from the leaders of this organization to the last man who attended here, as well as the non-Ilocanos who graced this occasion — thank you all for your cooperation.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].