Remarks of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the Manila Seedling Bank Foundation Inc.

[Released on September 19, 1977]

THIS IS THE best birthday gift, if it is a birthday gift, to me. It was meant to be a surprise. And I am surprised with this offering which should turn out be one of the breakthroughs in the development program of the Philippines. For if the environment and the land have been degraded by man and the machine, now we turn around and convert the land and the machine into the means by which to restore and recover the environment and the land.

I am of course astounded at the scheme and the means by which both man and the machine joined in partnership in his noble endeavor. I am immediately reminded of my generation. I hesitate to mention my age. It has been repeated so often that I am beginning to feel old. Actually, I belong to the generation that saw the Philippines lose its forest at a rate and degree that was not only alarming but disastrous. For I belong to the generation that used to hunt in the forests of this land at the time when there was no concern whatsoever about the loss of trees. But the encroachment — gradual but relentless — of the wasters of our forests, the degradation, the erosion, the denudation is now very obvious and palpable even to the most complacent among our people.

We have a total of 30 million hectares of land. Out of 30 million hectares, we have up to now a forest stand of 42 percent or about 30,900,000 hectares. And 8,900,000 hectares are erodable land which every year is deprived of its top soil and rendered useless to the farmer and the urban dweller.

At the same time, denudation continues at a fast and alarming rate. About six or seven years ago, denudation was at the rate of 200,000 to 250,000 hectares a year. Since I became President, we have been able to reduce this to 84,000 hectares a year. But we are still losing 84,000 hectares a year up to 1976.

The causes are many. Some point to the kaingeros, some to the loggers. Whichever it is, it is now necessary that we confront the causes and overcome whatever causes the wasting of our land.

From 1975 to 1976, we were ableto reforest abut 34,000 hectares. We were therefore short by still another 50,000 hectares of the required annual rate of reforestation. In short, we replanted 34,000 hectares, but we lost 84,000 hectares. From 1976 to 1977, we overcome the loss and replanted about 110,000 hectares of forest land. We have here with us the two departments that are concerned with this particular problem — the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Natural Resources. Secretary Arturo Tanco, Jr. and Secretary Jose Leido, Jr. are very anxious about these figures because they realize the tragedy that these statistics represent.

We have a total arable area of about 11 million hectares. We are met with the problem of choosing intensive or extensive agriculture. By intensive agriculture, we mean producing more from the same area of land because there is no more land to which to expand our agricultural operations. And yet, we have an area of about 9 million hectares that could be the area for expansion, if we could prevent erosion. To prevent erosion, we must plant trees, we must conserve, we must hold back the waters of rivers by setting up catchment basins and water reservoirs at the foothills of the principal mountain ranges.

I have just come from a survey of some of these areas. I said that I belong to the generation that saw the destruction of our forests. When I was a boy. We needed to go out not more than a few kilometers from the towns to hunt. Now, in order to be able to reach the forest, one has to go 50 or 100 kilometers towards the mountains. This immediately struck me on my survey. I had to utilize the helicopter, one of man’s most modern contraptions, to reach the forest. I used to reach the forest either on horseback or on foot. This indicates the degradation to which we have subjected our land. We must recapture the past from now on.

The First Lady has spoken of us recapturing the past on which to set our roots, and then shooting out to the sky for our future like a tree. Well, the physical environment of that past is fast receding. And unless we do something about it, we will never be able to transmit even the shadow of that past to our children and their children.

Thus, I welcome this opportunity to participate in this gallant and noble effort at the restoration of our environment. For this is principally a restoration work.

We congratulate the bearers of technology from Finland to our land. But looking to the West and its technology in this instance involves an irony and a paradox. We, here in Asia, the land of the forest that exports logs and wood products to the West, must now go to the West to learn to produce logs that we export to the West. It strikes me as very ironic, and yet we are compelled to do

We welcome this transfer of technology, one of the blessings of Western civilization. We welcome our friends. To you, therefore, go the gratitude of our people and the gratitude of the Republic of the Philippines.

According to the First Lady, if we would set up more facilities like this, we could produce 500,000 seedlings a day. This facility, when finally finished, will produce 20 million seedlings a year. I am a little skeptical about projections. But since it comes from the First Lady, I cannot question it. I accept it.

But you know, the requirements of the tree planting program which requires every able-bodied 10-year old to plant one tree a month for the next five years is, I would say, about 372 million seedlings a year. That is, about 31 million seedlings a month. And if one has looked up the logistical requirements of this operation, then one is shocked and aghast at the demand for seedlings. You know, we are talking about seedlings. We should start with the seeds.

Sometime ago, I issued an instruction for the collection of seeds by school children as well as by everybody. I noted the ways by which seeds, including mango seeds, are thrown all over the place, resulting in waste and even in problems of waste disposal. On one occasion, I looked at a garbage can in Manila. And I saw the number of seeds that were there in it. And I was struck by the thought that here we are thinking in terms of disciplining ourselves and our people in order to attain economic balance, and yet we are throwing away the seeds of life. So I think it is time that we now move into the recovery of seeds. And I hereby order Secretary Leido to prepare a decree for the saving of seeds. We start out with the school children, with the military, with the civil service. These people we can reach quite easily. And we will start out with local and national officials. We are going to save seeds. I direct that a decree be issued on this particular matter so we can save and properly utilize the seeds.

The other matter is this particular facility. This does not belong to the Manila Seedling Bank Foundation, Inc. yet. Can you give me that decree which transfers it to the Foundation? Let me sign it in your presence. I hereby transfer this land of about seven hectares, subject to survey and boundary segregation, and exclude it from the operation of Proclamation No. 418, dated October 24, 1968, which established the national government center site. You see, this is a part of the national government center site in Diliman, Quezon City. Where is the mayor of Quezon City? We will have to take this away from your jurisdiction now, and hereby reserve the same for the purposes set in the charter of the Foundation. In your presence, I sign this decree.

I hereby order that the Bureau of Lands, under the Department of Natural Resources, set aside equal areas of seven hectares each in each municipality city or province, as the case may be, for purposes of seedling development

The First Lady is whispering to me that the capacity of seedling production is 500,000 a day or 15 million a month. However, the nursery has a capacity of only 10 to 20 million a year. So there is some kind of an imbalance here. And she suggests that we now replicate the nurseries in all the other areas. I am certain that the Ilocos province will only be too happy to set aside an area for the nurseries. We will require, as I said, at least 100 million seedlings a year. Actually, there are 31 million Filipinos who are subject to the provisions of the decree on planting. Those who are more than 10 years old and able-bodied are not exempted, Thirty-one million Filipinos planting one tree every month for five years. This requires a seedling bank in every town or, for that matter, in every barangay. I suggest that this program that we have inaugurated here be now included in the program of the Department of Natural Resources or the Presidential Council for Forest Eco Systems.

You know, one thing we Filipinos are good at is giving high-sounding names. What does it mean? It just means planting trees. But one lives by symbols. The First Lady and the cabinet ladies started planting rice. Then it became fashionable. Now everybody wants his picture taken planting rice.

Although this is said in jest, I think that we in the urban areas should now make it fashionable to do what is necessary to save our country.

We speak of saving the country as if it were a war. And I want to inform you that it is a war. It is a war against the environmental degradation that threatens to engulf the Philippines if we were to allow the loss of 100,000 hectares every year. We will lose our forests in no time at all. When we lose our forests, we lose our agricultural land. When we lose our agricultural land, we lose our source of living. We will have to import everything that we eat. And we will end up with the deserts which many of the countries have as a result of past prodigality. Before we reach such a state, we now must go into this program.

I am happy, through this birthday gift, to mark a new threshold in our efforts. And I would like to bring in the private sector— industrialists and businessmen. Here is a decree—which I had prepared a long, long time ago—requiring all individuals, partnerships, or corporation engaged in the exploitation, development and exploration of natural resources, or in the construction of infrastructure projects, to rehabilitate areas subject thereof as affected thereby to their original condition. This was brought about by the mining operations of some of our businessmen. They open the land, destroy the trees, wreck the mountains, take away the richness of our soil, leave it, as they have wrecked it, unrestored. This, we found in some of the beaches in Pangasinan, La Union, Ilocos Sur, Leyte, and other areas. I stopped the mining operations to the dismay of some of the operators. I know that they lost some money during that period but they have made enough money. Anyway, they could have rehabilitated the land. Now, they have rehabilitated the land not to my complete satisfaction, but the beaches are there again. Before, when we flew by helicopter, the First Lady and I were dismayed to see that the beaches in Pangasinan, La Union and Ilocos Sur had been pockmarked by these diggings for magnetite sand which is being exported to other countries. So now, I sign this decree compelling all these operators to restore all the land that they utilize for their operations. I sign it in your presence.

As a last measure to encourage tree-farming by small businessmen and commercial forest planting by big corporations, I hereby direct that the Bureau of Forest Resources and he Department of Natural Resources now draw up a decree which shall give more incentives than we are giving now to the farm lessees and commercial forest planters.

Now, what does commercial forest mean? This merely means that we open up all of these public lands to private owners, and leave these to them for 25 years. I understand that many of these planters are not content with 25 years. We now increase this to 50 years. Infect, if you ask about the length of time, the truth of the matter is under the Constitution, we can lease public land to Filipinos for 99 years. But we have not done so. If necessary, we will do so in order to encourage reforestation. And at the same time, I would like to say that the pioneers in this field will be given additional incentives for freedom from payment of the fees and from the payment of P0.50 per hectare a year. This is rental for the land.

For those who are going to engage in this pioneer project, I hereby order that they be exempt from the payment of rent. And in addition to this, I hereby order that the government purchase from them and guarantee a market for all the products of commercial tree farming. I suggest that the Secretary take note of this because I am going to follow this up. I want you to prepare the decree. Let us now encourage the private sector to participate in the tree farming program. I notice that in countries like Japan, most of the forests are owned privately. I was surprised to see that in Japan — I was in Japan last July — most of the forests are owned by private individuals. And yet, you will see that there are quite a number of six stands of trees all over Japan. When I inquired, they told me that private ownership was one of their means of encouraging the planting of commercial forests. Let us try it in our country now that we are starting to work on forests.

With all of these measures, it is my hope that we will be able to attain our objective. And in order to be able to attain this objective, we have to utilize such schemes as the one we are inaugurating today.

I have thanked everybody except the First Lady. May I now especially thank her for this special birthday gift? I am indebted to her beyond gratitude and even beyond repayment. But our people realize and understand that she saw this example on her trip to Libya and the Middle East. So we are also thankful to the Middle East for providing this example. Perhaps, our people should be told now about this particular process which she learned when she went to Libya. And I understand that the Middle East is moving towards reforestation at a fast clip. We congratulate these countries.

And so now, to all of you, thank you very much. Let us replicate this particular effort.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1979). Presidential speeches (Vol. 7). [Manila : Office of the President of  the Philippines].