Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening of the 1966 Asian Ministers of Labor Conference

[Delivered at the Social Security System (SSS) Conference Hall, December 12, 1966]

Secretary Espinosa; Distinguished delegates of this Asian labor conference; Your Excellencies, Diplomats, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

It is my honor and distinct pleasure to be able to welcome you personally to the Republic of the Philippines which is honored by your presence and by your selection of Manila as the site of your conference.

I understand skepticism has been expressed over the results of this labor conference in Asia, inasmuch as Asia presents some of the gravest problems in manpower employment, which prevails all over the world. Asia, which has more than half of the world’s population, certainly is beset by the similar problems of unemployment of lack of development capital and lack of a systematic approach to the confusion that has arisen out of the sudden evolvement of independent countries in our part of the globe. But certainly I feel that Asia can contribute constructively to the problems of labor and to the systematic solution of the inadequacy in the employment of our human resources.

It has been said that Asia today, with its teeming millions of impoverished, ignorant and diseased peoples, constitute the gravest threat to the peace of mankind. It has been said that as long as this problem of Asia and Africa remains unsolved, there will be no peace in the world. Therefore, the problems of labor and unemployment may well be the key to the peace of the world. I cannot, therefore, overstate the importance of your conference today. I can only hope and pray for the success of this gathering.

It has been said, and perhaps properly, that the Western world developed its technology and its present state of affluence through the exploitation of human resources. It has been said that the industrial revolution of the world has resulted in human wreckage. If this be so, your new mission and mine, the mission of the ministers of labor, is to establish the delicate balance between development and human welfare. For your countries and mine are countries lacking in the available capital resources and funds for development. It is a test of the statesmanship of all the ministers of labor to establish such a balance for their respective societies and their respective governments.

In our respective societies, we may discover that all the available funds that we may have should be utilized first for development, but not as an end; rather, economic development should be used ultimately as a tool for the reestablishment of social justice. At the same time, as we utilize our available capital resources for economic development, and ultimately for the attainment of social justice, let it not be forgotten that we must have welfare, too, jointly with economic development, and that we must have welfare and social justice without pricing ourselves out of international competition. We must have social justice without killing individual initiative.

This, too, is one of the gravest problems that you and I face. The administrator of government, as well as the stateman and the leader in labor, must study the complexities of such problems.

There is a new dimension in government all over the world today, and that is the establishment of the human factor in all kinds of development—political, social and economic the human factor that looks to the individual and individual dignity as the ultimate aim of all societies, the human factor that establishes the right and the capacity of man to develop his entire, available genius and strength in accordance with his own best efforts and energies. We must establish an industrial revolution without exploitation, it is true, but in establishing an industrial revolution’ without exploitation we must not destroy either the means by which we can attain such an industrial revolution.

We must tame the machines in order that we may not leave on the road of progress human wreckage that was the price paid in the past by the development of modern societies. I will not go into the different aspects of this problem which I am sure properly grasped in your able hands in this conference. Suffice it to say that in my country, in our country, the established assistance of social security and the system of welfare programs are aimed at recreating a new society.

In our country, as in yours, agriculture is the main source of livelihood of the great majority of our people; anywhere from 60 to 70 percent of our people earn their livelihood from this sector of our economy. On many an occasion I had stated that many of our countries must look to agriculture first and its development in order to improve the living conditions of most of the people But ultimately and at fast, the final objective must be a balanced an industrial economy-balanced agro-industrial economy for it is only industry, probably, that can absorb our unemployed and our underemployed.

In the Philippines we have the strange spectacle of the family system absorbing the unemployed and under-employed of our country. Sociologists, political observers and economists have often asked me why, if there are so many unemployed in our country, why there is not a more palpable manifestation of this unemployment? And the answer is, the family system, the close family ties tend to make a built-in welfare service for the unemployed and the underemployed.

But before long, we must attend to the unemployed and the underemployed through a more systematic approach. Thus, we have established, I repeat, a social security and welfare program in the Philippines. The Social Security System, started in 1957, now covers about 1,500,000 workers. It is my hope that before long this will be doubled, and that before the end of my term, the system will cover about one-half of the entire labor force of the Philippines.

In the past several years, in meeting claims for death, old-age and illness benefits, the Social Security System has paid P250 million. Now, we are studying the possibility of social security, or insurance against unemployment. If these studies indicate a financial capability of the Social System to pay for unemployment, I shall immediately direct that unemployment be taken under the wing of the Social Security System of the Philippines.

I repeat, you and I are faced by the dilemma of growth. This dilemma is the choice between development and welfare. We all want to grow, we all want to progress Economic development is a means by which we must progress. But economic development, I repeat, does not mean the adoption of mere technology, without humanity and without compassion. On the contrary, all efforts of man must be aimed at human welfare and this means compassion. It is therefore time for us to tame technology, tame the machines and utilize our manpower in such a way that we shall not only develop our economic system but develop a manpower that is alert, effective and certainly humane members of the human society.

This, then, is the new mission that you and I have. I repeat, we create our respective societies. However much you and I may differ in the approaches, in our ideologies sometimes, ultimately and at last, your aim and mine is the upliftment of all of humanity. But we must start. With our own peoples, and our own race. I shall start with mine. You start with yours. But in so attempting to solve our own national problems, you and I must gather in consultation, at conferences like this; and gathering, seek to establish a basis for such consultations in order that you and I may unite to attain this new dimension in our societies and in our efforts to honor the human factor in economic development.

I am certain that all the peoples of Asia look towards you, and perhaps all the peoples of the world will look towards you. I repeat, in the improvement of the living conditions of the laboring, teeming millions of Asia lies the peace of the world, and let no man in any manner mistake this as a presumption, or imposition upon any of the leaders of the world today. It is a statement of fact, which has been accepted by all thinkers and observers. With the teeming millions lies the key to peace, in the long run, of our world; and upon you lies the burden of establishing not only the confidence but also the effectiveness of the labor system in our respective societies.

So, I must say that if this be so—that ultimately the establishment of peace in the world lies on your shoulders, it is, indeed, a heavy burden for every minister of labor to carry. But I am sure that on your shoulders this burden will prove to be very light.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1966). Speech delivered by President Marcos at the opening of the 1966 Asian Ministers of Labor Conference held at the SSS Conference Hall, Monday, December 12, 1966. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 63(2) , 272-275.