In this ceremony, we reaffirm the fulfillment of our government's promise to provide land to the urban poor.

The inauguration of this park is meaningful, as is the awarding of land titles to approximately four thousand residents living in this part of Navotas.

The joy you feel at the completion of this park and the receipt of your land titles is the same joy felt by thousands of others who have received benefits under the housing program in Metro Manila, which has also given hope to many more citizens who will receive similar benefits.

Nothing better highlights the government's commitment to addressing the basic needs of the poor than the continued focus and value placed on our housing program, especially in impoverished areas.

In the history of our city, many leaders have strived to solve the housing problem, but all of these efforts ultimately proved futile and did not come to fruition.

This will not happen with our programs now.

When we began our efforts to redevelop the city of Manila and its surrounding areas, many seemed to doubt the success of this undertaking. There were also those who believed that nothing could be done to solve this major problem of Manila.

Today, we can point to them the progress we have made here in Dagat-dagatan to prove the sincerity of our promises and the effectiveness of the changes we have launched.

Over the past many years, we have repeatedly inaugurated many parts of this project, as well as other projects in Metro Manila. This only proves that our efforts are not just one-time events but continuous in order to help the poor and transform communities.

On this land along the shores of Manila Bay, we have achieved something that we once considered impossible or difficult to happen: the development of human settlements and the promotion of community resilience in this part of our city.

Over the past year, your servant and the First Lady have already awarded 10,900 land titles to poor families. And today, we are awarding land titles to 4,000 citizens.

Because of this, we can say that this is evidence of the development of impoverished areas.

This is also evidence of the improvement of social status and the provision of basic needs in communities in Metro Manila. Urban development and planning are now better than in the past, although I am sure the First Lady and the mayors will admit that there is still much to be done.

Now we can say the true meaning of caring for the welfare of the poor, and because of this, our programs should only be supported.

The development of impoverished areas is proof of our government's efforts to distribute the blessings that the country should enjoy, which are the fruits of progress.

As we strive to develop the entire country, we cannot deny that progress is meaningless if our poor citizens are not benefited. This is the main objective of our housing program in Metro Manila.

However, we should not be content with merely providing housing for our citizens. We must also focus on providing them with a livelihood.

There are two objectives to our program for the poor: the development of residential land and the provision of livelihood opportunities under the movement for livelihood and progress or K-K-K.

In short, our aim is to establish a self-sufficient community from former slum areas or poor settlements.

In essence, the concept of development lies not in statistics but in the blessings provided to families and communities. We believe that what is often referred to by our First Lady as Quality of Life is the most important issue when discussing development.

No matter how large the problems we need to solve in our efforts to develop Metro Manila, we can now say that our dreams and efforts have not been in vain.

No matter how big the problems we face, we are optimistic that all of these will be resolved for a better future.

Dagatan-Dagatan is proof of the potential of every Filipino to progress for his own benefit and for the community.

In this place, you have witnessed the hardships… And through our collective efforts, we now have new hope. This is what we need for a stronger and more progressive nation and society.

All of this became a reality because of your cooperation with our government. We can achieve any success through our mutual assistance.

I hope that in future occasions we can be together again as in this meaningful and impactful celebration.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.