Symbol of the Triumph of the Race

When the First Lady greeted you and said that you are the true heroes of this center, I was the first to applaud. Honestly, I didn't believe you could finish these houses in just a few days. But you proved that you could, because the project was completed in only 21 days.

The truth is, colleagues, this project will only succeed if it receives the protection and support of the people of Bataan, especially the town leaders of Morong. This project will succeed if all of you here in Morong, Bataan and your leaders will support and help this project. Because, it cannot be denied, this project is the beginning of a new spirit. Therefore, it needs to be nurtured and grown by all the people. I request and implore all of you, especially those from Morong and Bataan, to support this project.

The First Lady and I should be in another province because it is campaign season. In nine days, we will be voting in the local elections. It has been a long time since we had a local election, so everyone, even those who are sick and cannot walk, will probably go out to vote.

Today I should have been in Pangasinan, or in Baguio. But when it was mentioned to me that I was also needed here with the First Lady because it was necessary to show, to demonstrate to the public the sympathy of the Filipino people and their national leaders to our suffering brothers and sisters affected by the calamities in Vietnam, I did not hesitate to come. Because Vietnam is our neighbor. If you head in that direction, you will reach Vietnam; if you take a small boat towards it, the first country you will reach and encounter is Vietnam. Because Vietnam is indeed our neighbor, their suffering is our suffering as well.

You know, Morong and Bagac was the western terminal of the last line of defense of the United States Armed Forces in the Far East in the fighting in 1942. On April 9 when that line collapsed, the western terminal of the line was Morong. Many battles happened here in Morong, many of our brothers and sisters perished here. That’s why when I was flying, while flying over Morong again and passing by Mount Samat, Mount Natib, Mount Silanganan—Mariveles and Layac Mountains are to the South, Natib and Silanganan Mountains are to the North to our right—I remembered that descent, that low passage from Pilar is going to Bagac to Morong. I remembered all our brothers and sisters who died because of the war. We all know the hardship that is the fruit of war. We know the misery, deprivation and the death because we lost about one million people in the last war and even now during the fighting in Mindanao. Because I know that many of us who were soldiers then also fought there in Mindanao. You know that 500,000 to one million people were displaced—lost their homes, lost their livelihoods and many of them got sick and died during the first battle there in Marawi in 1972 and in Cotabato from 1973 to 1976. Many of them still haven’t been able to return home.

Truthfully, Filipinos come from a lineage of refugees because we have accounts in our history about Datu Puti and Marikudo. What was Datu Puti if not a refugee? He was a refugee who came from Borneo. And Marikudo, what is his story? The truth is, Marikudo and Datu Puti are the origin of all the Filipino race. They were driven out by a cruel government that they fought against. According to history, Datu Puti returned and fought in Borneo. And the race that dominated here and ruled Manila, Ilocos and Pangasinan came from the South. Therefore, all of you, all of us can truly say that we come from a refugee lineage.

We are actually a nation composed of many refugees. The various races that have come here are Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Bornean, Malaysian, Thai, and many others. When Kublai Khan sent a large naval contingent to attack the islands in the South China Sea, many of the refugees in Malaysia moved towards the Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore, and other Asian countries.

And so to our foreign guests, we say, we know how it is to be a refugee, for our history is full of many instances of our tribes receiving refugees and allowing the infusion of new blood to strengthen the entire race.

Today, once again, we witness different races throughout the world repeating the most common mistakes of humankind – solving our problems through war, which causes the displacement of many people.

Ngayon, gayunpaman, tayo ay naririto upang buksan ang isang sentro sa pagsisikap na mabawi ang bahagyang nawala ng humanidad at integridad ng tao. Ngayon, nakikita ninyo ang mga mismong bansang naglaban-laban sa lupaing ito—Hapon laban sa Estados Unidos at laban sa Pilipinas—na nagsasama-sama upang magtatag ng isang sentro para sa mga refugee, na muling magpapatunay sa humanidad ng tao para sa kanyang kapwa tao, at marahil, magbibigay sa atin ng bagong pag-asa na kahit gaano pa kapino ang tela ng pandaigdigang komunidad, ang telang iyon ay hindi mapupunit dahil ang nakararami sa mga tao ay naniniwala sa pagpapanatili ng mapayapang ugnayang pandaigdig at kapayapaan.

Isn't it surprising, colleagues, that different countries are here today who, as the First Lady mentioned in her speech, once fought here? Who were those we fought against here? The Japanese were our enemy, and America's. Now, those who once fought are meeting, uniting to reclaim the true dignity of a person, whose first thought is their duty to their fellow human beings and to God.

On the evening of July 20, 1979, I received a call from the American ambassador indicating the need for some kind of initiative in view of the fact that there was a stalemate in the Geneva Conference that had been called by the Secretary General of the United Nations, on the request or initiative of Prime Minister Thatcher of England. The story here was that the entire conference would fall if there was no offer of some kind for a refugee processing center.

The truth of the matter is that I have been trying to convince many of our friends in the ASEAN to set up such processing centers long before the Geneva Conference. Indonesia and the Philippines had agreed to reserve certain islands for this purpose. And so I immediately took up the suggestion and called up Minister Carlos P. Romulo who was in Geneva sick with fever. He was sick, had a slight fever but I woke him up and I said, “Tell them at the conference in Geneva that the Filipino people will provide a piece of land to house the poor people who were expelled from Vietnam.” We here in the Philippines will provide that land and that land will not be in Palawan, but here in Bataan because I know that the people here in Bataan are the most compassionate, humane, and God-fearing.

And so we made this offer. We are very happy that it broke the stalemate in Geneva. We are very happy that we have been able to help our friends in arriving at a solution to this problem.

Why Bataan and not Palawan? Why was Bataan chosen? Because Palawan is extremely far. When the costs were considered, it was found that half of the cost of building a processing center would go to transportation. And every time we mobilize, we would be hampered or would have to use our ships. Our ships, however, are few. Therefore, we were compelled to locate it and it is now here in our beloved province of Bataan, our processing center.

I already mentioned that I shouldn't have come here. But to demonstrate to all of you, to your citizens here in Morong and Bagac, and to the neighboring areas here in all of Bataan, that this project is your project, a project of the Filipino people, so we need to help each other.

Likewise, the First Lady said that we will also benefit from this project. Why? The equipment, goods, and food to be used here must be purchased from the neighboring communities, in Morong and in various places. That's fifty thousand, my countrymen. We know that the money to be spent will go to you because the goods to be used and the food to be consumed in this center will come from you.

Perhaps, we can say that we are all fortunate. We are all fortunate because in giving, in our expressions of sympathy, we are the ones who will benefit.

We should therefore extend all our support to this project. I say that this is a national commitment, not only a commitment of your President, but a commitment of the Filipinos. Therefore, it is necessary that we extend all our support and cooperation to this project.

Perhaps some of you are hesitant. Those who think this is our way of forcing people to leave their farms. That is not true. Your farms will continue. You can continue farming your fields. They will not be taken away from you. I heard some of the people asking, “Will this settlement expand so that it will mean our losing our farms which are not covered by homestead?” The answer is “No.” Unless you voluntarily give it up and unless we need it. And I don’t think we will need it. On the contrary, it will be necessary for you to farm properly so that you can sell your produce to the processing center and in the process you will gain, you will earn money and you will have a market for your products.

We also feel that there are many ways in which this particular project will be of help to you because it will show you that the Vietnamese, these Vietnamese people are hardworking. So do not be mistaken when you see them. You will see that they work tirelessly. It is good that we have a measure, a measure of our skills, characteristics. A measure of our wisdom and intelligence because we cannot say that those people are foolish. No! They are intelligent and hardworking.

I am Ilocano but they are perhaps more diligent than Ilocanos and more frugal, right? I know that here in Bataan, the people are also frugal, just like you Ilocanos. That is their saying. “Why does the President have so much work done?” “It’s because,” said one, “he is Ilocano. So all he does is save and save.”

We really need to be frugal; that money isn’t your own. That is the people’s money, the money of the citizens. The same is true for this money. This money being used here is not our money. The money that is being spent here is not our money. This money comes from various nations. And therefore must we use it properly. There must never be any question at all about its proper expenditure.

That's why I told the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, we don't want to hold that money. Something bad might happen. So I said, they should hold the money and they should spend it. If it gets lost, it's their fault and not ours.

But whatever happens, the funds used here do not come from the coffers of our government. These are contributions from various countries. All the ambassadors I called, all of them are contributing to our work here. Because this is a project of different countries around the world. So help us demonstrate and show the whole world that Filipinos can be trusted with anything, with honor and with money. Honor and money can be entrusted to the Filipinos. That is what we need to show.

I thank the Ministry of Human Settlements. You know, during times like these, I remember my spouse. They already bring my food because I still have a lot of work in my office. That’s why I am happy to be here again in Bataan. You don’t know how much joy fills my heart every time I come to Bataan. Why? Because I am alive, I should have died here if fate had been different. But with the help of God, I am still here.

In the past, we would just walk around there with torn clothes, hungry, and almost dying. How many wounds did I have? About five wounds on my body. Now I'm riding in a helicopter, imagine that. Isn't that amazing? I am very happy.

I observed Bataan while on a helicopter and I remarked that life was very good. That is why I am happy to speak to you, because here in Bataan, during the battle at Mount Samat, I was one of those who swore that we would all die here. Five thousand swore. Aren't you the soldiers who were with me then? When we were about to surrender, we said, since we will die anyway even if we surrender, let us just kill ourselves here at Mount Samat. All swore that the five thousand soldiers would die here at Mount Samat. No one would survive. Everyone who wanted to live had already left. We would fight to the death. The bad thing was, I was hit severely. I lost consciousness. When I woke up, look, the enemy was already facing me and stabbing me with a bayonet. We were made to walk in the Death March and until now, I still don't know why I lived.

I had a companion, he had seventeen bayonet wounds, and he stood up with me. I said, “Let’s walk, don’t show that you’re wounded.” We walked, and we joined the Death March, carrying him. I carried Priming San Agustin for about fifty kilometers.

Now I am here, speaking, and you are still listening. You are in the heat, while I am in the shade. It is very pleasant to remember all the hardships that happened in your life, after helping those who are also poor and without a country.

Therefore, I thank you, all of you who helped me when I was just a soldier with no duty but to fight; and to our Almighty God who gave me the opportunity to show everyone that our race knows how to strive for success. That is what we think needs to be shown to the public. And this center is a symbol of the triumph of our race.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Ngayon naririto ako, nagtatalumpati, nakikinig pa kayo. Nasa init kayo, ako nasa lilim. Napakasarap iyang maalala mong lahat ang mga pighating nangyari sa iyong buhay, pagkatapos natutulungan ang mga kawawa rin naman na walang bansa.

Marcos, F. E. (1985). Presidential speeches (Vol. 10). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].