Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of National Science and Technology Week

[Delivered in Malacañang, July 10, 1978]

A Tribute to Our Men of Science

FIRST OF ALL allow me to extend my gratitude to Dr. Melecio Magno for bringing out the fact that I have helped in a modest way in building up science and technology, especially education in science and technology, in the country today.

In keeping with the devotion to the principle of passionate anonymity, the discipline to which the scientists have vowed to adhere, the proceedings today are without the usual pomp and ceremony with which great decisions and great achievements are celebrated.

And yet, it is universally accepted that science and technology research play one of the most vital, if not the most vital, role in development not only in the Third World but in all countries of the world.

I notice too that most of those whom we have voted into the academy are of such age that even the President must feel infantile in comparison to each of them. To each of those who have worked in science and technology quietly and unknown go the accolade of the entire Filipino people and the appreciation of their President.

The Republic of the Philippines comes to you today to acknowledge its indebtedness to each and every worker in science, in research and in technology.

If the unknown soldier has a monument, perhaps, we should also build a monument to the unknown scientist. For our country moves like all the countries of the world, with science and technology providing the cutting-edge of change, of innovation, of movement, of advance in our society.

Dr. Magno referred to social engineering as part of the area in which research has been done by those who have helped the National Science Development Board in the last several years. However, social engineers do need the sharp edge of your capability, of your advances, of your ivory-tower discoveries that must be brought down to the level of the rice fields, the muddy fields in which the growth of the nation is actually decided.

Perhaps, it is now time for our people to realize the importance that science and technology play in their ordinary lives. For indeed, very few among our people caught in the urgency of daily routine, very few of them realize that there is a corps of silent workers on whose dedication or devotion, on whose discipline, on whose talents and genius depend the advancement of our entire society, the growth of a nation and the stability and strength of a Republic.

Today, therefore, it is my honor and pleasure to come and commend the scientists and to announce the total commitment of the Philippine government to science and technology.

The auspicious occasion today which highlights our observance of the National Science and Technology Week, significantly coinciding with the 20th anniversary of the National Science Development Board is merely a symbolic testimony to the priority given to science which is a vital part of the official policies of this administration.

This is an occasion for celebration not only because the agency has endured the passage of a long span of time, or because the agency has grown far beyond the puny legal creature that it was at its birth, but because it has gathered a record of marked achievement particularly during the last six years when the country experienced a period of crisis the period of development, and of reform.

We are wont to claim that society is engaged in reform and yet on many an occasion, you and I have agreed that many of these reforms, even political and social reforms, have often been reduced into economic terms; and economic “reforms” have often depended upon the success of your researches.

It also signifies our ever increasing and enlarging participation in the common efforts of mankind to bring an end in time to the ancient scourges of hunger, disease, illiteracy, superstition, and now the new danger, the scarcity and insufficiency of energy.

At the same time, the larger sums allotted by the present government to scientific research and the dissemination among our people of science consciousness principally through the national educational system and other media will, I sincerely hope, ensure our faster progress henceforth in harnessing all available talent, old and young, as they do in other countries, for the achievement of our defined goals in social and economic growth for our country and people.

Under the science tax, we allocate about P60 million every year specifically for science research. I was astounded, however, to hear that the impression seems to be that the amount spent for science and technology is limited only to P60 million. This is not quite true. The total budgetary amount reaches the sum of P300 million every year.

It is my intention to see to it that this amount will increase by at least 15 percent every year until it reaches PI billion every year.

Let me add here that the utilization of science and technology as handmaidens of our development efforts symbolizes our sincere efforts, as I have said earlier, our own contribution to the common effort of the progressive world to use these “handmaidens” in the solution not only of local and domestic problems but also of regional, and perhaps, of world problems.

You have participated as has been explained by Dr. Magno in the campaign for self-sufficiency in rice. And now you are participating in the energy program.

If I were asked, what problems confront the country today which need priority, this would be the two areas that I would point out — food production and energy.

On these two areas depends our survival. On these two areas depends the attainment of all that you and I dream about for our people.

If we fail in food production no amount of energy will help us. If, however, we should attain food production but lack energy, then we may also fail in attaining a balanced agro-industrial economy.

And thus, today, I am happy to note the aggressive participation of science in food production research. The chairman of NSDB has spoken to you of the various achievements in this field particularly on rice and com.

Incidentally, I forgot to mention the fact that corn mildew was something which all countries have been trying to solve for the past several decades and no country has succeeded except the Philippines. For this, we must congratulate again our scientists.

There are several fields in which we can be proud of our scientists. Aqua-culture, the production under laboratory conditions of high-quality products not only for our fishponds but for the blue farms, the sea farms that we anticipate will follow the rice program, the Masagana 99 and the Maisan.

At the same time in aquaculture, we have been able to produce bangus fry also under controlled conditions. I have had occasion to see for myself these breakthroughs because these are what could be marked as the most dramatic achievements in food production. Then there are the different varieties in soya bean culture and mung beans.

Talking about mung beans, when I went to the sugar areas last May, I asked that there be inter-cropping in order to save the sugar industry. And I was told that our variety of mung bean does not grow well in the shade of sugarcane. But now Los Baños has come out with a variety that grows better under the shade of sugarcane than in the sunlight. So I think we can move forward in the intercropping program of the sugar industry. And this indicates merely one of the achievements which may save an entire industry. The same thing is true with other products.

If we have therefore moved forward since the declaration of martial law and the establishment of the crisis government, if we have moved forward with accelerated thrust and momentum, we dare to say it was your minds and hearts, your determination, your discipline, your dedication that provided the propellant for such progress.

Science and technology truly are the movers of progress. But the key to progress is held by the men of science more than the general public would comprehend, and this probably can be attributed to the fact that the man of science is subjected to certain disciplines and the spirit of self-sacrifice and idealism, which I certainly would like to see in every Filipino.

Discipline is a virtue that has to be developed in all our people, if we are to grow as a nation.

Just as we elevate the soldier who has offered his life in combat, so too would I like to elevate the scientists today, not only for the achievements that have brought about progress but because they represent to me, and to those who understand, a symbol of the Filipino that we would like every Filipino to be— disciplined, dedicated, idealistic.

For men of science have a greater understanding of nature, a deeper knowledge of the ways to control those natural forces that surround us. The satisfaction of a job well and honestly done are inspirations and rewards greater than comfort, gain or security.

Finally, in all their actions men of science seek to help their fellowmen — whether friend or foe.

In international circles the spirit of cooperation and understanding is better exhibited and demonstrated by men of science than by statesmen or would-be statesmen and politicians like me.

It is for this reason that one of our models of the men and women we seek to have in the New Society is the man of science. Thus in our New Society, science has received the attention long denied it. And I believe everybody now knows this for a fact.

An article of faith I have long cherished is in the arena of national development. That area is more crucial than the definition of priorities — priorities in the choice of strategies and in the allocation of resources.

In this process, man is the most crucial factor since man is both the means and the end of the development effort. The means because it is man’s ability to control his physical and social environment which promotes progress. The end because no effort is worthwhile undertaking unless directed towards promoting the welfare, the security and the integrity of man.

We need therefore to husband our resources and discipline our efforts. Each one of us must recognize our role and accept our responsibility as defined in the context of an orderly society.

The urgency of greater efforts is underlined by factors not within our control. An expanding population that makes demands on all our natural resources, worldwide shortages that can be relieved only at the total destruction of the same natural resources — unless we face these challenges with missionary zeal, the day may come when our backs may be pushed once again to the wall. When that should come, then it may be impossible to accomplish all the dreams that we have for our country, even with the help of the most innovative and enlightened legislation.

Even more important, from my point of view, is that all of us will be held to account one day for the manner we husbanded our resources. Did we bury these blessings given abundantly to us in the ground, so to speak, either through disuse or misuse or did we make them bear interest for future generations to enjoy?

Since the establishment of the Republic in 1946 there have been only a few laws for science development. But it is with pride that I say that since the establishment of the New Society, we have seen the approval of many pieces of legislation to foster science research and technology.

We have changed practically overnight the state of science and technology in our country. The attention of the government has in turn aroused the private sector to an awareness of the importance of research, evidenced by the increase in research expenditure yearly of individual firms as well as by increasing assistance given by various firms to training projects in the sciences and to the promotion of science consciousness.

The budget of your agency has increased four-fold in the last five to six years. Its increase has been at a much faster rate than any other department, any other ministry, any other agency in the entire government.

At the same time, we have participated in international research activities utilizing Filipino scientists like the Southeast Asia Fisheries Development Center or the SEAFDEC.

Your agency has been utilized as a model for streamlining so that your work could be facilitated and your needs better attended to. Of course, I understand your condition is still far from ideal.

More than anyone else, we are probably more aware and conscious of your problems, more than, perhaps, even yourselves.

We appreciate the patience that you have demonstrated and the difficulties you have endured with your present salary scales which are admittedly not commensurate with those of men and women of your skill in other places.

I understand that when the program for the upgrading of the salaries of the teachers became public there was a quiet inquiry as to whether this would cover those who are engaged in science and technology. And the answer is a resounding “yes.”

It is only proper that a country which entrusts many of its burdens on the shoulders of scientists should relieve these men and women of the cares that they encounter from day to day so that their hearts and minds could concentrate on the task at hand.

One very promising development I have learned is how serious efforts are now being exerted by the NSDB to increase the size and improve the quality of scientific manpower. Sometime ago, I suggested that we spread out the scholarships to emphasize basic training in science and research. And I wanted to establish regional science high schools. However, we have been limited by the lack of faculty members as well as other facilities. And so I ordered an increase in the number of students in the National Science High School in Quezon City. There has been an increase from 400 to now 1,000 students there. It is my intention to keep on establishing facilities for an increased teaching in science and technology.

Talking about salary scales (I have it in the latter part of my speech), I wanted to tell you that I am surprised that there has been no announcement of the program that I signed into law way back in December or October of 1977. On November 10th, I signed three presidential decrees. This was PCARR’s fifth anniversary, if you will remember, which I had the occasion to attend as I have attended all celebrations on science and technology in the last seven or eight years.

You will remember that on the occasion, I signed a decree which was entitled “A decree providing for incentives and administrative reform to promote efficiency and productivity of scientific and technological research.” This has not been released officially, apparently because there was a question of funding. And there was some kind of technical obstacle because the auditor’s office and the budget commissioner wanted to know whether we should give priority to this and eliminate some other items in the budget. I repeat that announcement which was made sometime last November.

I announce that now this shall be given priority over all the other programs of government. This involves, one, the hiring of retired scientists and technical personnel. As you know, we have a very strict retirement law. But now I have authorized in this decree, the re-hiring on a contract basis without any limits as to compensation of qualified scientists. Next, not only is the NSDB authorized to re-hire, it can enter into a program for hiring the services of scientists on the basis of a contract in all research projects under the umbrella of NSDB. This was prohibited by existing law before. If Dr. Salcedo will remember, this was one of our problems when he was still chairman of the NSDB.

Incidentally, I am ordering scientists exempted from civil service requirements. This includes the possibility of hiring close relatives, meaning relatives of existing employees or contract workers, because I understand that there are research teams who are either father and son, husband and wife, and the civil service rules do not allow employment of such teams. If you employ the husband you have got to kick out the wife; if you employ the wife, you kick out the husband. But at the same time, while I did authorize civil service eligibility of the highest order for all the scientists there were some technical obstacles which now we do away with under this decree.

Then this decree authorizes sabbatical leave privileges for scientists which could not be given before and also honoraria for research, technical and support personnel. I suppose this is the most important part. This program for upgrading the salaries of scientists was applicable to PCARR originally. I have now ordered it to be extended to the entire group of institutions and agencies under the National Science Development Board.

The operating provision is, the amount of honoraria that may be paid to such researchers and scientists directly shall conform with a schedule formulated by the NSDB or the PCARR on the basis of research ouput and in consultation with the National Science Development Board and related research and educational institutions and approved by the governing council. This makes the NSDB practically an autonomous agency in government.

At the same time, I authorize payment of hardship or hazard allowances. Again the operating provision reads as follows: “Hardship or hazard allowances may be paid to research, technical and supportive personnel who are engaged in research that cause hazard and hardship to health and life in amounts pre-determined by the research agency concerned.”

I understand, too, that there have been difficulty about movement and mobility of research personnel. I, therefore, authorize duly receipted expenditures for both travel and lodging of research personnel traveling outside their official station on mission orders. You are beginning to be treated more and more like soldiers.

And now we have travel insurance for researchers and technical personnel. I authorize the purchase of locally produced or manufactured articles because there was some rules before which apparently were dictated by some of the old laws which did not allow the purchase of locally manufactured research articles. This we are doing away with.

I believe that all of us consider the upgrading and expansion of the educational facilities in science and technology and research as one of the priority programs under EDPITAF. I am glad that Assemblyman Perfecto is here, and the Minister of Education also, so they can attend to this.

There are also some obstacles which have not allowed an expeditious procurement of your equipment and supplies for research in the past. This is properly attended to in this decree. I will not bother you further with such things like purchase of large cattle for experimentation and the like, construction and repair of infrastructure without public bidding. These are the details which often are not only awkward but actually stop research, obstacles that stop research.

Now, I would like to announce a few appointments. First, I would like to announce the new vice chairman, and executive director of the NSDB. This is no other than Dr. Segundo B. Roxas. As Commissioner of the NIST or the National Institute of Science and Technology, I would like to announce the appointment of Dr. Vedasto R. Jose. I also would like to announce today the conferment of the National Scientist Awards to three of our most eminent scientists.

First, in accordance with the recommendation of the board the first National Scientist Award to Dr. Juan Salcedo, Jr. for his outstanding achievement in the field of public health and nutrition. Next, for his contribution to the field of physical chemistry, the National Scientist Award is given to Dr. Alfredo C. Santos. And for distinguished achievement in the field of engineering and inventions, to Dr. Gregorio Y. Zara.

The members of the academy, the National Academy of Science and Technology, have recommended the following to constitute the executive council of seven members. They are: Dr. Paulo C. Campos, Dr. Alfredo B. Lagmay, Dr. Cecilio Lopez, Dr. Tito A. Mijares, Dr. Alfredo C. Santos, Dr. Carmen Velasquez, and Dr. Gregorio Y. Zara.

The members of the temporary screening committee, National Academy of Science and Technology, are as follows: Physical science, Dr. Melecio Magno; biological sciences, Dr. Carmen Velasquez and Dr. Paulo Campos; mathematical sciences and engineering, Dr. Tito Mijares; and social sciences, Dr. Alfredo Lagmay.

I spoke of the areas which are considered crucial to the survival of our country: food production and energy. I am glad that the Minister of Energy is here, Minister Velasco. You are well aware that 95 percent of our source of energy come from oil and that oil is at present totally and completely important.

It became necessary to support national development goals through the provision of an adequate, stable, secure economical and environmentally acceptable energy supply and through its judicious and efficient consumption.

We have began to develop the domestic energy base through the extensive exploration for indigenous oil and non-oil energy to meet the requirements of a developing economy. There are three basic strategies to be pursued. First, the building of the necessary institutional arrangements for better national energy management. Second, a short-term work program calling for an accelerated indigenous energy resource exploration, imported supply assurance, stockpiling, fuel allocation, pricing mechanisms and conservation. And third, a long-term measure essentially involving the development of domestic alternative energy sources with emphasis on renewable forms.

Institutional arrangement for resource utilization and for energy exploration and development, of course, initiated the effort. We redefined the contractual schemes that had governed ineffectively oil exploration in the country. This merely means we have divided up the country into concessions and given the right to the concession owners to develop such concessions in the own good time.

But now we have moved into another phase. We now enter into service contracts requiring exploration within definite periods of time. And it was during this period that we realized that simultaneously with oil exploration we had to move into other sources of energy including geothermal, hydroelectric, coal, and others.

Serious oil exploration commenced in earnest with the promulgation of Presidential Decree No. 87, otherwise known as the Oil Exploration and Development Act of 1972.

As I said, prior to this decree, oil exploration was governed by the antiquated Petroleum Act of 1949 which actually hampered the entry of technically and financially capable entities. There were instances where under the old law, foreign and alien explorers were inhibited from entering into exploration contracts with government as well as with the private concession owner.

Foreign expertise and high-risk capital were needed to pursue an intensive exploration effort. Among the incentives that we gave was tax exemption of equipment, repatriation of capital investments, and retention or remittance abroad of foreign exchange earnings in excess of operation requirements.

Since 1973, we have entered into 25 service contracts, culminating in the drilling of over 39 wells, 29 of which were offshore.

And in vindication of the soundness of the new exploration thrust, significant successes in exploration activity were recorded during the last two years. In 1976, of the 10 wells drilled, Nido I in Northwest Palawan and Sampaguita I in the Reed Bank discovered oil. Similarly in 1977, three wells proved to be oil finds: South Nido I, Cadlao I and South Nido West I all of which are in Northwest Palawan.

All these discoveries have confirmed that the Philippines is clearly a part of the Asian oil belt like its oil-producing neighbors — Indonesia and Malaysia. And very soon we will be extracting oil like these countries.

I was informed by City Services and Oriental that we should be drawing oil from the Nido discovery by April of next year. They may intend to start out with 40,000 barrels a day which more or less may be about 20 percent of our daily requirement.

With this delineation of oil reserves, oil exploration in the country will therefore continue in high gear in the years ahead. Assuming the same success parameters in the next ten years, the Ministry of Energy projects an aggregate production level of 19.3, 34.0, and 45.2 million barrels of oil annually in the years 1982, 1985, and 1987 respectively. This would contribute up to 15.2 percent, 20.5 percent, and 23.8 percent of the projected annual oil requirement.

Whatever high importance we give to oil, we recognize that a strong and adequate energy base requires the exploration and development of alternative energy sources, and this is where science and technology comes in. We must move possibly towards the reduction of national dependence on oil from its present level to about, say, 69, or even less, percent in 10 years.

Under the energy program that we have set out to attain, oil is therefore complemented by the development of other indigenous resources, like coal, geothermal, hydro, nuclear and other non-conventional sources.

I need not go into coal because as you know, we now have an oversupply of coal because many of our factories had not been able to convert into utilization and it may be necessary to export some of our coal.

We have discovered some of the country’s coal potentials. We have hired the services of a London-based coal consulting firm and after engaging in an extensive evaluation of the country’s coal potentials, the firm estimated the country’s probable resources to fall within the range of 0.8 to 1.2 billion metric tons, a magnitude which far exceeded all previous estimates.

Potential recoverable reserves are expected to be greater. To tap these potentials in the most efficient manner, I signed the Coal Development Act of 1976. This coordinated all the efforts on coal production. We seek to attain coal production of 1.2 million metric tons in 1980, 1.9 million in 1982 and 3.3 million in 1985. The current rate is only 300,000 metric tons per year. We are trying to develop the local coal market for a program of converting the major oil consuming entities like cement and power-generation plants.

The National Power Corporation has included in its power program the commissioning of some 1245 megawatts of thermal capacity within the next 10 years shall be partly or wholly coal-based.

The pace and extent of the development of coal supply has brought about a temporary oversupply situation, and we have considered exportation as an interim measure to sustain the momentum of the coal industry which is at present at an early stage of development.

The third energy resource that we seek to develop is geothermal energy. The Philippines as you are aware lies along the circum-Pacific fire belt, regions where volcanic activity was and continues to be intense. Because of our peculiar geographical location, we are also endowed with a geothermal potential which can be used for electric power generation and other energy uses requiring heat.

Through the National Power Corporation as early as 1971, we have engaged the services and financing of a foreign group who possessed the technology and experience to develop our geothermal potential in Albay and in Laguna. The Chairman of the NSDB has referred to Tiwi and Bae. The government-owned Philippine National Oil Company followed suit in 1976 in Tungunan, Leyte, Negros and Davao. Since then a total of 52 geothermal wells have been drilled with a total proven generation capacity of 248 megawatts by the end for 1977.

It is the plan now to move the copper-smelter plant to the area near Tungunan, Leyte.

A pilot non-condensing plant of three megawatts capacity is currently operating in that area. The first 55-megawatt gothermal plant of Union Oil and NPC, or National Power Corporation is scheduled to undergo test runs by December of this year.

Geothermal power is projected to provide 4.4 percent of total energy requirement by 1982, with a targeted installed capacity of 548 megawatts.

With equal vigor, we are also pursuing the development of hydro-power resources, they being vital not only as a source of power but also as a source of water for domestic and agricultural use.

Tapping the country’s uranium resources to fill the uranium requirements of the first nuclear power plant which shall be operational by late 1982 is also one of our energy priorities. We have taken the nuclear option in the face of receding oil reserves.

Finally, we have invested time, money and effort in the development of non-conventional sources of energy, including solar and biogas energy resources. We have particularly directed these efforts to provide the rural sector with readily available energy which they can produce from indigenous materials.

Largely because of these efforts to tap indigenous resources, the nation now finds itself in a position to supply a significant portion of our energy.

Perhaps, it is worth noting that the 25 percent contribution from indigenous energy resources which we shall attain next year had been originally targeted by 1987. In the last formulation of the energy programs submitted to me, therefore, we shall be nine years ahead of schedule.

In view of these accomplishments, I now order that the target of 50 percent source from the indigenous energy initially programmed for the year 2000 also be advanced to the year 1987. In that year, total energy consumption has been projected to reach the equivalent of 119 million barrels of oil. Our target as of today, therefore, is to supply 95 million of that from locally produced energy fuels. To put this magnitude into perspective, of course, 95 million barrels is even more than the total energy we consume in 1977 which run to about 85 million oil barrels.

In the effort to increase our indigenous sources of energy, you will note that from five percent, we have jumped to 25 percent. This five-fold increase, however, will stabilize to 20 percent only through 1982 if there are no additional oil strikes. In 1983, the share will go back to 26, on the strength primarily of increased coal, hydropower usage, and nuclear energy.

These projections assume a nine percent annual growth rate in energy consumption and a lower 5.5 percent annual growth rate in petroleum requirements due primarily to our massive fuel diversification effort.

As a mere study, perhaps, I can tell you that if we have to maintain the 25 percent participation of indigenous resources of energy in our consumption of power, to sustain a 25 percent reliance on indigenous energy resources from 1982 would require the discovery of at least two more oil fields by 1979, each of similar size as the Nido complex.

A 50 percent indigenous energy target by 1987, however, will call for the discovery of four more oil fields between 1980 and 1984, with each field having the equivalent capacity of Nido.

Falling short of these oil projections, heavier reliance will have to be placed on our other indigenous resources — either coal, geothermal and probably both, in order to pursue our programs of gradually displacing imported oil supplies.

The emphasis we give to energy source diversification in our National Energy program lends focus to the importance of power development.

Perhaps, you have noted that before 1974, the usual infrastructure capital expenditures were for highways, irrigation and school buildings. These were the three principal items of about three to four billion annual capital expenditures of the government.

We have now increased our capital expenditures to about 11-12 billion excluding loans from outside. We are now spending most of it for power. The priority given to highways and irrigations, of course, still remain, but we have balanced all the other expenditures in order to give priority to power development.

Now, as of 1977, what was the recorded aggregate installed operating capacity of our power facilities? It was 3,084 megawatts, and these provided support to industry, agriculture, and commerce, ad served an estimated 35 percent of total households in the country. The low level of service coverage is a major factor for the backwardness of several regions of the country.

Our national energy program must provide for an effective answer to this service backlog. And it is in these terms that we have designed the power development program.

All in all, our goal, and our commitment, is the total electrification of the country by 1990 within the framework of the national energy program.

Over the plan period from 1978-87, an incremental generating capacity of 6,518 megawatts is programmed for operation. By 1987, therefore, cumulative capacity will be 9,602 megawatts, representing an average growth rate of some 13 percent annually.

And the growth rate will expectedly stress areas which are at present experiencing low-capacity levels, such as the Visayas, and generally speaking, the rural areas.

Finally, it can be remarked that the national energy program has substantially improved the quality of national consumption of energy. Full emphasis is given now to energy utilization for developmental activities, and energy conservation has considerably reduced wasteful consumption of our energy resources.

I am certain that the achievements charted by our national energy program embody in the main the soundness of the path we have chosen, and they provide secure basis for confidence that we can cope with the crisis and challenge of today and the future.

In this effort, however, we will need the participation of our scientists and researchers. I am certain that we do not need to call your attention to the crucial need for the cooperation of each and everyone — not only the scientists but every man in the Philippines in the effort at curtailing energy utilization to most essential requirements.

I go back, therefore, to the fact that today, as we remember the scientists, it is our hope that our people, the country and the Republic, will remember that everyday there is a group of men and women dedicated quietly, anonymously to the advancement of our nation in the quiet of their laboratories and the ivory towers of intellectual endeavors. We, too, fight the battle of survival. And I may say, more than anybody else, I realize the vital and crucial role that you play in this battle.

To you, therefore, I repeat, go the accolade of the entire Filipino people and your President.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].