Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the Philippines’ program for economic recovery and growth

[Released on July 25, 1984]

I would like to express the Philippine government’s deep appreciation to the delegates on this second and last day of the local aid review conference, especially our good friends from our donor countries and international institutions. Our thanks also to the Asian Development Bank for the valuable assistance it extended to the national economic and development authority in the organization of this meeting.

Your meeting indeed comes at a crucial time in our nation’s history when we are in the midst of grappling with a financial crisis that continues to put a heavy strain on our development efforts. As we look back to the past, we note that the last decade (1972-82) was a period of significant changes in the Philippines, a middle-income oil-importing country with a present population of 53.4 million. Growing at the rate of 5.5 percent in real terms over the past 11 years, the Philippines has a per capita GNP of $650 in current terms as of end-1983. Agriculture accounted for roughly 25 percent and industry about 36 percent of the gross national product that year as against 29 percent and 31 percent respectively, in 1972.

The Philippines’ economic performance during the past decade is the result of a development strategy that was characterized by continued high rate of public investment; supportive fiscal and monetary policy; and substantial capital inflows to fund development requirements. These policies were pursued to partly overcome the two major oil shocks in 1973-74 and 1979-80.

Consistent with the long-term growth strategy and in response to several debilitating effects of the first oil crisis, we embarked on a number of important measures. An aggressive energy development program was launched in 1973, which reduced oil import dependence from 95 percent in 1972 to 65 percent in 1983. Export development was strengthened and collection of domestic revenues and exports provided the leverage to gain access to foreign borrowings, particularly during the mid-1970s. During the period 1973-82, the country was granted medium and long term loans averaging to some $1.5 billion per year.

At the same time, Philippine availment of official development assistance also grew substantially amounting to a total of US$6 billion ODA loans outstanding as of end-December 1983. The proportion of ODA loans to total non-monetary external debts increased from 19.6 percent in 1973 to30 percent in 1983, reflecting the growing contribution of ODA to the overall development program of the country.

These foreign borrowings substantially augmented our domestic resources, and these were utilized to finance major development programs in an effort to meet the increasing demand of the population for basic services and livelihood opportunities.

During the decade 1972-1982, the government spent some P62 billion in such people-oriented development programs as: (1) energy self-reliance (23.5%); (2) education (21.5%); (3) water resources (11.3%) food self-sufficiency (14.4%); (5) transport and communications (15.8%); (6) health (6.2%); (7) livelihood and housing (5%); and (8) agrarian reform (2.3%). These expenditures, designed for the economic and social uplift of the poorest among our people, were more than 10 times the development expenditures for 1962-71. While government spending was clearly expansionary, the budgetary deficit to GNP ratio was carefully controlled at less than 2 percent until 1980, increasing only to 4.3 percent by 1982.

This development strategy was successful until the late 1970s, by which time the economy had been growing by about six and a half percent, much faster than in the late 1960s. After 1979, however, real GNP declined progressively from 4.4 percent in 1980 to 1.4 percent in 1983, the lowest growth since the country’s independence in 1946. The decline can be attributed to two factors: the second oil shock in 1979 and the consequent prolonged recession and the failure of some past investments to yield expected targets.

After the second oil shock and the onset of a world recession, major debtor developing countries like the Philippines found it more difficult to earn foreign exchange from exports because of the international recession. At the same time, restrictive monetary policies abroad to contain inflation caused a steep rise in international interest rates and heavier debt service burdens for borrowing countries. The Philippines’ already sizable level of external debt and the decline in export receipt precluded the sustenance in growth targets in the 1980s.

To redress our present economic difficulties we are now pursuing a medium-term plan that is built around a five-point recovery program. This four-year plan is basically designed to stem the balance of payment crisis, increase self-reliance and national productivity and bring about meaningful structural changes in the Philippine economy.

We are now negotiating a financial package with the International Monetary Fund, a consortium of about 500 creditor banks and official sources of capital, most of whom, I understand are represented here today. This financial package will consist of an IMF standby credit, rescheduling of part of the country’s foreign debt, maintenance of trade-related credit facilities at least at the level of October 1983, and particularly with your generous support on new official development assistance loans. This is expected to improve our BOP position and to maintain the inflow of essential imports.

We are also taking measures to stimulate domestic resource generation through a combination of demand management policies designed to restrain imports, strengthen export incentives, and minimize inflation. A floating exchange rate was adopted as of 6 June 1984 to control the current account deficit. At the same time, the national government has adopted a revenue and expenditure program to keep the fiscal deficit to not more than 1.2 percent of GNP up to 1987. In keeping with the stabilization program, credit expansion will be stringently controlled to minimize inflationary pressures.

In tandem with shorter-term stabilization measures, development activities have been reoriented in favor of on-going, small-scale, labor-intensive, and foreign-exchange-saving or earning projects. A larger share of investments will be allocated to productivity programs for livelihood provision and self-employment. Natural resources will be developed to complement priority programs in food production, energy, exports, and social services. In contrast to the large-scale capital intensive programs of the late 1970s, these small-scale investments are addressed specifically to problems of resource scarcity and possible worker displacement, particularly during the period of adjustment.

We have, moreover, adopted a development strategy that emphasizes the modernization of agriculture. Through agricultural productivity programs, it is envisioned that the country’s current dependence on foreign borrowings will be reduced by increased export earnings from agro-based activities and the boost to domestic savings generated by higher rural incomes. The development of forests, aquatic resources, and mineral-based activities, on the one hand, will be complemented by cottage, small and medium scale, labor-intensive industries, on the other. As an immediate step to generate more livelihood activities, jobs, food supply, foreign exchange receipts and to meet the other needs of our people and industries, productivity and rehabilitation programs will be implemented.

These programs include the massive planting of hybrid corn, intensified rice production, aquaculture development assistance to the copper industry and other mineral sectors, expanded production of non-traditional exports such as electronic products and garments, and commercialization of technological breakthroughs for producing food and raw materials on a commercial scale such as rattan, root crops, and other products.

To make the productive system more efficient, internationally competitive, and able to generate more productive employment, phased trade liberalization and tariff reforms began in 1980 will continue to be implemented. In line with the new priorities, structural adjustment will be expanded to include the agriculture sector. The program will cover more efficient pricing and marketing, institutional and other incentives. These are expected to increase the labor absorptive capacity, foreign exchange generation, and relative profitability of agro-based industries.

To support the structural adjustment program, key industries will be revitalized. Nonconventional and rural-based sources of energy will be developed, and exportation of goods and services will be encouraged according to the country’s comparative advantage. These will be complemented by tourism promotion and increased collaboration with other countries on mutually profitable ventures, to maximize foreign exchange earnings.

We recognize that over the short-term, economic stabilization measures are expected to put pressure on the unemployment situation. This will be addressed through a package of adjustment assistance for workers and their families suffering from economic stress, such as prudent wage adjustments, staggered working hours to prevent mass layoffs, separation pay for laid-off workers, advance payment of vacation and sick leave benefits, and unemployment assistance loans. Short-term skills training tailored to the needs of potential growth industries shall also be given to facilitate re-entry of laid-off workers into the labor market.

The Philippine government adheres to a policy of helping to advance international cooperation while at the same time pursuing the national interest. It is in this light that we have embarked on a financial and economic program to make our domestic economy more self-reliant, able to respond better to external shocks, and able to fulfill its economic obligations to the rest of the world.

Beyond national initiatives, however, a broadly based world economic recovery is contingent on actions taken by the developed countries. Firstly, we welcome policies conducive to lower international interest rates, in order to sustain investments and reduce debt servicing cost. Secondly, we encourage the continuation of capital inflows from both commercial and official development sources, including initiatives to extend multi-year rescheduling of external debts where debtor countries show serious adjustment efforts. We are also pledged to supporting flows of direct private investment. And thirdly, we encourage more openness to developing country exports and a generally more liberal approach to trade.

As I mentioned earlier, the Philippines has increasingly availed itself of ODA to supplement domestic resources. In the face of the rising interest on commercial loans, the tight credit situation, and the general instability of the financial markets, official development assistance will continue to play a major role in our national development programs.

We are indeed very grateful to both bilateral and multilateral lending institutions for their continued assistance during these difficult times in our national life even as we vigorously pursue our economic stabilization program, not only to achieve a healthy national economy, but also to fulfill our commitments to the institutions who have generously assisted the country in the past, we look forward to the continuing support and cooperation of both bilateral and international development institutions. In particular, we hope these agencies will look favorably at programs and projects directly supportive of agricultural and rural development and other support services aimed at raising agricultural productivity and benefiting the majority of the Filipinos who continued to rely on agriculture for their livelihood.

Again, on behalf of the Filipino people, I thank you for your support in our national development efforts.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.