The speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, on the distribution of 25,000 land titles and the inauguration of BLISS Condominium II for teachers.

I am very happy to be with you on this historic day of our distribution of land titles to our poor countrymen, coinciding with the inauguration of the Teachers BLISS Condominium here in the historic place of Balintawak in Quezon City.

Not far from this place is one of the greatest places in our country that reminds us of the sacrifices, dreams and aspirations that were inseparable from the birth of our race and nation. In this place also, eighty-eight years ago, our brave Gat Andres Bonifacio, together with the great men and women of that time. Together and united they tore up their cedulas as a sign of their liberation from the chains of our slavery to Spain. They also shouted with all their might in this place which was then a wilderness and forest so that the whole world could hear “Long live the Philippines.”

We proudly remember that great day, August 23, 1896, which we call the First Cry of Balintawak. Until these moments, we have not forgotten that day which signaled the beginning of our race's struggle to achieve independence.

Therefore, it is only fitting that on this day, eighty-eight years ago, we gather once more in historic Balintawak to fulfill and carry out a new cry of our countrymen – none other than the cry for their well-being and welfare.

You probably still remember when we started our land program for the landless in Metro Manila in 1981. Then, we distributed titles to 10,000 lots to the residents of the Tondo Foreshore Project. I will never forget what I said then: there should be no Filipino squatter in his own country. I said then that as long as I serve as President of the Republic of the Philippines, all my intelligence, ability, and strength will be devoted to fulfilling the dream of land ownership for all the landless in our country.

Since then, in all parts of our country, not only in Metro Manila, it has become a vow of your servant to strive to fulfill this promise.

Since that time, that basic policy statement has becoming the rallying cry of so many of our urban citizenry. Not only here in Metro Manila but in all urban centers of our country.

And since then I am truly proud to say that we in Government have not reneged on that promise and that pledge. We have continued to explore and avail of all means to turn into reality the hope of our urban poor to have their own land and their own homes.

The awarding of 25,000 titles to project beneficiaries is such a testament of this on-going commitment. It pursues on a massive scale the program we began in 1981, and it sets the way for future projects that will doubtless benefit thousands of other families in our country.

This is not just a small program. Since 1981, the number of titles we have distributed to many families has been growing year after year. In 1981, we distributed 10,000. In 1982, it doubled, becoming 20,000. And now, we are distributing 25,000 titles.

It is true that former politicians and leaders often talked about the “Land for the Landless Program”, especially during election season. But, it was all promises and words. They never once had a real fulfillment of their promises.

But things are different now. To be honest, today, the land program for the landless is a true fulfillment. This is the first thing that your servant and our Government are focusing on because your servant firmly believes that there should be no Filipino squatter in his own country. That, and every family deserves to live with dignity and honor in their own country.

If one were to carefully examine what we have done to solve the problem of the poor in crowded cities, anyone would see that our program is not a joke.

First of all, we created urban land reform as one of the specific objectives of the Government to fulfill the provisions and spirit of our Constitution. Thanks to the amendment adopted in the past plebiscite. Now, our Government can truly fulfill its responsibility to implement urban land reform. Through the aforementioned amendment, we have cleared the path towards the full implementation of this program and thus, we can truly solve the problems regarding the areas of the poor and squatters throughout the country. Through this amendment as well, we can extend what we started in Metro Manila to the far-flung corners of our country.

In any case, even before there was an amendment regarding urban land reform, our care for the welfare of our poor in the city was truly genuine. We created the National Housing Authority which truly cares for the landless. And, there are countless projects completed by the NHA that are witnesses that cannot be erased by time. All of these are living monuments of our love and concern for our poor countrymen who came from former areas that were almost despised by others. They have become truly worthy places to be called homes.

I would like to emphasize here that we did not only build houses. We are complementing this with the necessary programs so that these residences truly progress and develop. What I am referring to is none other than the opportunities we are providing our countrymen to learn livelihood skills so that they can stand on their own feet and earn a living in a dignified manner.

For many years, we have strived to solve the problem of poverty. And, in this time of major economic difficulties, the problem has grown and the needs of the poor have increased. That is why, all of our government's programs now are focused solely on the goal of helping our poor countrymen. And, among these programs for the poor are:

1. KKK 2. The BLISS Program 3. The Gubat ng Bayan (Forest of the Nation) 4. The Sariling Sikap (Self-Reliance) Program 5. And, The Urban Land Reform

Since I became President, the first thing I have focused on is the concern for the welfare of our poor countrymen. Indeed, I firmly believe that for this country to truly prosper, the seeds of prosperity must be sown in the areas where the poor live, the foundation of our nation's stability.

Our ultimate goal, let me stress again, is to establish self-reliant communities. And we shall achieve this in the best tradition of “bayanihan” and community effort.

We would have reason to fear failure in this program if we were doing nothing more, than the mere granting of land titles to beneficiaries. But in fact there is more to it than that.

The fortunate families who reside in the villages we have built also have their own responsibilities and duties. The land and its accompanying benefits are not free. Those who have received it are expected to pay a stipulated installment amount. This is so that we can continue this program and allow other less fortunate individuals to also be fortunate enough to have land and a home. The government shouldered a portion of the expenses incurred here. However, those who received it should also shoulder a share within their capacity.

Our true objective here is none other than to create orderly and beautiful villages from the former slums, while instilling in everyone’s minds that the comforts and blessings of life are obtained only through hard work and diligence. If we do not do this, slum areas are likely to sprout up again in various places and the old principle of begging and relying solely on others will return, instead of striving and helping oneself.

Therefore, I foresee a new dawn for our impoverished countrymen. It won't be long before all slums are replaced by model communities where residents are self-reliant and do not depend on and wait for alms and help from others. It won't be long either before all our countrymen have homes they can call their own.

And, if anyone in the opposition says that what we have done is just a gimmick or a vote-catching scheme, we will not respond with anything. We will simply point to the records of our successful accomplishments regarding this program. We will show them a record that even if all the housing projects done by all the Presidents of our country are put together, they cannot match what we have accomplished in the past ten years alone. We also invite them to visit and see the changes happening in Tondo, in Malabon, in Caloocan and in Quezon City.

Through these, what we emphasize is our concern for our poor countrymen in the cities, along with giving attention to the basic needs of our other countrymen.

It is only fitting that along with the distribution of land titles, we also inaugurate this New Teachers BLISS Condominium II here in Balintawak.

In the ranks of our civil services, there is perhaps no sector so vital and important to the future of our nation than the teachers who man the ramparts of our public education system. We can hardly exaggerate the contribution they make to the vitality of our society. And I know personally of the sacrifices of every public schoolteacher because I myself come from a family of teachers.

It is true that for a time, because they are so many, increments in pay and ameliorative benefits accorded have not always kept pace with the responsibilities they bear. And that is why we were witness for a time of the agitation for a new deal coming from the ranks of our school teachers.

The time of neglect, however, is now past. Today, we are doing all we can to implement a package of measures that will upgrade teachers' salaries and benefits, accelerate teacher development and enable teachers to improve their well-being and livelihood opportunities.

We see here today in this Teachers BLISS Project one vivid manifestation of the priority we give to the well-being of teachers.

The Teachers BLISS Program is similar to other BLISS projects. We have a building of considerable size and we can give more people the opportunity to acquire a home here. It won't be long before the teachers who have acquired these and their loved ones will participate in our livelihood projects through the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran or KKK. Like other KKK projects, we will strive to maximize the benefit for every family member and help them increase production, along with the growth of their family's income.

The Teachers’ BLISS is the response to the housing needs of our teachers. This is only the beginning of our efforts regarding this. From Metro Manila, we plan to make this program a National Housing Program for Teachers.

Of all the things that we might mention here on this occasion, it must be stressed above all that we are not talking here of a program or programs to merely benefit a few, of projects focused only in Metro Manila. You in this city are indeed very fortunate, but let me say now and stress again that this is only the beginning.

Our programs for the urban poor will extend from this metropolis to the far-flung centers of the archipelago. And we will transform every slum and squatter community of our country into new habitats of life and hope.

Our BLISS program for teachers in Metro Manila is but the precursor of a larger nationwide program. And you may be sure that our Government will not relent until the well-being of all our educators is so advanced and promoted.

To fulfill this program, before you now I will sign Presidential Decree __________ to make the fund of the National Housing Authority five billion pesos and thus expand the Urban Land Reform program. As well as our housing program. This includes the National Housing Program for teachers.

Through this, we show everyone that this program is fully achievable, genuine, and not a joke. We will not stop until every deserving child who is willing to strive and persevere has their own house.

The NHA is the agency behind our projects such as Tondo Foreshore and BLISS Programs. To address the growing program and the increasing problems embraced by this agency, we need to increase its funding. Only in this way can we repeat what we did this morning in historic Balintawak in different parts of our country.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.