I would like to begin by extending, on behalf of our Government and people, a very warm welcome to the Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry of ASEAN and the members of their delegations who have gathered here in Manila for their sixth meeting.

I welcome this opportunity to meet with you on the opening day of your conference. And I welcome most of all the opportunity this meeting affords us to take our bearing and possibly chart new directions for future cooperative action which will bring us closer to the ideal of regional peace, freedom and prosperity on which the Association of Southeast Asian Nation was founded.

We meet at a time when mounting protectionism, depressed world markets and abnormally high interest rates continue to besiege the economies of ASEAN and much of the rest of the world. The promise of trade liberalization made by the major industrial countries at the Williamsburg Summit and at various GATT meetings have yet to be translated into concrete policies and actions. Trade barriers have yet to be dismantled. High interest rates continue to erode the earnings from exports of developing nations and aggravate their debt burdens. And the much-acclaimed recovery of the major industrial powers have had but marginal positive effects on the economies of developing nations.

This set of intolerable conditions has at best effectively reduced the capacity for growth of the nations of the Third World and continue to dampen the chances for recovery of those that are in economic difficulties. Even worse, these have immeasurably helped push some fragile economies to the brink of bankruptcy and ruin.

But until such time as the industrialized nations heed our call for concerted action against these plagues on the international economy and threats to world stability, we of the Third World and of ASEAN particularly would be well-advised to explore every avenue to cooperative endeavor.

We can perhaps consider ourselves fortunate that, among the developing nations, we have in the ASEAN a working and dynamic organization. Yet it seems rather ironic that this organization which was originally conceived as a vehicle for regional economic, social and cultural cooperation can count among its more substantial achievements its common stand on political issues. Our common position on Kampuchea is a collective expression of concern over expansionism in the region that has been heard the world over. Altogether, we have manifested a unity of purpose and a common will to act as one on matters affecting the peace and stability of our region.

But if we can act as one in the sphere of politics, much remains yet to be done to transform ASEAN into a viable economic alliance. The lack-luster growth of intra-regional trade suggests the dimension of the problems we need to overcome, despite our preferential trading arrangements, intra-ASEAN trade still remains a small fraction of our total international trade. In 1982, we bought from each other some $22.2 billion worth of goods. This amount is less than one-tenth of our global trade transactions during that year. There is certainly reason for concern over the fact that from a vigorous 52 percent in 1978-79, the growth rate of intra-ASEAN trade has plunged down to a little over 8 percent in 1980-81, and still further down to 1.07 percent in 1981-82.

Equally distressing is the slow progress of the ASEAN Industrial Complementation Scheme. Singapore, for one thing, had to give up its diesel plant as a regional project because at least two other ASEAN countries had plans of their own to produce diesel engines. On the other hand, the Philippines’ copper fabrication project is not assured of an ASEAN-wide market because another country produces its own copper wire rods. Finally, there is still the unresolved issue of competition between Thailand’s soda ash project and that of Indonesia.

While all these issues beg for resolution — and I am fully confident that in time they will be resolved — we should cast our eyes on broadening and intensifying regional cooperation in other economic areas.

Surprisingly enough, agriculture, fishery and forestry offer some bright prospects for greater regional cooperation contrary to the conventional view that ASEAN member countries cannot help but compete with each other in these areas given our geographic proximity and similarity. A paper prepared by the ASEAN Agricultural Development Planning Center concludes that ASEAN countries actually produce more complementary than competitive agricultural products. Some countries produce surpluses which could fill part or all of the excess demand in others. Rice, corn, cassava, pork and poultry, sugar, rubber, coconut and palm oil are prime examples. At the same time, most ASEAN countries are in short supply of such food products as beef, fish, and dairy products, among other things.

There is no reason, except perhaps our inadequate knowledge about each other’s needs, why we cannot expand the production of these vital commodities to fill all the requirements of ASEAN countries and even generate surpluses we could trade with the rest of the world. It is my hope that a portion of your deliberations during the next few days will be focused on determining the modes of cooperation in agriculture which would not spur trade in ASEAN but more importantly bring about food self-sufficiency in our regional community.

We in the Philippines are committed to a National Agricultural Productivity Program which has as its ultimate aim the full exploitation of our agricultural potentials. We look at agricultural productivity as our decisive response to the crisis now prevailing in our national economy, and we have revised our plans to put the greatest emphasis on agriculture. We have already set aside P500 million to support commodity-specific production programs designed to eliminate our country’s dependence on certain imported agricultural inputs. And our eyes are set on producing enough not only for our needs but for the international market as well.

Initially, we have made available the amount of P100 million for the production of yellow corn. Some major agricultural companies are participating in our Feed-Grain Program. And in just two years, we expect to be self-sufficient in our yellow corn requirements after which we should be able to export our surplus production to our neighbors in Asia.

To further lessen our dependence on imported feed-grains and possibly eliminate the importation of such commodities, we are intensifying the cultivation of soybeans, ipil-ipil, cassava, and sweet potatoes. We are also developing Azolla, a nitrogen-fixing alga, to displace a portion of our nitrogen fertilizer imports.

Only this week, I authorized the release of P130 million to finance these programs. Part of this amount will also be used to supplement the P100 million earlier allocated for yellow corn production.

To further boost agricultural productivity, we have also in recent months raised the price ceilings on agricultural products, including rice, meat, fish and poultry.

And whatever investments we may be capable of generating will mainly be concentrated on the construction of agricultural support infrastructure.

Our revised plans and the series of policy reforms we have adopted are clearly designed to support the Agricultural Productivity Program. We are sparing no effort to ensure its success for on it we have staked our chances for national survival and recovery. In these times of economic stress and crises, we rely on agriculture as the source of our greatest strength.

This is true not only of the Philippies but for all of ASEAN. With the exception of Singapore, every country in ASEAN is basically agricultural. And despite some encouraging progress made towards industrialization by ASEAN as a whole, agriculture remains the most dominant sector of our economy. Three out of every people in our region are engaged in agriculture, 36 percent of ASEAN’s Gross Domestic Product is derived from agriculture and 57 percent of consumer expenditures is used to purchase food.

Any sensible national or regional economic plan must, therefore, consider the primacy of agriculture in our economies.

Under the prevailing situation of a continuing global economic crisis, your meeting assumes the highest importance. There is ground for our optimism that this meeting will again yield fruitful results. The Manila Consensus forged by ASEAN Ministers of Agriculture in 1979 set forth the areas of cooperation in agriculture and began the process of evolving a common agricultural policy.

Substantial gains have since been made under the leadership of the Agriculture Ministers of ASEAN. We have established as ASEAN Food Security Reserve, which is the first regional undertaking of its kind in the world. We have adopted a common quarantine ring to protect our livestock and plants from destructive pests and diseases. And we have begun to pool our resources for basic research and technology development.

I am proud to know that the University of the Philippines at Los Baños has played an important role in research and technology development. And of course the International Rice Research Institute has been at the forefront of the efforts to upgrade our knowledge on rice cultivation and technology.

Finally as in research, there has been a continuous flow of information among ASEAN countries through training and extension services in our agricultural colleges and universities.

Through all these, we have certainly made substantial headway towards the full adoption of a common agricultural policy. But even as we take pride in these achievements, we only know too well that our job is far from over.

We are aware of the need for greater cooperation in the fight against malnutrition as well as the development of fisheries, agricultural cooperatives and fertilizer self-sifficiency. The conservation of our forests and wildlife also needs immediate attention. We ought also to begin considering ways of feeding our own people and providing for their other basic needs through the development of our own capabilities and resources.

In sum, we should enlarge our vision and give our utmost exertions towards making agriculture the foundation of a viable ASEAN economic community.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.