A New Vision, A New Dimension

Just as with respect to energy and food we concentrated our government resources, talent and energy, it is now necessary to concentrate our resources, energy and telent on a new vision and a dimension of our economic development. On Constitution Day, January 17, 1984, I said that no man is truly politically independent or any nation truly sovereign unless economically liberated.

On this basic philosophy do we now present the new program for the conversion of every community and every citizen into a productive unit. The initial model and basis and starting point will be the “Sariling Sikap” program. It may initially utilize low-salaried employees of the government including the men in uniform and those in the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports including the teachers and non-teachers.

I have just ordered the organization of a Provincial Development Fund to be managed by a Corp of Presidential Fellows for Economic Management (PROFEM), and the authorization of provinces and cities to use City Development Funds to be managed as an expanded component of the KKK program which is part of the nation’s agenda for growth, that I announced during the opening of the Batasang Pambansa last July 1983.

The creation of the Provincial Development Fund will provide the mechanism to utilize the savings of provincial governments for viable livelihood activities of the province in accordance with the provincial development plan. To encourage the provincial governments to realize savings, the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran through the KKK Processing Center Authority and/or the development projects fund will invest a matching equity fund of the same amount to the Provincial Development Fund.

The creation of an implementing Corp of President Fellows for Economic Management (PROFEM) composed of provincial economic managers who will act as the Chief Executive officers of the Provincial Development Fund with the provincial governors as the Chairmen of the Fund.

These economic managers will be appointed by the President for a period of three years. They will be seconded from the top executives and businessmen of the private sector and compensated with private sector rates.

This program will provide the system to organize private and government efforts, reorienting the provincial development to a corporate viewpoint.

The Provincial Development Fund which is co-funded by the provincial government and the KKK and/or the Development Projects Fund may enter into a joint venture with private corporations and may invest in wholly-owned projects. The projects may also qualify for loans from existing loan programs.

A Presidential Assistant will be appointed for economic and development affairs who is to handle the supervision of this program, with the economic managers directly under him.

You will remember that we identified one million hectares of land or forest land for replanting or what is commonly referred to as industrial tree plantations with initial plantings of ipil-ipil but with permanent and central trees or orchard plantings. The initial step is first creating a large source of pelletized animal feeds for both domestic and export purposes from the leaves of ipil-ipil and veneer, from ipil-ipil as well as fast growing species of trees source like albicia falcata for both domestic and export purposes. The orchards may include cacao, coffee, langka, suha, and other types of fruits which could be processed either into drinks or canned food products.

We cannot but be moved by the present difficult times and am now seriously studying with the rest of the administration how we can increase the salaries and emoluments of teachers, officers and soldiers, officers and employees of the government. As you are well aware, I come from a family of teachers and I myself have always ambitioned to be a teacher. I cannot but feel sympathy those who have humbled themselves to a point where they have been violating the law sitting down on their assignment as teachers and almost causing a breakdown in the school system.’

I have therefore studied with all the advisers especially the First Lady, the problem on how to increase the emoluments of the salaried employees and officers of the government, especially the teachers and members of the military.

While it may be necessary to ask the teachers and soldiers and other officers and employees of the government to wait, it is urgent that as soon as possible we create new incomes for these officers and employees without burdening the government — that income to come from sources other than the budget. It must come from the production of goods and services, utilizing the resources of government it is true but by the employees, officers and citizenry in general allowing for the augmentation of income of officers and employees of the government.

We must now organize a system of production, not through factories but by the small people who will also attain both dignity and economic liberation. I have in mind therefore the utilization of public land for the low-salaried and the least advantaged in our society. The establishment of tree farms that I have already ordered for every province and, if possible, for every city and municipality.

We should immediately start with 1,000 hectares for every province. There are 73 provinces and so there should be 73,000 farms. The studies indicate that after two or three years, if not less, the income from pelletized animal feeds from ipil-ipil and veneer alone can produce an additional income of P25,000.00 per hectare (the study actually states P50,000, but let us be conservative and say we have only one half of this income.) For every province therefore, theoretically, there should an increase in income of P25 million for every one thousand hectares initially in each province that is planted only to ipil-ipil. It does not take into account the other sources of income potentially available in such a province for processed food, truck gardening, orchard, coffee, cacao and other kinds of plants.

If we were therefore to assign one employee or one teacher to each hectare theoretically this should produce for him an additional income of P25,000 a year or at least another P1,000 per month. However, it will be necessary for us to concentrate the resources and the energy and talent of government to these projects.

We will have to install the “Sariling Sikap” program so as to make it applicable in a wider scope to all the provinces and cities.

Perhaps it will be necessary for even the heavy and other equipment of both the national and local government to be utilized and concentrated on these projects in the meantime. Perhaps it would be necessary for even the construction engineering battalions and the military themselves to be utilized in bringing these areas into production. Perhaps it will be necessary for us to cut down the expenses of maintenance and operations of our government to the tune of two or three billion pesos annually in order that we may utilize these savings as seed capital for the project.

Perhaps it may be necessary to assign the teachers for every hectare of land to be developed in order that he or she can have an additional income. It may perhaps be necessary to employ the students so that they can learn new skills and at the same time earn some income.

Perhaps it will be necessary to utilize the service of idle hands in the countryside, but this is the fascinating aspect of this program. It can absorb as many of our people as may be possible.

There is no intent here to cause more deficits by expenditure of government funds. We shall have to discipline ourselves and take the capital from savings. I order as of today a ten percent cut on expenditure of every ministry and office for this purpose. And it will not be another inflationary and purpose expenditure by artificially creating jobs because it will be productive on the shortest possible gestation period. The worker for pelletized ipil-ipil leaves and veneer are there to absorb these products. A market study has been made.

In the meantime perhaps we should now seriously consider the increase in the salaries of teachers nationwide on the basis of a new school tax and on the basis of savings by the national and local governments. These too will require the cooperation of all the ministries, the offices, and agencies of the government.

(Insert the material dictated to Jolly Benitez)

I have spoken about the 1,000 hectares province which means a total of 73,000 hectares. Actually, we have identified from one to ten million hectares of barren and overlogged areas throughout the Philippines. Our target should initially be on the first year 73,000 hectares, if not double this, because ultimately we must raise this to one million or even five million hectares.

So from this source of income other than the government funds there will, therefore, be theoretically, if we are to earn P25,000 per hectare per year an additional income every year of 25 billion for every one million hectares that is developed.

I was myself pleasantly shocked by the implication of this study because this study points to self-reliance, to sariling sikap. It is the vision of a man dignified by his own labor. It is a new dimension of the Filipino race. To this vision we must completely dedicate ourselves. I repeat, no man, no nation can be completely free nor politically emancipated unless she or it is economically liberated. It is now time to fight a new war, impose new discipline, create new frontiers, and work out our own survival.

This is the new vision, this is the new diemsnion that I have brought to this August Chamber as we enter a new year of struggle. Never again must we allow our survival and our destiny to depend on the generosity or forbearance of other nations and other countries.

God willing, we will succeed in this noble vision.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.