Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Assembly of Lawyers

[Delivered on June 9, 1981]

The Undertones of Criminal Disobedience*

One cannot speak before lawyers without first establishing basic premises. As is usual among lawyers these premises are those already known and widely accepted – yet sometimes forgotten. Let me then begin with a brief review of the concept of law . In its most fundamental concept, law is the system of rules of external conduct expressing directly or indirectly the collective will of a community, independent of the individual will of its members and enforced by acknowledged authority (Ennecerus). More simply stated, it is the body of rules governing the conduct of persons living in association with others, under the guaranty of social compulsion (De Page). There are, to be sure, innumerable classifications of law. But the most relevant in our exchange of ideas this morning is the classification of law according to scope , into Public Law which governs the relations of the individual with the sovereign or the community as a whole, and Private Law which regulates the relations of the members of a community among themselves.

Law defines the rights and obligations of the individual upon whom it operates. Hence, this classification must in turn classify the rights and duties that flow therefrom. Accordingly, public rights and duties arise from Public Law, and private rights and duties similarly arise from Private Law.

In its broadest connotation, a right is the power to exact from other individuals the observance of a certain act or behaviour, which power is recognized and enforced by state authority as conforming to the general interest. A duty is the juridical necessity to observe a certain demeanor or conduct sanctioned by law. Right and duty are therefore reciprocal, correlative, and inseparable, being the opposite aspects of the same relation. Where the right and duty are private in nature they may refer to different persons as distinct subjects in that what is one’s right is, in effect, another’s duty. But when the right and duty are public in character, the right and duty may be merged into one identical reality, inhering in the same subject. Stated more simply, the act or behaviour prescribed by public law may itself – singly, indivisibly and identically – be both a right and a duty. Of this peculiar kind is the right of suffrage – which is both a right and a duty.

If I seem to be dwelling on concepts much too axiomatic to belabour, it is because the experience of the recent campaign for the coming presidential election has shown that many lawyers of the opposition, heretofore highly respected for their legal acumen, seem to have lost their bearings on these basic concepts of law, and of right and duty.

“No man is an island.” As a social being, he is a member of the community, a part of the nation, a citizen of the State. As such, he receives protection and benefits from the Republic, and, in turn, he has certain obligations to the State. These obligations are as essential in times of peace, as they are necessary in times of war.

The most fundamental of these obligations involves the citizen’s loyalty to the country, obedience to its laws, and his commitment to protect the existence of the State. In virtue thereof, the citizen has the duty to participate in the processes of government and to vote in elections in time of peace, and to fight and die for his country if need be in time of war.

When there is danger, socio-economic or political, where there is peril short of war, the remedy lies in the choice of leadership. This choice is effected by the use of the ballot. In time of armed aggression against our territorial integrity and national existence, then must we stake our very lives to defend our people. These are not only rights but also duties – sacred, personal, and inalienable. The legal truism that one cannot refuse to vote, is founded upon the same principle that one cannot refuse to fight and refuse to die for his country. Those who advocate the abandonment of these duties should not be allowed to hold public office, for they are guilty of treachery to the people whom they thus betray. For this reason I am in solemn duty bound to enforce the law against those who abandon the public right and duty of suffrage. The Constitution forbids a boycott of elections, and the law punishes it. From the words of the law there is no departure. (“A verbis legis non est recedendum”). For this same reason I view with candid cynicism and even genuine amusement the sudden outbreak of an epidemic in the affluent residences of the metropolitan areas on April 7, 1981, and its disappearance, just as sudden, on the very next day. For the same reason I am struck with admiration at the civic spirit of the poor who, struggling for the minimum essentials of bare existence, seem to value the right and duty of suffrage more than those who enjoy the bountiful luxuries of an abundant life.

In truth, the issues that confront us during the coming election are indeed simple. My cause – and your cause – consists in the crystallization of the changes that our people have decided upon in the last plebiscite of April 7, to restructure our government along the patterns of a parliamentary participatory democracy. Our people overwhelmingly resolved to discard the purely ceremonial figurehead of the original 1953 Constitution, and to entrust the affairs of state and of government into the hands of a strong President directly deriving his mandate from the people themselves. At the same time we have steered clear of the impractical checks and balances – more properly described as “checks and imbalances ” – of the presidential system by ensuring the implementation of national policies and programs of government through the joint action and interaction of the Batasang Pambansa, the President, the Prime Minister, and the Cabinet working together hand in hand. Preserved and institutionalized are the badges of parliamentarism, consisting in the prerogative of the President to dissolve parliament, and the power of parliament to adopt a vote of censure against the Prime Minister as the “alter ego” of the President in the administration of government.

The alternatives offered are of retrogression in various stages, a retreat back into the past from which our people emerged victorious, “bloody but unbowed.” One group advocates the forfeiture of our very freedom and independence, the unabashed delivery of our country to the sovereign rule of a foreign power. Another group advocates our return to the outmoded, outdated, and discarded presidential system of government which our people found grossly ineffective, having been the very cause of the socio economic stagnation and political ills of the Old Society. A third group advocates downright anarchy by the actual dismantling of the processes of government. To push the idea of a boycott to its ultimate conclusion would mean that the optimum desideratum is that no one will vote. If so, we would have no president. Applied to all other elections, it means that we would have no elected officials – national or local. In fine, it means that we would have no government. It is as simple, as illogical, and as ridiculous as all that.

And yet, it is not quite as simple, as illogical, or as ridiculous, if we realize that what this oppositionist group really wants is to set up by violence and bloodshed a government under a foreign ideology diametrically opposed and completely antithetical to our democratic way of life. External actions show internal secrets (“Acta exteriora indicant interiora secreta”).

If I were truly convinced that those who advocate boycott are prompted by conscientious reasoning and a sincere belief in its validity as a political theory, I would have subjected the matter to more sober thought and serious discussion. But I cannot accord the issue of boycott more dignity and attention than it truly deserves. I can only categorize the arguments for boycott for they are – a futile exercise in shallow and specious sophistry. Invoking equity, they violate equity. Equity follows the law – it never counteracts the law (“Aequitas sequitur legem – nunquam contravenit leges.”)

I happen to know why, how, when, and wherefore the proponents of boycott eventually invoked this mode of illegal inaction. These proponents (who were formerly members of the ruling party) had demanded of me certain political and commercial concessions. I resisted these impositions because I knew that they were for the selfish advantage of a few powerful persons and their well-to-do families and not for the good of the nation. I refused to yield because I knew that these demands were unfair, unethical, and indefensible. Sullen and sulking from the rejection of their demands, and their financial and political aspirations thus shattered, these former allies-turned-adversaries, joined the Liberal Party, and assumed the posture not only of civil disobedience but criminal disobedience which they now foist upon our people. I repeat: a boycott is not only civil but criminal disobedience. Criminal disobedience is the exact antithesis of civic duty. In truth this shibboleth is only the tip of an iceberg. Underneath is that cold and treacherous mass of sinister planning, scheming and plotting for the overthrow of the Republic by terrorism, violence and subversion.

Citizenship is not a compartmentalized concept – it is an indivisible reality. One cannot be half-Filipino and half-alien. One cannot assume a Jekyll-and-Hyde type of patriotisms. One cannot invoke Filipino citizenship to enjoy advantages and act as an alien to eschew inconveniences.

This is the significance of today’s rally. It is actually the moment of truth. It is a return to common sense. It is a reaffirmation of the principle that right is might. It is the palpable expression of our belief and trust in our people.

I thank and commend the lawyers of our country for staging this rally for the rule of law. You deserve the accolade of our people for according them intractable, ineluctable, and inexorable guides, norms, and attitudes towards the correct and reasonable application of the law. For you do so with patriotism, prudence, and wisdom – true to the traditions bequeathed to us by Solon, the statesman and lawgiver, who lived long before the dawn of Christianity, and who during his lifetime (638 to 559 B. C.) framed the democratic laws of Athens. These democratic traditions he founded have survived to this day. Solon-like in your espousal of the rule of law, you vindicate the stability of law. Law ever seeks stability. And it is stable because it is the law. Exceptions can neither be justified nor countenanced by imagined wrongs, by selfish motives, by personal ambitions.

While there are man like you the future of the Philippines is safe. Let us therefore resolve that our faith in our people will henceforth give us new dimensions of present realities, that the magnitude of the work before us will make us feel the precious meaning of our lives, that with our love and loyalty for the Republic we shall continue to plant the seeds of greatness in our people, that by our labours as men of law we shall fashion society into a living communal reality, a community of believers not only in our Creator but in our own selves and in our own destiny, and in the vindication of our rights and duties our deeds will ever be a reflection of Divine Justice.

(*Speech delivered on June 9, 1981 before the Assembly of Lawyers, Manila Hotel.)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.