Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On a New Philippines, a New Republic

[Delivered on June 18, 1981]

A NEW PHILIPPINES, A NEW REPUBLIC

Sixteen years ago, on this same sacred ground, we shared together a vision of Filipino greatness.

It was this vision which guided us in the gravest crises; we owe to it our triumphs; it has kept us whole.

You will recall that on my second mandate, I gave it a definition– the New Filipinism. I said then that “the New Filipinism represents the discipline and the ethic of independence, that it seeks the substance rather than the shadow of freedom, that it develops independence beyond formality to reality.”

Let me recall to you the exact words, for they provide a perspective for today:

“Under the influence of this spirit, we have started to re-examine our own narrow outlook on ourselves and the world; we have ceased to think ourselves as a small and insignificant nation, a non-entity in world affairs; we have started to re-examine the time-honored postulates by which we have lived in the past five hundred years, and have lifted our sights to wider horizons and more ambitious and peremptory goals.

“In the foreseeable future, this new spirit will prompt us to re-examine our own basic institutions and perhaps recast them to make them more responsive to the needs of our people. We must not hesitate, from a sense of racial timidity, to change what should be changed. From hereon we should be guided only by our own sense of what will advance, protect and fulfill our national interest.

“We must aim at the reality rather than the formality of democracy. Political and social institutions that merely perpetuate entrenched privileges based on the accident of birth must be remolded or replaced with new ones that promote genuine democracy. . .

“We must not be afraid of innovation in our social, economic, political and cultural life. The New Filipinism is a call for innovation– a revolution directed against the sterile and self-defeating habits of the race but without bloodshed and without fratricide.

“The New Filipinism is. ultimately a call to greatness. But any form of greatness must begin with an act of will. . . Transformed by the New Filipinism, the Filipino people will no longer return to the sterility, mediocrity and timidity of the past. The new spirit of achievement will be indestructible, and will fashion, in time, a great nation of Asia.”

In connection, I asked you, the Filipino people, whether we should venture into a new world of possibility or retreat to the safety of a familiar but sterile past, and your answer was– we should cross the frontier.

Twelve years have passed since we enunciated the New Filipinism. We have not only re-examined our outlook on ourselves and the world; we have, in fact, changed it– as well as the world’s regard for us. That foreseeable future of re-examination of our basic political and social institutions has come to pass: we have radically changed our institutions; we created a new social and political order. In sum, we changed what needed to be changed.

That all this had to be done under a crisis government attests to the strength, the compelling power, of the vision rather than its weakness. There was a profound sense of historical necessity when eight years ago, we have had to proclaim martial law. The measures then undertaken were swift and sweeping, as it became evident that slow deliberation and political opportunism in all its forms, subversion, and secession, were endangering the life and liberty of the nation.

This is neither the time nor place to review once again the undeniable achievements of the period– the reorientation of economic policy, the recasting of attitudes and the revolution in society. Rather is this the time for another re-examination, for having achieved so much, the question now is whether we have achieved enough.

It was not meant for this generation– a generation which has seen the horrors of war and confronted the challenges of peace– merely to win the struggle for national survival. We were not meant, perhaps, simply to surmount crisis, heroic as that may be, but to achieve national harmony, economic prosperity and social equality. Some may call it fate, others destiny, but whatever its name, history has a will and logic which a people can only ignore at its own peril. Your overwhelming mandate appear to-confirm this fate.

So, then, we must start anew.

Sixteen years ago, we woke up to a world in change. Now we are in a world of crisis and contradictions. The Third World nations need to be self-reliant in a world that is irrevocably interdependent. All nations recognize the imperative necessity for a new world economic order but few nations, especially the rich, would accept a change in their own economies. There is a clamor for peace and a preparation for war. We need to cooperate but persist to take advantage. Meanwhile, the poor, which make up two-thirds of the world’s peoples, are bewildered and resentful of the high professions and low intentions of the privileged.

It is against this setting that we have dedicated ourselves to the pursuit of a vision– Jose Rizal’s century-old prophecy of a New Philippines. We are also infected with the world’s malaise, a particular reflection of its crises and contradictions. We are not, therefore, exempt from the difficulties of the times.

Still, we have seen to the transformation of society. Institutions like barangay democracy have been established in order to give our people true control of their lives in community. At a time when the common people of many nations no longer feel sovereign in their lives, our own people, through the barangays, have a sense of purpose and control. The institutions, let us frankly admit, are imperfect; they are young. But they are anchored on a philosophy that Filipinos recognize as their own– the philosophy, or the ideology, if you will, of national liberation.

But where institutions are the protection of men, it is men who run them, and in this there are more imperfections still. The reason for the failure of some is obvious: they have not “internalized,” as Mabini once pointed out in the original revolution, the principles and tenets of the New Society. Thus we have experienced and heard of abuses and injustice, of privilege and indifference, illnesses of old which plague our national life, which can no longer be endured either by this leadership or by our people.

These illnesses– the social cancer, as it were– have their roots in the colonial past. They should no longer be a part of us. We must, therefore, resist all the blandishments of the merchants of mendicancy, the propagators of the past, the advocates of colonial restoration. Social injustice, graft and corruption, the abuse of power and the misuse of privilege, were partly collaboration with and partly resistance of an abject people to a government which was not theirs. But we now live basically on our own terms. We have no right to betray ourselves.

This was the noble purpose of the sacrifices and lives of our heroic forefathers. It was for this purpose that they established the first authentic Filipino republic– the first Asian Republic– nearly a century ago and it is the purpose of our New Republic, which we inaugurate today, keeping faith faith with the vision of unity, equality, and liberty.

We look back on the First Republic because it was self-proclaimed by the Filipino people on June 12, 1898; for three hundred and fifty years, the inarticulated aspirations of the people had inexorably led to this event. There were, to be sure, two other independence days– on October 14, 1943 under the sponsorship of the Japanese Imperial Army and on July 4, 1946, as a grant of the American government. It is not in denigration of these events that we choose to call ours the New Republic, with its historical roots in Kawit, but out of a rediscovered sense of identity and recovered national pride. Our national liberation must be an act of our own political will.

What is then new in our republic is its fidelity to our historical legacy and its repudiation of the colonial past, in so far that its opportunism and mendacity have left their mark upon us.

Possessed of our identity, restored to our destiny, we can meet any external challenge and bear any difficulty. But the way of national liberation is not imperilled by forces outside of ourselves; it is ourselves that we must ultimately conquer. Tempting, indeed, is the comfort of collaboration against the perils of resistance; a royal road seduces those who would progress without sacrifice, who would be free without effort. Yet history has marked this as a false road whose destination is enslavement and oblivion. In this regard, there can be no one to look to; there can be no outside savior. There is only us– the Filipinos.

We cannot survive, we cannot advance without being one race, one nation. We have known where division has led us– let us dare where unity must lead us.

The national unity that is so vital to our existence is a covenant between each and every Filipino; it is also a covenant between the leader and his people. The rare honor that you have bestowed on me as your thrice-elected leader imposes on my person– and those closest to me– a debt, an obligation, that I cannot shirk and a pledge that I dare not betray. Let history judge me harshly on this, my renewed pledge: that until every Filipino can say with conviction that he has been liberated from the bondage of ignorance, poverty, and disease– that until he can call his mind, body, and spirit truly his own, I shall have failed you and betrayed your trust.

From you, my countrymen, I ask the utmost commitment, the limits of your capacities as citizens, the endurance of all hardships and sacrifices for the common good– not as a personal demand but as a way of your keeping faith with the vision of our race.

Give all that you can give to your country, and, God-willing, I will give you, with your support, a society that will respond to all your needs for a decent and honorable life.

We have not been brought into this world simply to enjoy and indulge a brief existence. The poorest among us have a sense of life as meaningful existence. In our most miserable state, we are a part of mankind and its noble dream. We may call it, as we call it now, Filipino humanism, a nationalist humanism, but behind the concept and the precept is that certain knowledge within us that Man is the wonder of creation, that all of us must, in the end, realize ourselves in the service of our common humanity.

Let us call on the intransigent to realize their just purposes with us; let us awaken the unconscious and enlighten the misled; let us listen to our detractors in honest counsel. Let us, in sum, get together, bind the wounds of the past, and, in one united effort, realize the aspirations of our people. !

We must also be firm in our resolution and not compromise our aims. History is a merciless and at times even a cruel judge. As your president, I will risk the judgment, but as your fellow-countryman, I urgently appeal to you to spare the next generations from the retribution which could be brought about by our own complacency.

We must liberate ourselves for the sake of a new republic, the inevitable child of the new society.

As I asked you twelves years ago, I ask you now: let us cross one more frontier!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.