Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the First Philippine International Conference on Paranormal Healing

[Delivered on November 27, 1984]

For me to address this conference is a unique experience. But then hosting a conference of this kind is also unprecedented experience for our country and our people. Nevertheless, it seems only to be expected that we would one day have the opportunity to welcome this kind of gathering of scientists, healers and researchers on the esoteric subject of paranormal healing, the Philippines after all has gained a measure of renown the world over as some kind of center for the sick who have either given up hope for relief through medical science or are simply inclined to put their trust in non-conventional methods of treatment.

It is also a quaint coincidence that this conference is being convened at a time when the whole nation continues to reverberate with wild speculations regarding my health. ! am afraid that once again I must disappoint those who have been preparing for my burial since many years ago.

Coincidentally too, I have been invited to address the International College of Surgeons when their Manila Conference opens a few days from now.

My acceptance of your invitation and that of the International College of Surgeons clearly underscore our Government’s approach vis-a-vis the art or science of healing. For it has been our policy and our objective to explore every avenue and make use of any acceptable methods that would secure our people’s health.

I understand that you have come together in this meeting to consider the ultimate causes of diseases or ailments and to discuss the varied ways through which they can be treated through methods that are beyond the pale of medical orthodoxy.

History records many alternative ways of explaining and dealing with illness. At one time, illness was popularly regarded as the result of transgressions of Natural Law; at another period, it was held as a just punishment for sin. The common prescription for dealing with illness then was either exorcism, through which evil spirits were believed to be cast away from the ill, or prayer, penance and sacrifice to placate an angry God.

In more modern times, scientists discovered germs and viruses, and thus began the relentless advance of medical science against disease. Progressive developments in medicine enabled it to eradicate dreaded diseases, preserve health and prolong the lives of individuals.

Today, medical science has advanced so far that its principles, practices and methods have come to dominate much of the thinking of the modern world.

And yet outside the field of medical science, traditional methods of dealing with diseases have persisted up to these times. In the Western world, such traditional healing methods as herbal medicine, shamanism and faith healing are being performed mostly in secret because of the militancy of the members of the medical profession. Until recently, the medical profession in the Philippines considered traditional healers, herbolarios and psychic surgeons as no better than magicians and quacks.

But the growing evidence and testimonials attesting to some amazing success in the field of traditional healing are difficult to ignore. They probably warrant a more serious second look.

Nothing less than the World Health Organization has begun to recognize the valuable role of traditional healers in the treatment of diseases and the preservation of health. It now encourages governments to tap the services of these traditional healers for the primary health care programs of nations where modern medical services are inadequate or hopelessly beyond the reach of people, especially those in the rural communities.

This is a step in the right direction for in this way governments can introduce simple, scientific methods into the practice of folk healing and persuade its practitioners to abandon some useless or even harmful practices.

But while the traditional resistance of the medical profession towards folk medicine has begun to soften in response to practical realities, the gap between these two methods of healing remains to be bridged. And I am glad that this conference is being held for it marks a signficant step in this direction.

A broad-minded and liberal approach to this field of knowledge is most welcome indeed. For science cannot progress unless its advocates are willing to investigate certain phenomena which defy its established principles or require their modification. As I pointed out in my little book, “An Ideology for Filipinos:” “The validity of scientific theory depends on its constant demonstration by observed regularity. As soon as new experiences emerge which a scientific theory cannot account for, we begin to doubt the theory’s adequacy. If we insist that science should consist of no less than permanent truths, then it will cease to be useful to us in dealing with nature. For science then would be blind to those features of reality that tend to throw doubt on its presumed truths.”

The continued existence in every society of unconventional methods of treating diseases despite the dominant influence of modern medical science tend to cast doubt on the latter’s exclusive prerogative in treating illness. Surely, other methods are worth looking into, especially in those cases where modern, orthodox medical methods either fail to effect a cure or are otherwise unavailable to the great majority of the people.

Man’s quest for the elixir of youth will never end. Neither perhaps will his quest for the ultimate conquest of diseases. And as long as man continues to be the great mystery that he is, there will always be room for pushing man’s frontiers of knowledge further as we move through time.

I therefore congratulate the organizers and the participants in this important conference on paranormal healing for contributing in no small measure to the advancement of man’s knowledge regarding the causes of and the cures for his many illness.

In conclusion, allow me to wish you all a most fruitful conference.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.