Address of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines To the Commemoration of the New Filipino

Distinguished President Edward Chua of the National Youth Barangay Council; Richard Valdez, chairman of Baguio; Benjie Tagarao, diligent, kind and dedicated leaders and members of the Kabataang Barangay; fellow countrymen:

It seems that all the young Filipinos are gathered here in Baguio today. Wherever I look, I see the energetic, happy and truly patriotic Filipino youth who are with us in building a new Republic. Because youth is truly full of vitality, I was surprised by the number of resolutions you submitted today. I thought: it seems like the old Congress back then that constantly approved resolutions. But in my opinion, your resolutions are just proof that the youth barangay is truly aware of public responsibility and the duties as heirs of the brown race. Rest assured that we will study all your requests and grant them if appropriate.

I am happy to be with you again, to talk to and exchange ideas with the select among the most select Filipino youth members of the Kabataang Baranggay from Aparri to Jolo. I was even more pleased to learn that this gathering is dedicated to honoring the new Filipino….the Filipino who knows how to work hard to live with dignity; the Filipino who always thinks of things that will help not only himself, and his own dreams, but above all, for the welfare of the race and the country; the Filipino who knows how to appreciate and recognize the efforts of the government to find solutions to the problems of the nation; the Filipino who does not think and do destruction and demolition; and the Filipino who believes that unity, cooperation and sincere brotherhood are the true path to the fulfillment of all the dreams of our race.

I salute and congratulate all the new Filipinos we honored this morning. Those who received the New Filipino award have shown that a person's age has nothing to do with having concern for the common good. So even if this award did not push through as we originally planned last September, due to problems created by people who are again trying to sow terror and plant chaos in our country, our gathering today here at the historic Mansion House is a witness to the love, concern and unparalleled appreciation of your servant for the welfare, fate and future of the Filipino youth.

The times are sensitive again. There are many problems again. I know you also know that the economic problem is not only experienced by the Philippines. It is widespread throughout the world. Even a resource-rich country like America has problems with the economy and unemployment. And in times like these, it seems that false prophets and prophets of doom emerge who only want to lead our countrymen, especially the Filipino youth, to the brink of misfortune and disaster. That is why, more than ever, young people like you should be truly aware, alert and intelligent. Think carefully and study well anything said and taught by failed creations who are only looking for someone to share their misfortune and failure in life. You know that there are people who, when they fail in their dreams and what they want to happen, want everyone else to fail and perish, even harming our homeland.

I know that life is difficult now. That is why your servant and the government are not wasting time to find solutions to the problems. All the efforts of your servant now are focused only on the desire to rise and overcome the problems. But, your servant is not superman who can solve the problem alone. If our countrymen, especially the youth like you, who are the destination and focus of all our efforts, will not shoulder the burden, your servant and the government will fail. But, if you and the majority of our countrymen are behind me, if you are with your servant, we will face any danger without fear, no matter how big or how many.

Therefore, I once again appeal to the select youth gathered here, as well as to all our countrymen, let us unite. Cast aside the hatred and anger that others want to plant in our hearts. Let us unite. Let us help each other. Let us sympathize with each other. Nothing will happen from sowing chaos and turmoil; nothing good will be gained if we quarrel among our countrymen; no blessing will be obtained by anyone when Filipinos are divided; our problems will only get bigger if we let the troublemakers continue their harassment. The Philippines is our only country. We are the first to answer and have a duty to care for our country. This is the only legacy that the Almighty has given us all, so we must love and save our country from danger, even if our lives are the price.

I do not know what kind of people these are, who, pretending to be Filipinos, do nothing but besmirch our country in the eyes of the world just to fulfill their dark plan to cause chaos in our nation and seize the government through violence. Thank God and it is only a few of these kinds of people in the Philippines. The majority in our country are the youth like you, exemplary and believing in their own perseverance, effort, diligence and patience to solve everyday problems. That is why, my faith in the intelligence and capability of the Filipino race is steadfast, especially the youth like you. I believe that the prophets of doom will not mislead our countrymen who already know the true plan and desire of these kinds of people.

I repeat my congratulations to those who received awards as New Filipinos. I hope that in a year, we will be able to bestow this award on many more. Continue the great works you have started that will bear good fruit and progress for yourselves and for our country as a whole. Do not hesitate to cooperate with your servant and the government, your servant and this government will not tire of thinking of ways and striving to take any step to solve our problems. The strength and courage of your servant lies in your unity and cooperation… and there also lies the true strength of the Philippine Government.

Thank you all very much. Long live the Filipino youth! Merry Christmas to all of you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1983). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.