Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the dedication ceremonies of the NIDO oil complex in Palawan

[Delivered at the Maharlika Hall, March 21, 1979]

Reducing Our Dependence on Oil

THIS IS INDEED a happy occasion. These ceremonies were supposed to be held at the production platform of the Cities Services and the Philippine companies of NIDO Palawan today. Unfortunately circumstances did not allow us to proceed to the site. And perhaps it is therefore best that these ceremonies that are principally a formal recognition and appreciation of the work of the private sector in oil exploration and exploitation in the Philippines should happen here in Maharlika Hall, the hall of free men, which symbolizes not only the authority of the President of the Republic of the Philippines but also the sovereignty of the Filipino people.

These ceremonies and the formal opening of the production of oil from the NIDO complex coincide with the worldwide oil crisis occasioned not only by the OPEC price increases but also the developments in the Middle East which have resulted in the deficiencies in oil supply.

The present NIDO complex started operating January 27 this year, meaning that as of that date, we started to draw oil commercially from the two wells under contract with Cities Services and the Philippine companies. I spoke of the Philippine companies. I also wish to refer to the Philippine organizations that have strongly supported the government program on oil exploitation: Oriental, headed by Mr. Vincent Recto; Philippine Overseas by Mr. Henry Brimo; Landoil and Basic, headed by Jose and Oscar de Venecia.

The question has often been asked me: To what do you ascribe the sudden spurt of oil exploration in the Philippines which dramatically increased in 1972? I place the cutoff date on December 1972, for on that day, I signed Presidential Decree No. 87 which converted the old concession system into the service contract system.

Under the service contract, we encouraged the entry of private capital, both foreign and domestic, under a sharing arrangement — 60 percent of production to go to government and 40 percent to go to the service contractors. This particular sharing formula was the result of a long study which had been pending the Office of the President and with Congress for many, many years, before 1972. For many varied reasons, Congress could never get around to amending the old system of oil exploration by concession.

It is the policy of the Philippine government that the principal action agents in exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons in the Philippines should be the private sector. The government, of course, in accordance with its basic policy in economic development, sets the atmosphere, the guidelines, the orientation, works out the support organizations from government, and to a certain extent spends for whatever infrastructure may be required for oil exploration and exploitation. But the principal agent of the entire operation for oil exploration and exploitation is and will continue to be the private sector.

On this occasion, therefore, I wish to announce that it is the intention of government to continue with this policy in order that there may be no slowdown in the participation of the private sector in our oil exploration efforts.

At the same time, however, government has organized a government-owned corporation that engages in drilling and possibly exploitation. However, based on our studies, my own personal studies, and the studies of my advisers, I believe that the resources of government could best be utilized not in oil exploration but in the development of other sources of energy. This is the reason why in the energy program for the next ten years, there is programmed an expenditure of $ 13.9 billion, or about P111 billion, for the development of such sources of energy as coal, nuclear power, geothermal, hydro-electric, solar, even biogas or marsh gas, and whatever else that we feel can be utilized in the Philippines.

This ten-year program is just starting. It is only two years old. But we consider the program on oil exploration one of the principal and basic supports of the program. For up to now, the main source of energy in the Philippines is oil; 36 percent of the entire energy costs is allocated for transport energy cost, meaning, the gasoline that we use for all kinds of vehicles. Both government and the private sector consume 36 percent of our entire oil bill; 35 percent is consumed by industry; 19 percent goes into the generation of electricity. In the generation of electricity, again, most of the sources are powered by oil.

And thus it is that the exploration of oil and the exploitation of available indigenous sources of hydrocarbons become a very critical matter for the survival and the economic development of our country.

Today, the NIDO complex produces a total 10,000 barrels a day from the two wells. The third well is being drilled right now. And it is hoped that there will be five producing wells. By June or July, according to the program by Cities Services and the consortium, we will be producing 40,000 barrels a day from five producing wells. If we do produce 40,000 barrels a day, then we should be producing about 15 percent of our requirements.

Our requirements as of today are 220,000 barrels daily, or 90 million barrels annually. It is the intention of government that we should reduce this dependence on oil all around. It is the intention of government that our people should participate in the effort to cut down on the use of oil products.

As with other countries of the world, we have been notified by the oil companies that there will be a shortage of oil deliveries of about 9 percent of our requirements. Our immediate reaction to that is to transmit to our people this information and to appeal to each and everyone now to take steps in order to reduce the consumption of oil throughout the country by at least 10 percent. This is embodied in many and various letters of instructions and decrees. Indeed as the Philippine consortia and the Cities Services, as well as the other service contractors like Chebron, Caltex, Amoco (which is going to drill in Cadlao), Phillips, Shell (which has just finished its second well in Palawan), Houston Natural Gas, and many others, it is the belief of the Philippine government and the Filipino people that the Philippines has sufficient oil to meet all the energy requirements of the country. However, we cannot just await the possible exploration and development and exploitation of these resources.

And thus it is that we are moving forward towards the development of the cheaper sources of energy. As of now, I have issued instructions that greater emphasis be placed on geothermal development. And thus we have one geothermal source already in operation in Tiwi, Albay. It is now producing 55 megawatts. It is due to produce ultimately, in about five to eight years, about 200 to 300 megawatts.

We are also moving into the Banahaw and Makiling areas where our service contractors have discovered a similarly substantial source of geothermal energy. Right now there is also a development in the province of the First Lady. In Togonan, Leyte, it is hoped the 100 megawatts of energy that will be produced there will be utilized by a copper smelter plant that is supposed to be located in the municipality of Sta. Isabel, near Ormoc City.

Today, our country formally recognizes the sacrifice, the dedication, the continuous and patient work that has been put into the exploration of oil in the Philippines.

We recognize the achievement of Cities Services not only in the discovery of oil but in immediately putting into production the NIDO complex, and now it is moving into a similar complex, Matinloc, which Cities Services also discovered a few months ago.

We recognize the efforts not only of the Cities Services, not only of the members of the Philippine consortium, but also the efforts of all service contractors and the other persons in the past several years, or for that matter, many years, inasmuch as the exploration for oil started as early during the Spanish times. I understand that oil was discovered in Cebu but in non-commercial quantities a long time before the arrival of the first American soldiers. However, this is the first real commercial discovery in the Philippines.

As we congratulate Cities Services, it is also our hope and prayer that they will continue to discover more complexes like NIDO.

Allow me, therefore, to say on behalf of our people and the Republic of the Philippines — as we did in the citation that has just been read on the award of the Presidential merit medal to Mr. Sellers — that this happy event does indeed strengthen the resolve of the Filipino people to meet and overcome all obstacles and all problems with which we are confronted today. With such achievements, we are confident that we will succeed.

And to each and everyone, therefore, again, we say, congratulations.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 9). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].