Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 1982 Asia Pacific International Finance Seminar

[Released on March 17, 1982]

It was with some serious reservations that I decided to accept the invitation to address you today during the opening of the 1982 Asia Pacific International Finance Seminar not so much because I knew that I would now be engaged in hectic preparations for a most important journey of friendship and goodwill to Saudi Arabia as because I realized that I would have very little to contribute to the difficult discussions in your agenda for the next two days. In fact, I suspect that this is the reason why my good friend, Mr. Gilbert Kaplan, has requested me to speak for about 15 minutes only. As a politician who has come to regard speech-making as a welcome respite from the daily grind of attending to endless problems and affairs of the state, I feel effectively muzzled by that limitation. Nevertheless, I promise to observe it if Mr. Kaplan would also pledge to withdraw his threat of conducting the American Symphony Orchestra when it plays the Mahler Resurrection symphony in September, lest the world of international finance be deprived of his invaluable services. The world has yet to witness his performance as a conductor, but I have it on good authority that he performs flawlessly in orchestrating his business interests and seminars like this one, and I earnestly hope he would not abandon the effort in pursuit of his first love, which is music.

But before my time runs out, let me welcome you all to Manila and express the wish that your seminar would be productive and fruitful.

To me as it is perhaps to most other mortals, the bankers and the financial experts such as those gathered here today represent a select breed of men who possess extraordinary knowledge and therefore command our respect and awe. It therefore comes as a surprise for us to know that from time to time, financial executives not only from our region but also from the various financial centers all over the world gather together to exchange views and assessments on a wide range of topics affecting the financial community. But soon enough we come to realize that even the most learned of men discovers first of all that he really knows little of the entire body of knowledge available to man. And this is true even of the highly specialized field of international finance. Your presence here bears witness to that fact, and from this I can already discern the real reason for your meeting: it stems from your awareness that a clear picture of the environment in which the financial executive operates is essential to the effective prosecution of his tasks and the objectives of the organization he represents. The increasing complexity of the environment in which the financial expert must operate demands of him a continuous effort to grapple not only with the realities of our times but also the possibilities and unknowns of the future.

This meeting acquires added significance and timeliness when you consider that Asia and the Pacific region has of late become the focus of world attention because it is the scene of a new economic miracle aborning, at least in the eyes of some economic forecasters. The latest forecast, coming from the United States Department of Commerce, identified the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, of which the Philippines is a member, as the fastest growing region in the world and predicted that ASEAN would soon emerge as a new center of world economic power. The same special report on ASEAN also went on to predict that the combined gross national product of the five member countries of ASEAN would double during the next 9 years provided that we can maintain the 7 percent average annual growth rate of the past decade.

Of course, there is much to commend about such rosy forecasts. Optimism, being the infectious outlook that it is, has a way of boosting up confidence and brining about the very condition predicted. But there is no absolute guarantee that such predictions will be self-fulfilling.

ASEAN must continue to summon the collective will, the determination and efforts of its governments and peoples to sustain the momentum of progress we have achieved in recent years. It must move into other areas of cooperative endeavors if it desires to consolidate, let alone improve upon, the gains we have made.

This is not to say that predictions of an economic boom in the region are based on shaky foundations. On the contrary, there are sound and solid reasons why we believe that the most optimistic forecasts for the region can be fully realized if not surpassed. We have the resources, the manpower, the policies and the kind of leadership that is committed to the pursuit of growth and development through the individual efforts of the member nations as well as common cooperative action among the members of the Association. All these have been subjected to the most severe test during the most critical decade of the seventies, and we have emerged stronger than ever.

But if we are to sustain the momentum of growth that has carried us through crisis after crisis we must also continue to make common cause with the rest of the Third World in seeking for a more equitable sharing of the world’s wealth, not through aid but through trade. This has been the persistent cry of developing countries, and we have heard them echoed in Cancun and more recently in New Delhi. And we in ASEAN join our voices with those of the other developing countries who have made known their protest over discriminatory trade practices and artificial trade barriers imposed by the developed countries, for we too have suffered because of these.

Many of our products, from raw materials to garments and light manufacture, have been placed at a competitive disadvantage because of excessive tariffs, stringent quotas and other trade barriers imposed by the developed countries of the West. We have seen the prices of our raw material exports sink to intolerably low levels while the capital goods manufactured in the West continue to command ever higher prices. During the last few days, for instance, the price of copra which is one of our major exports has gone down from 25 cents per pound during the first days of March to only 22 cents during the last few days. Last year, in fact, our export earnings from copra and other coconut products went down by $53.6 million to around $745.5 million despite the fact that the volume of our exports actually increased from 914,000 metric tons in 1980 to 1.05 million metric tons in 1981. As with copra, the depressed prices of our other exports have the effect of penalizing and dampening our efforts to increase productivity in various sectors of the economy, including our modest industrial ventures.

It is as if the developed countries would deny the poorer nations the opportunity to stand on their own two feet. I have high hopes, however, that the developed countries will soon come around to the view that it is to their interest as much as ours to restore order in international trade. For protectionist policies are not only barriers to trade, they are also barriers to economic development and world stability.

I have decided to take up the issue of protectionism because I feel that it is one of the most critical concerns of our world today. I am aware that there are other pressing issues that you would have occasion to dissect during the next few days. Unstable interest rates, alternative sources of financing, energy — these are but a few of the many burning issues that you will have the opportunity to examine. All are of vital interest to men in business, to bankers, to financial executives as well as governments. Indeed my only regret about this meeting is that I could not be a participant in your deliberations. But I am confident that the results of the seminar will ultimately prove of great value to the efficient management of the finances of your corporations and the countries which you represent.

In closing, let me again wish you great success in your seminar. I hope that the serious business you have to tackle in the next two days would not prevent you from enjoying your stay in Manila.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.