Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Social Security System Building, April 20, 1966]

IT is a pleasure for me to appear before this admittedly prestigious group of business leaders in the country, in whose hands lie to a great degree the economic development of our country. I have taken time out from the routine “of government in order to participate in the clarification of the policies in which, not only you but also the entire nation and our friends in the world are interested in.

Three months ago, I appeared before Congress and spoke of the crisis that confronts us—a crisis that was many-sided, a crisis in the private sector, a crisis in government: a government that was bankrupt and a private sector in which many industries faced imminent collapse. Trade and commerce was sluggish and the rule of law in shambles in many parts of the country.

I said then that there was a general demoralization and that the principal challenge was a challenge of confidence, confidence in the government and, more than this, confidence in ourselves. I believe that in the last three months, your government has grappled firmly with this problem and met this crisis resolutely and placed it under control.

On the part of the government, the collection of income has improved, the moral tone generally has been raised in the conduct of government. With respect to confidence, I feel that there is an increasing tide of faith not only in the government, but more important than this, faith in ourselves, faith in the people to surmount all obstacles to our progress. It will not be correct to say, of course, that we have overcome or recovered from the crisis for it is not so. There are still great problems facing all of us but we have reversed the trend and the forces of recovery have stopped it.

From the Bureau of Census and Statistics and other sources of data, comes the conclusion that business has picked up quite considerably since January this year. Taking one example, the textile industry which is considered to be one of the most distressed industries. We note that it now has production of cotton and fibers amounting to 63,889,656 square yards for the three months from January to March this year. Last year, production in the same period was 41,082,000 yards. Thus, there has been an increase of 22 million yards and this increase represents 55.5% for the same period.

Employment in the textile industry for the same period has risen by 54.4%.

In the investment field, the period January to February this year had a total number of 1,786 single proprietorship, partnership and corporations.

Establishments engaged in commerce which, by the way, includes supermarkets and groceries referred to in some reports, have increased by 9.4% in number. In terms of actual investments, mining registered an increase of 19.7%, manufacturing, 1.7%; construction 406.6% electricity, 110.5%; and miscellaneous 95.4%. The number of great structures, especially for March alone this year has exceeded by more than 60% that of January and February. These totals indicate a rapid rate of business establishments being formed.

The overall employment level in October, 1965, was 94.0% of the total labor force but as of March this year, is has reached the level of 94.4%  It can be concluded that we have not only absorbed the year’s increment of labor but have also absorbed some of the unemployed carried over from previous years.

The nation has arrested the economic and social downturn and it is possible to state now that there is an initial momentum for new advance. But there is something to note. In the past several years, the hardships in the economic field were felt mostly by Filipino firms, also by our countrymen in business and industry with their meager capital base. The crisis in financing has hurt most deeply the struggling infant industries, many of which are owned and managed by our countrymen. The program of rescuing these industries is in the nature of salvage operations for the viable Filipino industries and these industries represent the heroic efforts of men and women in our country for the past several decades to build the base of modern Filipino economy.

I, therefore, believe that our government must exert all efforts to help rehabilitate these industries and put them back on their feet. The alternative is to see all these gains of many years in the struggle for economic independence dissipate on this single period. But these reforms should not only stimulate industries but trade just as well for trading activities have suffered from the scarcity and high cost of credit as everyone knows, especially in the provinces. And these conditions tend to paralyze the Filipino small merchant not only in the provinces, in the towns and in the barrios against their better placed alien competitors.

While I have spoken of this crisis many times, it is only before such distinguished leaders in business like you that I can set aside the histrionics and drama of public speaking and eloquence, and paint you the hard realities of our economic life and, with you, draw the conclusions in a cold, objective and dispassionate manner. For, emotion, so you always repeat, has no place in business. If this is so, let us in cold blooded manner look at the problems of businessmen today.

And, I would like to look at this from the viewpoint of a student of business. What actually is the relationship between the private sector of business and government? I would like to speak today on this concept of an active partnership between government and the private sector of our Republic. It is perhaps a truism but nevertheless true and pertinent to observe that we have a strongly symbolic relationship between government and business of the private sector and an improvement or deterioration of one sector affects to that extent either the improvement or diminishes the position of the other and we saw this under previous administrations. We saw the deterioration of the position of the economy, the position of the government, affects the private sector and the desperate efforts to recover the position of government also causes the discreditation of the Filipino businessman.

It is under this concept, therefore, that the present administration has consistently reaffirmed the resolutions of this relationship and has oriented its anti-smuggling, its tax collection and refinancing campaigns and projects accordingly.

In the continuation of this concept of active partnership, I can assure you now that your government will continue to protect the Filipino businessman and promote his better economic and financial position. But the role of government is not to supplant the private sector. It is merely to augment the efforts of our businessmen, for economic development in our society of free enterprise is the primary responsibility of the private sector. However, it is the government’s duty to participate actively in this venture by assisting directly in building up productive capacity through the establishment of economic public works facilities. Another major contribution is direct financial assistance and indirect financial help by means of monetary credit and fiscal policies designed to benefit productive private industries. So what has your government directly done in the last three months in the past? Allow me to outline them for you.

First, stabilize for the time being credit arrangements with the International Monetary Fund which have been restricted but without the crippling restriction of the ceiling on the Central Bank’s domestic efforts. Ever since our relationships with the International Monetary Fund, I believe it is only now, this year, that the ceiling has been lifted.

Second, The exchange rate of the peso to the dollar has been maintained, so much so that this exchange rate continues to follow a definite trend of stabilizing the levels, lower than those obtaining in the immediate past. The present exchange rate, according to the Central Bank, is 3.894 to the dollar where it was 3.94 or 3.95 in December, 1965.

Third, the level of international reserves continues to rise to heights which far surpassed previous levels. Reserves of the Central Bank as of March stood at about $195 million compared to $136.6 million in March, 1965 and $140 million in December, 1965. The reserves net of commercial bank obligations for February, furthermore, were more than double the average level for April and May, 1965.

Fourth, the unrelenting pressure brought down on smuggling activities both of the technical and outright varieties has definitely slowed down outward remittances for invisibles as well as exerted pressure on international reserves and exchange rates. More specifically, textile mills which only recently could afford to operate only one shift twice weekly, now operate under three shifts a day.

Fifth, the removal of opportunities for graft which in the past prejudiced legitimate traders. We have initiated measures to allow for payment of customs duties through agent banks. Electronomic data processing equipment and facilities for processing and recording trading documents are now being used by the Customs Bureau to safeguard the interests of both the government and business.

Sixth, initial steps have already been implemented to improve the financial position of the government financial institutions, like the GSIS, SSS which is our host, or the DBP and the PNB, to enable these agencies to already loan financing commitments to provide agriculture, trade and industry.

Seventh, the Committee in Loans and Investments has submitted its proposal to extend financial assistance through the DBF for the rehabilitation of distressed industries. The three major components of this program, of which you are aware, are the Securities Marketing, Investments Refinancing and Foreign Exchange Financing. They are substantially adequate to bring about the rehabilitation of variable industries now saddled by imbalance and disruptions in their financial structures.

Eighth, We still maintain and continue to maintain fiscal prudence and restraint in government expenditures as an underlying policy in the projected operations of the national government, without sacrificing much in public service or facilities required for growth in productive capacity. This policy insures that the balanced budget with respect to current expenses will be achieved. Together with our policy on national debt program that what money is borrowed will be used only for development projects, and government operations, our corresponding need for funds will no longer compete with the private sector for available credit.

Ninth, in the past, businessman engaged in supplying materials, equipment and supplies to the government have been hesitant to continue their operations because of difficulty in collection and the additional cost this represents. In turn, the government has suffered because it has not always obtained the best prices. We have now completed the necessary studies and are about to implement the appropriate measures to improve, modify and simplify government purchasing and supply procedures.

Tenth, and I presume what may constitute the most important aspect of the problem, from the viewpoint of businessmen. The Central Bank—your government—has instituted policies and measures to ease credit restrictions in order that private industry may be able to secure financial resources essential to building up production levels and with this the incomes and employment in the industrial sector.

a) The rediscount rate which has remained unchanged in the last four years has substantially lowered in January this year from 6% in December, 1965, to 4.3/4% today.

b) The computation of the rediscount ceiling of commercial banking system was modified so that ceilings are not now based on net worth as of Dec. 31, 1965 but instead March 31, 1965. Moreover, quota for rediscounting rates was raised from 50% of net worth to 125% which is 25% more than what you asked for in your president’s letter of January 8, 1966. Fifty percent of this, of course, goes to commercial loans, 50% for production loans and 25% exclusively for rice and corn loans.

c) Local reserve requirements on savings deposits in commercial banks are lowered by 20%, that is: from 10% to 8%.

d) Local reserve requirements on time deposits summarily lowered from 10 % to 6% on time deposits with maturity within 30 days, and from 10% to 5% on time deposits with maturity beyond 30 days.

e) Special time deposits on imports were scrapped thus releasing the required assets against these deposits.

What do all these measures spell out?

These credit relaxation measures have generated immediate effect on bank reserves: combined excess and potential reserves of the commercial banking system have increased by as much as P120 million in January and February. The revision of rediscount ceilings raised the amount of Central Bank credit available to domestic commercial banks by another P21 million; and the lifting of special time deposits against imports will generate an additional P13 million to bank reserves. These will increase credit availability to banks by P400 million which if multiplied, one and a half times at the most or half a billion considering possible inability of banks to utilize the full limit of their capacity.

These are the major policies and the practical measures that the administration has carried out and implemented to fulfill our part of the partnership in the growth of the Philippine economy. Even now we await congress actions for relaxation in measures pending before it designed to provide economic incentive to private industries to expand and to extend adequate protection to the constant requirements of consumer welfare, to those domestic industries which strictly need this temporary assistance.

Further to this we have adopted a policy of encouraging pioneering projects in specified industries. But we are now adopting also administrative measures that subsequent overcrowding or proliferation will be prevented. It has also been observed that substantial portions of import payments last year went to semi-processed raw materials estimated at anywhere from 47% to 55%, meaning that we have devoted most of our imports to assembly plants or packaging industries. We will study the adoption of such measures that may be needed to shift this emphasis from packaging or assembling into basic manufacturing concerns and we cannot very well notice the other problems in the area of industry—the alien control of several industries being only one of them. However, I can repeat this, that the government can extend only so much help and the rest will have to be done by the ones more than personally affected, you in the private sector.

The government makes no claim of holding the secret to business success, or even to national prosperity. But it believes that working under the system of partnership I have alluded to in the government, hardwork, initiative, perseverance, and confidence will prove that the steps taken are in the right direction.

The government is prepared to come up today with definite proposals. We will organize, or we have or are organizing three committees: the Export authority is in the process of organization, the Customs Advisory Council is partly organized, and the Tax Advisory Council is already organized. Of importance to all of us is the fact that in these councils that affect business in the most sensitive areas are represented such associations or organizations like the Bar Association, the Chamber of Commerce, Chamber of Industries, the Producers Group.

Now I ask your president and officers to give your organization’s nomination for your representative to the Customs Advisory Council.

This is the summary of what the administration has done and what it plans to continue, so long as it enjoys and receives the people’s mandate. But what must be resolved now is not what the government will do. What must be resolved now is what shall be the response of the private sector to the measures that have been taken. We develop self-reliance after this transitory period of government assistance or weaken in its resolve to be independent and self-sustaining, hopelessly dependent upon subsidies and the protection granted by the government.

The challenge is, therefore, clear, not only to participate by passive acceptance of what the government has done, but perhaps actively to participate in these reforms or recommended norms and procedures of the public-private sector relationship, not only to secure the foundations that have already been established but to pioneer in the development of those areas of economic activity that are crucial to national growth.

The government stands committed to the protection and assistance of Filipino businessmen and today or any other day, I do not hesitate to repeat this commitment to each and every one of us but neither should I hesitate to ask you leaders of the business community to do your own part in this partnership.

I ask you to embolden yourselves and confront the future in the manner most befitting to the national temper, with optimism, with confidence. And I conclude with the hope that response to the basic challenge will be of the same measure, doing justice to yourselves and to the entire nation.

Thank you and good day.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1966). President Marcos’ speech before the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, Social Security System Building, Quezon City, April 20, 1966. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62(25) , 4355-4361.