The right to human dignity is inviolable. The State shall protect and promote the dignity of every human person. This includes, but is not limited to, ensuring access to basic needs such as food, shelter, clothing, healthcare, and education. Ang karapatan sa dangal ng tao ay hindi dapat labagin. Dapat pangalagaan at itaguyod ng Estado ang dangal ng bawat tao. Kabilang dito, ngunit hindi limitado sa, pagtiyak ng access sa mga pangunahing pangangailangan tulad ng pagkain, tirahan, damit, pangangalagang pangkalusugan, at edukasyon. Any act that degrades, endangers, or violates the inherent dignity of a person is considered a grave offense and shall be penalized accordingly. Lahat ng gawaing nagpapababa, nagbabanta, o lumalabag sa likas na dangal ng isang tao ay itinuturing na isang malubhang paglabag at parurusahan ayon sa batas.

It is always, for me, an edifying experience to join the Lions in observing an occasion of public significance. Your collective experience, drawn from numerous careers and professions, never fails to add a special quality to the event which has inspired your celebration.

Testimony to U. N. Value

United Nations Week gains such extra dimension as you gather today to add your own observance. To those whose hopes about a world organization may have occasionally faltered, I am sure it is reassuring that the Lions Club of Manila, itself a part of a globe-girdling agency of man’s advancement, is giving its own testimony to the importance of the United Nations.

I am happy to participate in your observance of U. N. Week today.

The U. N. as Agent of Change

As innovators in many fields, you are undoubtedly in a position of authority to call, as you do with this observance, for increased support of the aims and ideals of the United Nations. For the United Nations, in the 23 years that it has existed, has been consistently engaged in works of innovation and change.

Our celebration of the founding of the United Nations this year is particularly significant, because 1968 has been declared by the General Assembly as International Year for Human Rights. The significance of this lies in the fact that the entire mission that the United Nations has set out to fulfill is addressed to the betterment of human life, and its entire work has consisted of safeguarding and promoting all those rights which make for a better human life.

The Right to Human Dignity

The whole concept of the United Nations is. it seems to me, summarized in that provision of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted 20 years ago, which speaks of “the right to an existence worthy of human dignity.”

Though the activities that have been undertaken to enhance human dignity are numerous and varied, I think the activity that holds the pivotal role in the whole complex of United Nations projects is the war on Poverty. Put in another way, it is the U. N. program to accelerate the growth of the underdeveloped nations.

The Development Decade

It is a program to which, indeed, an entire decade was dedicated in 1961. The Development Decade of the I960 s has already, before it is even completed, produced more lasting and significant changes in the conditions of human life than in any other period in history.

This fact alone attests to the two most important assets of the world organization—the spirit of change and the spirit of cooperation. Without the vigorous desire to alter the oppressive conditions in which the majority of the world’s population have lived all their lives; and without the unifying influence of the United Nations, which has produced tin-growing cooperation we have seen crossing old barriers of color, race and even ideology—without these two propellants of human progress, the change that has taken place in this decade of development might well have waited for another eternity.

Need for National Development

At the core of the U. N. development program is the campaign to make every nation self-sufficient in food. It may sound paradoxical that the United Nations, where aim is to surmount the boundaries of geography, should work with such intense emphasis on national development. But as I have said earlier, the essence of the United Nations is the promotion of human dignity. The U. N. spirit is nothing if it is not the humanitarian spirit.

This sense of humanity requires that the individual in any nation should live in comfort and decency. Since food is the first measure of a decent life, numerous organs of the United Nations have directed their energies and resources to the program to feed the hungry and the undernourished.

The World Food Program

It is therefore appropriate that the beginning of the Development Decade was also the beginning of the World Food Program, established by the United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organization.

In a way, the World Food Program may be said to be a “crash” program, because of the element of emergency that motivated the U. N. and the FAO to organize it. However, this program has now developed into a farsighted undertaking, with the positive aim of providing support for the development program of every member nation.

Problems of the Year 2000

In the past few years, both in and outside the United Nations, there has been increasing effort to look ahead and anticipate the problems of the future. The nature and scope of the problems in the year 2000, for instance, have been the subject of special studies in universities and research foundations, particularly in the United States.

The requirements in food supplies, housing, city planning, employment, and education, in the light of advancing technology, are now being studied and projected. In the more advanced countries, these studies embrace even the future uses of leisure. But in the still underdeveloped countries, the primary concern will remain for many years to come the adequate solution of continuing food shortages.

Solution to Food Shortage

The United Nations for its part is leaving no stone unturned in its search for effective measures to alleviate these food shortages, and, as quickly as possible, usher in an era of abundance. Next year, the so-called Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development, a study of the world’s economic needs and how to meet them, will be released as part of the FAO’s Freedom From Hunger campaign.

Hand in hand with this effort is the work being undertaken through the United Nations Children’s Fund. Approximately 300 million pre-school children in the world are undernourished, and therefore easily susceptible to a host of diseases, such as yaws, trachoma and tuberculosis. UNICEF is engaged in a world-wide program to correct this dreadful condition.

The Work of the UNDP

Among the leading U. N. projects today to accelerate national development among the growing countries is the United Nations Development Program, started in 1966 to combine the work of two earlier development projects, the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance and the United Nations Special Fund.

The UNDP is proving itself increasingly more useful to the developing nations. At the end of last year, the UNDP had completed 39 surveys of national resources. These surveys are extremely valuable in guiding member nations towards the wisest possible use of their natural resources so as to quicken the growth of the national economy.

Guidance to Investment

Particularly important have been the UNDP’s studies and proposals for the proper rate and direction of capital investment in various developing nations. Many successful development projects in these countries were undertaken, and many more promising ones are set for launching, on the strength of UNDP findings.

At the same time, technical assistance, which is, as you will agree, one of the major needs of the growing nations, has been provided by the UNDP. The Philippines itself continues to benefit from this particular UNDP support. Before long, we expect our manpower program to gain new momentum with the support of the UNDP.

Our Potential For Progress

All these add to my resolve to accelerate the development of our country and realize as rapidly as possible the large potential we possess for economic growth. We have procrastinated too long in embarking on this task.

The poverty and deprivation that we are seeking to minimize or eliminate have remained with us for too long. In a sense, this long delay in changing the status quo in our country is the story, on a smaller scale, of the vast hiatus that two-thirds of the world has experienced for centuries.

The Earth’s Poor Millions

I have therefore been immensely heartened by the great activity going on under United Nations auspices to rescue the earth’s poor millions from the clutches of poverty, disease and ignorance. This too is our aim for the masses of our people; to bring them out or degradation and misery is also the prime endeavor of our government.

I am glad that the opportunity and the means to achieve a greater measure of human dignity for many of our people are growing. But we must realize, as the various organs of the United Nations have long realized, that the work is never quite finished. We must simply continue seeking more opportunities and more means to improve human life. The knowledge that this is necessary, and the willingness to fulfill this necessity, are in the final analysis perhaps the best source of that human dignity whose lasting protection we are all striving for.

Good day and thank you.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1968). Speech b efore the Manila Lions Club, Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, October 23, 1968 . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 64 (45) , 11503-11506.