Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the commemoration of the 80th anniversary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

[Delivered in Malacañang, June 23, 1978]

The Canons of Our Foreign Policy

YOU AND I who work in government, as well as those who belong to the foreign ministry, are executors of the purposes that saw the birth of the first department of foreign affairs under the revolutionary government of 1898. Great and sweeping changes have since visited our country and of course, all of the world; yet in a fundamental way, the substance of our concerns in relation to other peoples and nations remains the same as it was 80 years ago when we first sought our place in the family of nations.

The revolutionary government of 1898, if you will remember, set forth as the urgent task of its foreign affairs ministry the defense, the protection and the enhancement of the country’s sovereignty and independence. It declared that what was won by struggle and by revolution — the right to be a free and independent nation — must be secured through the maintenance of friendly and fruitful ties with other nations.

Today, 80 years later, those purposes stand as the bedrock of our Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Events did not prove kind to the early bid for national self-determination of our people’s revolutionary government. Let me say that while the first efforts at self-government failed and success eluded the very best — the likes of Mabini, Aguinaldo, Luna and the other great minds that set up the first Republic in Asia — yet even as the tides of new colonial empires swept into our part of the world, the will to independence was never again to be quenched, for once the fire was lighted it was to spread and in time the Republic would be born again and along with it would rise the structure of a new foreign office, more secure than its predecessor had been.

And today as we celebrate the founding of this ministry, we can without reservation declare that this institution has survived its frail beginnings, that it has succeeded in giving substance to national sovereignty and independence, and that it embodies what had long been the dream of our forebears — a free nation able to hold its own in the community of independent nations.

Perhaps it would be one of the exercises in our schools of diplomacy later on, and perhaps of other disciplines, to speculate what might have happened if the more talented members of the present foreign ministry had handled the foreign affairs under Aguinaldo.

You must know that the military have these exercises. They often take up the subject of how the revolution could have failed and as an exercise try to determine exactly how, with a more capable leadership, the revolution would have ended. And perhaps such exercises could be the basis for studies by our diplomatists.

Be that as it may, today it will be said that it has been a long road that we have traveled, that not so long ago we were not a nation in full possession of sovereignty and independence. It will be said that even after national independence was recovered in 1946, as has already been remarked, our foreign relations actually existed in limbo, entrusted to, if not dictated upon by, others.

But today, it will be said that we are finally sovereign in our land, that our Ministry of Foreign Affairs has not failed its supreme trust to defend, to protect, and to enhance the sovereignty and independence of our Republic. And I repeat, from the first Republic.

For however long it may have taken us, we have finally learned the lessons that attend the governance of a nation’s foreign affairs, truths which, ignored and misunderstood, can erode what is vital to these but when heeded and accepted as a guide are the touchstones to success.

From here have proceeded the major accomplishments of our diplomacy in recent years. Underlying all that we have accomplished is the perception at last (hat our place in the family of nations is ours alone to attain, that what we regard as our national interest and aspiration can only be advanced by ourselves, and that our foreign relations can never be safely entrusted to anybody else except to ourselves.

When considered in the full perspective of 80 years, these last six years stand out as an eventful and historic time in Philippine diplomacy. We need not indulge in a lengthy recapitulation of what has been achieved in our foreign relations during this decade. More important for us is a full and confident understanding of the main currents that have guided our foreign policy during the last six years and which might light up our journey into the future.

This is best stated in terms of the principles that underlie the actions we have taken and must continue to take.

The first principle — foreign policy reflects the conscious exercise of national independence and sovereignty on each and every issue, and on each and every initiative.

The time when foreign policy decisions were dictated and conditioned by the options of others, when we entrusted our affections or our enmities to any other nation, is long past. The lapses of the past may be explained by the circumstances in which our leaders then found themselves — the consequences of a world divided into mutually hostile camps. However one may explain it, we cannot belittle the ill effects upon our sovereignty as a nation. Nor can we ignore how vastly different the world has become; we inhabit today a new and critical period in international life, in which interdependence with others begins by giving due regard to one’s sovereignty and political independence.

In our part of the world, the need to take such a posture became a natural consequence of a series of events: developments in Indochina, the emergence of new centers of power and influence in the world, and the changing foreign policies of other countries. But with or without such events, the policy of dependence on others could not have been prolonged indefinitely.

The second principle — our foreign policy must be the servant of our national aspirations to development and progress.

Mainly because we had erroneously tended to regard foreign policy as removed from our domestic concerns, our foreign relations in the past played only a minor role in the shaping of national realities. Also mainly because of this, we were slow to realize the real consequences of neglect and drift in our foreign policy.

Yet in fact, we know only too well today that foreign relations can be a tool in promoting our development and national security. These are the two sides of the same coin. The other word for security is development, which we may help to attain through our economic and cultural relations with other countries.

To see national development as a major determinant of foreign policy is to accept in other words the unity of our interests and purposes as a nation. When we aspire to have security, we aspire to national development. When we aspire to have political stability and stable relations with other nations, we promote national development. And when we advance our economic relationships with all nations, we employ diplomacy at a level where it can touch the lives of our millions of people.

Following this second principle, we therefore subscribe to a third guidepost in our foreign relations: the need to maintain fruitful and beneficial ties with all nations, whatever be their ideology.

We have put an end to the prejudices of the past that conditioned us to regard almost half of the world as a hostile camp. We have established diplomatic relations with all the socialist countries. And we have seen the kind of mutuality and cooperation possible between states of different social systems.

Here we have seen only the beginnings of what can be a long and fruitful relationship. And our experience already confirms our hope that it will be a propitious and beneficial one.

The fourth principle — for the same reason that we attach great hopes to contact with the Socialist world, the whole spectrum of our relations with other nations must be based on mutual respect, mutual beneficiality, and mutual regard for each other’s independence.

Relations between nations grow and prosper on the basis of what they contribute to each other’s development and progress. The complementarity of national outlooks is an aid in this regard, but it does not ensure equality in the relationship.

For this reason, we face as a continuing task in our foreign relations the adjustment of our ties with many countries, to a plane where we as a developing country can reap as much from these ties as can those countries which are more developed and advanced than ours.

The fifth principle — as a reflection of the struggle of the developing world to development, our foreign policy recognizes, its oneness with the movement to reform the international economic order.

There is a limit to what bilateral relations can do in advancing the national interest. Conversely, we know today that the combined strength of the developing countries, whether taken regionally or conceived oh a global scale, represents a force for change that can result in untold benefits in terms of progress and peace among nations.

Thus, at regional level, we seek community with our Southeast Asian neighbors, through the building of a strong ASEAN community. In this initiative, we have already realized the beginnings of a vital regional groupings, and if we keep at it we will soon reap the full advantages of regionalism.

In the same spirit, we consider our identification with the Third World countries a vital aspect of our foreign policy, conducive to the construction of an equitable international economic order and to the building of a truly international human community. Many difficulties in here today in the bid of the developing countries for a better deal with the developed countries, but the intensity of the movement for reform can no longer be stemmed.

Finally, we recognize as a fundamental pillar of our foreign policy our participation in, and support for, the objectives and the work of the United Nations. Our country looks to the United Nations not only as the world’s most important force for building world peace; it is also, as it is now proving to be, an essential instrument for the progress of nations, especially of small nations.

To aid its work has been a national commitment ever since the birth of the world body, and that commitment has involved us in almost all of its major initiatives during the past thirty years.

That commitment will remain, powered by the belief and the confidence that the United Nations is proceeding on a course that embodies the interdepence of nations today.

On the basis of these principles, therefore, we have so shaped and guided our foreign policy as to make it a truly vital part of national life today and to earn for us a respected place in the family of nations.

What we make of our foreign policy now and in the future will surely depend on how well and how prudently we guide our foreign relations in keeping with these principles for its conduct.

This is the charge of our Ministry of Foreign Affairs as it moves on to its ninth decade.

That charge embodies a trinity of ends, broader now than those which confronted its predecessor in 1898, the revolutionary years, and these are: first, to assert and protect the sovereignty, independence, integrity and security of the country; to contribute to the accelerated development of the nation and finally, to promote regional and global stability.

In the pursuit of these ends, we must take more concrete steps to make our domestic policy more responsive to such global problems as food and energy shortages, overpopulation, resource depletion and income disparity. For while the international system has a big responsibility in the quest for global order, individual states must share a significant portion of this burden. The largest part of today’s global economic problems, after all, originates within states and remains within states and should therefore be remedied partly if not completely, within states.

This is not to say that such problems should be less the concern of the international system. (Indeed, global problems require global solutions.) This is rather to emphasize that until and unless internal policy resources are properly utilized, effective global solutions are unlikely to be reached.

Complementing this effort, we must strive to expand and intensify our relations with the outside world. We shall seek to increase our trade with all countries of the world. We shall continue to welcome and protect foreign investments as a means of boosting Filipino entrepreneurship in the creation and development of new industries. We shall seek greater exchange and contact between our people and the rest of the world.

We hope to conclude this year the negotiations of our agreements, military as well as economic, with the United States. This should put relations between the two countries within a new framework of mutuality of understanding and respect.

We must also accelerate the pace of our economic negotiations not only with the United States but also with Japan, for these are our two principal trading partners. In both cases, the new economic agreements should contribute to the growth of a resilient Philippine economy.

The consequences of our revitalized foreign policy open to us many new areas for exploitation and study, heightening relationships that once were dormant, requiring adjustment of old and historic ties, and necessitating initiatives on our part on many fronts.

These challenges will fully test the mettle of our Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and of all of you who constitute it.

If during the past six years, the Ministry has gone through major reorientation and change, it must be ready now for the kind of changes required by the times.

It is true that while we have established several new missions abroad, the ranks of the Ministry have not been substantially augmented. But it is not so much the problem of numbers that should occupy our attention now as the quality of our foreign service.

In saying this, I am not oblivious to the accomplishments of the service. On the contrary, I have come here today to extend to you my personal congratulations as well as the congratulations of millions of Filipinos who know the great achievements of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There is a need however to further professionalize the service in view of the active role the Philippines has assumed in international affairs and the complexity of Philippine concerns in our bilateral and multilateral relations.

In line with this, it is surely in keeping with precedent that the foreign office now take the lead in implementing the new presidential decree requiring the naming of deputy career ministers or career ministers to help head and run the Ministry. I shall be ready to make the appointments upon the recommendation of General Carlos P. Romulo.

This means the Ministry will be entitled to perhaps even a political minister, if that is so recognized as a need, as well as a career deputy minister and a political deputy minister.

Now the Ministry has also embarked on the study of possible reforms to improve its organization and staffing. I also came here today to say that I eagerly await your recommendations and the results of these studies. It is my intention to do my best to have the Ministry’s proposals implemented and institutionalized immediately.

I am particularly interested in the efforts of the Ministry to reorganize itself to provide greater coverage and expertise to the various areas that merit our interest. I would like to see that the individuals handling the various country-desks become real and unassailable authorities in their respective fields.

I assure you that the Office of the President will extend all available support to attain this objective.

To attract talented and perceptive individuals to the foreign service, I am ready to raise the salary scales of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The salary scales of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should now be brought up to at least the highest scales that can be found in government.

I am likewise announcing today that I support the moves of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to institute a promotion system that will encourage initiative, productivity, dedication to duty, comparable to the promotion systems of the top foreign services in the world.

I would have brought with me the list of those promoted in the foreign ministry, but in your giving the First Lady an award, the promotions might look as if it was a “kaliwaan” gesture or a matter of give and take. So we will suspend the promotions until later. Twenty-four hours, anyway.

Now, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has often recommended a rotation system of its personnel as an incentive for good performance and to avoid the possibility of its personnel assigned abroad being more attached to their country of assignment than to their native land.

Maximum support will be extended to the Foreign Service Institute to insure the professional development of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs personnel. It should henceforth be our policy that before anyone is assigned abroad, he must first be required to undergo all the necessary training and preparation at this institute.

I also realize the urgent need of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a new building that will adequately house its entire staff. You know, I may have disturbed a hornet’s nest here because the other coordinate branches of government, both the legislature and the judiciary, will call my attention to the fact that they too are entitled to a little more attention than they are getting now.

But whatever it is, it is quite true that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is the premier ministry in the entire government, and therefore the dignity of the position and of the Ministry requires that it be properly housed.

These grave questions affecting the reorganization of the Ministry, the professionalization of the foreign service, and the improvement of its facilities, all require measures that should be both speedy and within our means. I look to the leadership of the Ministry to take the initiative in this major effort at revitalization. And, as I said, I have come here today to pledge support for such efforts.

Our web of relationships in the world today has never been as vast, as important, and as critical to the nation as it is today.

No doubt it is vastly more complex than what Mabini ever dared to imagine when he first commenced to organized the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1898.

But it would surely please him to note, were he living today, that his vision of a Ministry defending, promoting and enhancing national sovereignty and independence, lives and thrives in the institution that he helped to establish, and that this institution has grown as surely as the nation it serves.

Nothing stands still, least of all the interaction and relationships of nations, and I would surely hope that long after our responsibility will have passed to other hands, there will continue to stand this Ministry of Foreign Affairs, guiding the Republic through the currents of challenge and change in the world because you and I had contributed our modest bit to the building of this Ministry.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].