Comrades, I heard earlier a song dedicated to your humble servant as a leader or head of our country. The truth is, a leader thinks of and cares for nothing but the fulfillment of all his dreams and promises to the citizens so that in the coming times, his service as leader of the country will no longer be needed. Perhaps the time will come when the spirit and foundation of our freedom reach all Filipinos and the need for Marcos as leader of the Philippines is completely forgotten.

Let us refresh our memories today with three chapters in the history of our independence.

It has been more than eighty years since we established the first republic in Asia through the great revolution.

You remember that it is our claim—it is the recognized claim in Asia that the first republic in Asia was established here in the Philippines.

It has also been thirty-four years since we regained our freedom from America. In 1946, in this very place, before many people like those gathered here today, the American flag was lowered and our flag was raised alone.

It has also been eight years since we established the New Society to fully achieve our freedom.

These are the three chapters that bind us all as a nation. Our Filipino identity is written in them. Here lies our true strength. Here lies our hope in the face of the conflicts facing our world.

Let today be a celebration of these three great events which constitute the variations on the grand theme of national independence for our country.

It was 80 years ago when we established, by revolutionary proclamation by General Emilio Aguinaldo, the first republic in Asia.

Thirty-four years ago we regained our Independence from the United States.

And only eight years ago we advanced our emancipation with the founding of the New Society.

These three events dramatize a single purpose: the liberation of the Filipino. They are the paradigms of our national unity. In them, the names Kudarat, Soliman, Lapu-Lapu, Dagohoy, Silang, Rizal, Luna, Bonifacio, and the hallowed grounds of Mactan, Tirad Pass, Bessang Pass, Bataan, Corregidor, Visayas, Mindanao evoke not narrow tribal memories and regional sentiments, not cultural divergencies, but the one powerful reality of Filipino unity and nationhood. Indeed, Jose Rizal was not the first of our heroes to call for national unity. If you will remember, as far back as the first landings of the Spanish conquistadores, Lapu-Lapu raised the cry, and later on so did Sultan Kudarat of Mindanao, Dagohoy and many others.

It is clear that the common struggle for freedom is our most precious heritage. It hands down to us the fundamental lesson of our national history. And that lesson is, to the extent that we are united, we are resolute; to the extent that we are resolute, we are strong; to the extent that we are strong, we are unconquerable. But the lesson itself has another face: the face of failure which we see in many pages of our history.

We know that our revolution was aborted, aborted perhaps by the Americans and their arrival; but it was destroyed initially by the factionalism within the ranks of the revolutionary. The commanding general of the revolutionary forces, General Antonio Luna was killed not by the enemy; he was killed by Filipinos, treacherously at that. Factionalism had wrecked the revolution. And when Luna died, Mabini, the intellectual, the paralyzed brains of the revolution said: “The revolution is dead.”

We would have lost the fight for independence if either the federalist or dominion status argument had won over our people. It is well to remember this now, for the federalist argument promised security and comfort in exchange for national independence. Here is a shameful page in our history, for some of the leaders in the fight for national independence actually intimated to American friends that they thought that our countrymen, the Filipinos, were unfit for sovereign rule.

It is futile to decry this now. There is always a Benedict Arnold in any anti-colonial struggle, for a Benedict Arnold is a colonial phenomenon. He is a man who has learned—in Rizal’s words—to love his chains. Not for him the hardships of free.dom but the security of the slave. And yet he parades himself as a patriot, even if a “practical’ one.

The Benedict Arnolds of our race are not necessarily evil men. Some of them may even have a deep compassion for our people. That is why they have no sense of either guilt or shame. But they cannot see the contradiction between calling on the might of a foreign power and working for the welfare of the people. They equate the good of the people with the goodness of a foreign master, that colonial servitude is justified by the benefits, real or imagined, of colonialism.

The Benedict Arnolds of our country are well known to you by name. In time, history will make a permanent record of their infamy.

There is one basic fact about the Benedict Arnold’s fate: he destroys not only himself but his country as well, should he succeed. Fortunately for us, he seldom, if ever, succeeds—but he can hold for some time and retard the advancement of a people.

In spite of the Benedict Arnolds of our country, great trials have unified our people. We have always been heroic in vicissitude. We are children of tribulations. Our qualities shine in our darkest hours.

The world had seen proof of this many times, for one, in the last great war. We had proof of this but eight years ago—when besieged on all sides, by dissidence, secession, and criminality, conditions aggravated by a shameless oligarchy, we decided to dismantle the old society to give way to the new. We knew that although all societies had their rebels and criminals, their share of corruption and insolent power, ours had gone over the limit and threatened the very life of our nation. Thus, when I signed the martial law proclamation, I did so with the hands of many, not only with mine.

We have seen proof in the past and we shall see proof again—now. For once more, my countrymen, we are facing a time of great trial.

And it is indeed proper that this parade today has shown to us the strong political structure on which the government of the Republic of the Philippines rests. It rests not on the leadership of Marcos, it rests not on the leadership of the Cabinet members or the members of the Batasang Pambansa, but on the foundational political unity of our people, and that is the barangay—the old unit of unity.

That is the foundation on which are based our efforts to raise our country into modernization. It is not based on income from oil, income from any other unusual source. It is not based on any unusual developments that give animal and material comfort to our people. It is based on the love of our people for our country and for our nation.

As I said at the beginning, on my part, while you sing to me of my participation in this great drama in which we play our respective roles, it is my intention to see to it that I shall convey to the next generation of leaders this legacy of dedication, patriotism and idealism. So that in time Marcos will not be needed anymore by the country.

It has been said that we cannot be heroes 24 hours a day and every day of the year. Thus, it was that in the early days of the crisis government, the people, perceiving its necessity and recognizing its wisdom, summoned reserves of goodwill, resolution, and discipline not seen for many decades. The bureaucracies were efficient, fair and honest; the private sector hummed with enterprise; the country weathered crisis after crisis.

We cannot, however, today deny that there has been deterioration in discipline, flagging resolution, the so-called “restoration mentality” which followed, as if after the crisis government, we shall have the license which came to England after the interregnum of Cromwell.

This is not the time for such illusions or for such dreams. Our times offer no easy solutions nor comforts; they do not promise excesses, they will not allow indulgence. Only the disciplined and resolute among nations will survive the present state of a world in panic. Yes, for the world is in panic.

The panic is palpable. It is seen not only in the developing states; it is seen even in the strongest superpowers. One can touch and smell the fear that pervades the globe. The energy crisis, the economic dislocations, the confrontations among powerful nations, the clash of cultures, are not isolated disturbances. They form a whole, the whole of a world crisis. They are caused not merely by the greed or selfishness of nations but by a powerful dread— by fear. One nation fears for its stature, another for its strength. When leaders of powerful nations meet, it is mainly to gauge each other’s “steel”. The supreme calculation is summed up by the words: “Can we get away with it?”

In this atmosphere, small and poor nations like the Philippines have to survive economically, build strong political institutions, lay the groundwork for national security, and relate in friendship with all nations. It is a task that calls for supreme and Washingtonian qualities, the qualities of a founding father. Still, the plight of small nations has no historical precedent. There is no school for the modern enterprise, for the leader and for the people of a developing country.

We Filipinos cannot look back to our heroic ancestors for specific guidance. All that we can learn is that they were united in a common struggle. Their technology cannot guide us, but their resolution, their courage, their patience and, more than anything else, their willingness to sacrifice everything, including honor itself for the country, for the people, will show us the way.

Ours is a time of hardships, but no one outside of ourselves can help us. Those who say that the goodwill of a superpower will alleviate our suffering forget that every superpower has vicissitudes of her own. The interest of the powerful always takes precedence over the interest of the weak. As Bonifacio asked once before, “Who will be for the Philippines if not the Filipinos?

We must then rely on ourselves. There is no choice, there is no alternative.

There can be no real independence without self-reliance. No one can think for us, just as no one can live our own lives for us.

There are issues in the world, however, to which we must lend our voice—along with other kindred nations.

Paramount among these are the survival of mankind, the restructuring of the international economic order, the limitation of nuclear arms, and the end of terrorism.

We stand by the United Nations principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of nations, a principle that is continually tested again and again.

Our detractors, on the other hand, do not seem to regard this principle as of any importance, for good reason, I presume: It does not encourage or help their ambitions.

At the same time, we are free to foster friendly relations with all nations, whatever their ideologies or systems of government, so long as they do not pose a threat to our national security. These will, in turn, depend on our national confidence, on our ability to discern what is perilous to us and what is advantageous to us.

Too long have we considered ourselves incapable of making subtle distinctions, too long have we been afraid of shadows, because out of colonial habit we preferred to use foreign eyes and foreign minds to interpret the world to ourselves.

For instance, when a visitor comes from abroad and he sees our bamboo houses, he says, “These are the poor slum houses of poor Filipinos.” He does not know it, because he is used to plastic and cement and steel, but the bamboo house is the best house that can be built for Filipinos.

We must now learn to interpret the world to ourselves through our own eyes.

That habit was broken with the advent of the New Society—the habit of using foreign eyes to appraise and assess everything, including our own lives.

To the danger of blind involvement in our foreign relations, we must now add the perils of factionalism in our domestic affairs,

As I have said, great trials unite us. But as soon as things quiet down, we tend to revert to atavistic tribalism and regionalism. We have yet to translate our heroism in times of great stress to the quiet struggle of day-to-day existence. We must learn to make quiet heroism a habit of thought and action. We must continue to dedicate ourselves without claiming any special attention from anyone nor demanding any reward for such service to our country. For that is the meaning of heroism and patriotism.

There are no easy tasks ahead of us, no easy comforts for those selected by history to carve a new national destiny and create a new society, a new world for all.

We find that for every opportunity, there lies a risk, just as for every freedom, there is a corresponding responsibility. We have learned that solutions to problems give rise to other problems.

A past generation could take comfort in the sure issue of effort; it lived in a world which progressed steadily— with minor disturbances but no surprising turns of events. But this generation has always lived with uncertainty, with danger and with surprises, if not at home, certainly abroad. Vietnam, Iran, Afghanistan are not but a few symbols of the unprecedented. We can, after the fact, trace their beginnings in history, but only after the fact.

The new science of the future, called by turns futurology or futuristics, reads of trends and patterns, but in the end, its prognostications depend on what man is willing to do, on how man perceives his options, and on how man makes his choices.

We may say therefore, that our prospects for the eighties are dim, dark, forbidding, or, with some optimism, that they are brighter than they seem. There are facts to argue for one side or the other. On the pessimistic side, there is the energy pinch, which means higher prices, more unemployment, slackened industrial development and possibly a deep recession worldwide. On the optimistic side, there are the anticipatory programs, our geothermal thrust, the expansion of our trade relations with Eastern Europe and other countries, the commitment of resources to social development. But the realistic attitude is to balance optimism with pessimism—on the side of optimism.

We cannot go on—no man can act—if he does not believe in the future. Let us recall the truth of Pandora’s box: That in the release of evil in all its forms, man has been given just one weapon, and that weapon is hope. Pag-asa . It must have been considered sufficient for man to keep up his hopes in order to survive and prevail.

I do not mean the false hope of the whimsical that things by themselves will end up well. I do not mean the false hope of the timid who leaves the work of society to others. I do not mean the false hope of the somnambulist.

I hope that what I speak of sparked the Philippine Revolution despite the insistence of the timid that the ideal conditions for revolution should be present before the Filipino could rise to claim his destiny.

We hear the same voices now, the same timid and weak voices during the great revolution that opposed that revolution because the people were not prepared for it. We hear those voices from some quarters now, saying, “We are not prepared for radical reforms in the villages.” And the answer to that is the brigades, the barangays, those who have marched here, voluntarily showing their loyalty to the Republic and the Independence of our country.

I speak too of the fact that there will never be ideal conditions for any noble and unusual effort. No ideal condition can be present before the Filipino can rise to claim his destiny.

I speak of the hope which regained our Independence over the insincerity of some of our advocates.

I speak of the hope which sparks the New Society, the hope that makes man the measure of his destiny.

If our problems seem too big for us, let us ask whether we just prefer to believe that we are too small for them. And if our society were ideal—and what society is?—would we have need for leaders, thinkers, illusions, programs, heroes? No. But let us not be guided by illusions. The great societies of historical record were themselves rocked with crisis and confronted with danger, what made them great was the human factor—the qualities of the mind and the heart of the men and women who lived and worked according to the contours of their age, and against all adverse circumstances attained their noble destiny.

Let us not commit once more the old society’s mistake of making the evil that men do the standard of our society. There is no wisdom in making your corrupt neighbor your model. Insolent authority is not your work. It is suicidal lunacy then to justify your indifference or emulation with that neighbor’s behavior.

We in the leadership have established the Tanodbayan. And, in case, you have forgotten, the ten-centavo telegram to the Office of the President for any complaint remains in force. There are the barangays which involve everyone’s participation in the affairs of the community. There is, above all, the interim Batasang Pambansa. These are still imperfect machineries, to be sure, but they will not work perfectly by themselves without human guidance and participation and support, without the exercise of our people’s political will.

We look up to the leadership, and that is understandable, especially in times of crisis in a complex world. A great mind once said: Victory in time of crisis is perhaps 90 percent leadership, but more than this, recognition of the wisdom of that leadership. But let us look to ourselves. Let us not just look to the leadership. Let us not just look to Marcos or the Cabinet members or the military or the governors and the mayors.

We look to ourselves. Each and every one of us—look deep within us and find where the hero is in the Filipino.

Let us look to ourselves, let us look around us and let us look at the ground on which we walk.

A leader can only be as great as his people. Let no man fool you. A people’s great qualities are magnified in him—and also their weaknesses. No matter how strong a leader, if the people are weak, the leader ultimately must become weak.

But I would not have remained President if I did not believe in our people’s capacity for great deeds. The crisis of eight years ago—the impending fragmentation of our country—would have consigned me to oblivion were there not in the Filipino people a heroic resolution to rise above difficult circumstances.

Indeed, we would not be gathered here today if we were content to find fault in our stars. The fault lies not in their stars but in themselves that they are underlings.

I realize that the anxieties that pervade the world have their disturbing effects on us. But let us not engage ourselves in the vain pursuit of comforting words.

All of us are privy to the truth of human experience.

We have survived before, we shall survive again.

Let us be honest with ourselves and once more give a chance to the invincible and the heroic within us.

We are Filipinos!

DO NOT WORRY, WE ARE PROBABLY FILIPINOS!

Thank you very much.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Speech delivered by President Ferdinand E. Marcos at the 82nd anniversary celebration of Philippine independence; Quirino Grandstand, Rizal Park, 12 June 1980. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 76(26) , 4420-4427.