Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Republic of the Philippines, at the annual reunion of the U.P. Law Alumni Association at the Social Hall of the DBP Building, Makati Avenue, on 26 April 1974.

You have bestowed on me the most distinguished alumnus award for 1973-1974, for which I thank you most sincerely my gratification becomes more complete as I recall to mind the truism that no person was ever honored for what he received; honor has been the reward for what he gave. At the same time, I remember the story that when a high official resigned from the government to become president of a multimillion international firm, he was awarded a medal after listening to the long and glowing tribute paid him, the honoree said: “I am sorry my mother is not here. She not only would have enjoyed this ceremony, but she would have believed every word of it.” It has been a year since we last broke bread together at our annual reunion. The years, I am afraid, speed by faster than many of us care to remark; but I for one do not fear the passage of time. Victor Hugo, Titan of Freedom Literature, was once called upon to comfort a friend who had arrived at his 50th birthday and was depressed at the idea of growing old. “You should rejoice, my friend,” Hugo told him, “that you have escaped your forties, which are the old age of youth, and have at least arrived at the age of fifty, which is the youth of old age.”

A reunion is always a time for stocktaking. If I could, I would conduct a simple experiment to distinguish two types of human nature. I would gather a throng of people and put them into a ferryboat. By the time the boat swings into the river I am sure to find that a certain proportion have taken the trouble to climb upstairs in order to be out on deck and see what is to be seen as they cross over. The rest have settled indoors, to think what they will do upon reaching the other side, or perhaps lose themselves in apathy or tobacco smoke. But leaving out those apathetic, or addicted to a single enjoyment, I would divide all the alert passengers on the boat into two classes those who are interested in crossing the river, and those who are merely interested in getting across.

As alumni of the College of Law of the University of the Philippines, all of us gathered here tonight are to be classified, not only as those merely interested in getting across, but more characteristically as those interested in crossing the river. And indeed, at this point in our national history, we are crossing the Rubicon; our people are fording the stream of national destiny. Never in our progress as a nation has the rule of law been more crucial than it is today. As your humble head of state and head of government, I must confess quite candidly that the need for the support of the U.P. Law alumni in the total development efforts of the administration, has never been greater than it is at this time.

Recently, the bestseller lists in the United States have included a book written by Joseph C. Goulden called The Superlawyers. It is about the s-called Washington lawyer who is defined as an attorney who practices before the federal government in the American capital − a man of immense expertise, influence, and wealth. The book includes a story, perhaps apocryphal, of the corporation general counsel in the midwest who asked one such superlawyer what his company should do concerning certain tax legislation. After several weeks, the Washington lawyer responded, “nothing,” and enclosed a bill of $20,000. Unaccustomed to this style, the general counsel testily wrote that for $20,000 he certainly was entitled to a more complete explanation of the recommendation. He got it. “Because I said so,” the Washington lawyer said in letter two, and billed the corporation for another $5, 000.

As U.P. Law alumni, many of you here tonight are the superlawyers in Philippine society, considered the best of the trial lawyers in the country. What does a trial lawyer do? A superlawyer would say that when he sits down at his office, he is confronted by a voluminous collection of facts. What he has to do is to winnow through them and find out what are most salient. He must organize them so he can understand them and put them into an orderly, logical sequence. Then he faces the burden of proving his case that is, presenting the facts as articulately and persuasively as possible, in an effort to guide those who are going to make the decision. Of course, very few lawyers receive the unusual and pressure-filled course, or go through the arduous discipline, of a trial lawyer.

I have made this digression to emphasize that the new society needs men and women who think like trial lawyers − people who can sift the facts, present them articulately, and use them to guide the people who, are the ultimate judges of our efforts. As your President, I call on your appreciation of the facts as they existed before the new society was born. Constitutional opposition, so indispensable in a democracy, was repudiated with such cynicism that I was forced to conclude that the democratic order had broken down in the Philippines even before we were confronted with the martial necessity.

The legitimate opposition found common cause with the openly unconstitutional opposition consisting of the communist revolutionaries, in no time, the legitimate opposition became illegitimate, pursuing its ends outside of the democratic political machinery.

I had learned in our alma mater that a threatened constitution provides for itself its own means of survival. And it invests the exercise of this means in the highest magistrate bound by oath to protect and defend the constitution. The commander-in-chief clause of both the 1935 and 1973 constitutions not only protects the republic from its enemies but also indisputably sanctions the martial necessity without interjecting the supremacy of the military. Since the civil authority remains supreme over the military, the civil courts continue to exercise jurisdiction over the entire legal system, unless it is over crimes against the state. The constitution, therefore, provides for its survival in the democratic manner, using the instrument which is not only legal but moral in the highest sense. It places the proclamation of martial law under the rule of law.

No less than majority leader Mike Mansfield has submitted a report to the United States Senate with this statement: “Martial Law was declared and is being administered at this time on a constitutional basis in the Philippines. The military carries out the orders but it is the president who gives them. In this respect, the principle of civilian supremacy remains in the saddle.” Indeed, the new society is anchored on a new social contract: that the political authority will establish the priorities and promote the mechanisms of equalization, but it is the entire citizenry which must provide the work and accept the sacrifices.

To insure the people’s support and therefore the eventual success of our democratic revolution, I immediately took steps to formalize the acceptance of martial law through the adoption of a new constitution which was ratified almost unanimously by the barangays on 17 January 1973. This action was questioned in a petition filed before our Supreme Court in the cases entitled Javellana vs. Executive Secretary, et al., Raising the issue of whether I had the power to call a plebiscite and whether I could proclaim the ratification of the new constitution. In so raising this issue, the petitioners (who, incidentally were liberals or political opposition leaders) raised the fundamental issue of the power of the president under a proclamation of martial law to issue decrees.

In 1971 I submitted myself to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court − in the case of Lansang vs.Garcia on the question of the suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. In 1973 I again submitted myself to that jurisdiction – for the Javellana case raised the question of the legitimacy of the entire government. Additionally, I proposed to meet the insistent suggestion that, in the event of an adverse decision, I would proclaim a revolutionary government or set up a dictatorship. For who is the dictator who would submit himself to a higher body like the Supreme Court on the question of constitutionality or validity of his actions?

Even more to the point, I wanted to emphasize that the revolution which I was leading was a constitutional revolution. It was constitutional in the sense that it did not depart from the strictures or limitations of the old and the new constitutions. The Supreme Court upheld our position in its decision of 31 March 1973, ruling that there was no further judicial obstacle to the new constitution being considered in force and effect.

We therefore now have a basis for the formalization of the political base of the new society. We also have the foundation of the legal structure of this society. We pursue a course relying on the political will, which makes political reforms imperative. Constitutionalism remains the basis of the present government constitutionalism that reaches down to the humblest level of the citizenry.

Tonight I make this assessment, that the gains in the political reorganization of our society have been substantial, but I would not call them satisfactory. We have tamed the old political habits, the old alliances between oligarchs and their political retainers; now we must uproot them. Only those succumb to backsliding who have lost their old privileges and thus miss their failing dominance.

To my fellow alumni, I appeal for a renewed sense of loyalty to the rule of law under the new society. We are engaged, more than anything else, in a crucial experiment for survival. We talk of a development program but it is the moral development of our race which is ultimately at stake. And I would recall to you that the law is the external deposit of our moral life; in the immortal words of the great justice Holmes “The life of the law has not been logic; it has been experience.” What more momentous experience can a nation undergo than to pass the crucible of constitutionalism and emerge tempered and poised for the cataclysmic task of national construction.

For the U.P. alumni who are devoted to the law – let us consecrate ourselves to the thought that the law has honored us, and may we honor it.

Source: National Library