Speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, at the opening of the Week of the Filipino Language of the Institute of National Language

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE FILIPINO LANGUAGE

Regarding our celebration of Language Week, I would like to tell you what happened to a fellow Filipino from Pampanga when he came to Malacañang recently.

Two weeks before his scheduled visit, our fellow Filipino from Pampanga decided to study the Ilokano language. Because I am Ilokano, he assumed that the Ilokano language would help him in talking to me and to the guards and helpers here in the People's Palace.

That's what he believes, according to our fellow Pampangueño, because in the old days, whatever language the President was accustomed to was the language that prevailed in Malacañang.

The day arrived for our fellow Pampangueño to meet with me and he did come.

The first Palace guard he encountered, he greeted in Ilokano, but he was ignored. He greeted another guard in Ilokano, but he was also ignored. So, he began to think that the guards in Malacañang these days were rude and uneducated.

But he also worried that his pronunciation of Ilokano was the reason he was being ignored. So, he softly and clearly repeated his greeting to the next guard. But instead of answering him in Ilokano, the guard apologized in Filipino and politely asked what business our fellow Pampangueño had at Malacañang. The Pampangueño was forced to speak in Filipino and the two understood each other.

A fellow countryman from Pampanga went to the Palace. While waiting for his scheduled meeting with me, he decided to speak in Ilocano to my aides.

But he was very surprised because not a single aide he spoke to knew Ilocano. He went around the entire hall and listened to what language was being used in conversations and discovered that if it wasn't Filipino, it was English. No one was speaking Ilocano there.

When he entered my office, he immediately greeted me in Ilocano. But because I knew he was from Pampanga, I answered him in Filipino. And I jokingly said that we should speak in Filipino so he wouldn't run out of Ilocano. And we did speak in Filipino.

Aside from Filipino being the language prevalent in Malacañang under the current administration, instead of the language familiar to the President or the First Lady, as was customary in Malacañang in the past, the government is now continuously taking steps towards the full promotion and existence of the national language throughout the archipelago.

One of these steps is the translation into Filipino of the oath of office in government. Because of this, from the President of the Philippines to the lowest-ranking government employee who needs to take an oath of office, now takes the oath in Filipino instead of in English or Spanish. I believe that Filipino is the language that should be used in the oath of office in government because it is the language native to our country, because it is the language we fully understand, because this language penetrates our hearts and souls.

Another of the steps I took was the translation into Filipino of the President's part in the ceremony for receiving foreign envoys here with us, such as ambassadors, ministers, and others. The use of the Filipino language by the President of the Philippines in receiving representatives or envoys of foreign countries demonstrates our appreciation for our national language.

But the Filipino language is not only used in ceremonies now. At all times when I believe that the use of the Filipino language is more appropriate and more effective, I use this language.

The Filipino language was also used by our delegation at the previous meeting of the International Labor Organization in Geneva. Through the Filipino language, our delegation was able to present the Philippines' position on the issues discussed there at the international meeting. This is another proof that the Filipino language is effective and dignified, and that we will not regret our desire to enrich and promote this language throughout the country.

Today, I greet the Institute of Mother Tongue on its achievements, current efforts, and future endeavors towards the enrichment and propagation of the national language.

I also greet all teachers of the national language who tirelessly enlighten, day after day, the minds of our youth towards embracing and using the Filipino language. These teachers of our country are the true pillars of the advancement of the Filipino language.

I hope that through our collective efforts, the day will not be far off when we can stop the campaign for the promotion of the national language. The truth is, many of us, including politicians, businessmen, and civic leaders, are slowly feeling that the Filipino language is necessary for them to effectively perform their respective functions. A day will come, and it is not far off, when we no longer need to encourage anyone to use the Filipino language. They themselves will strive to learn and use it because using the Filipino language is important to them.

One of the main goals of my administration is to hasten the arrival of that day.

Thank you.

Source: National Library

Marcos, F. E. (1968). Speech of President Marcos on the opening of National Language Week. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 64(38) , 9527-M-9527-O.