More than four years have passed since the Municipal Mayors League, or this organization of municipal mayors, last met, and I say I am happy that your organization is still active.

Some people say… that only one thing can invigorate local leaders to hold a convention at this time… and that is the upcoming elections. To be honest, the one who said that has a point, but your positions are not up for grabs in the elections to be held in the next two years; and another mayor said that you will only meet if you really have something important to discuss. We all know that there are important things that our local leaders need to discuss now.

Whatever the real reason for your infrequent meetings, and your sudden holding of this convention here in Manila, I say your meeting is timely, and my facing you now is a great opportunity to discuss the important problems and challenges related to our local governments.

I would like to mention that when the Municipal Mayors League was formally established on December 15, 1976, and when it held its First National Convention on November 28, 1977, our country was still under what was called a crisis government. Now, after four years, we have implemented a complete transition or total change from what we call an emergency government to a normal democratic government. And this historic part of our country has witnessed and shouldered the problems and opportunities for our country and our local communities.

You are also meeting at a time when the final deliberations are taking place in our Parliament or Batasan regarding the proposed Local Government Code, which we expect will clarify the roles and powers of our local governments in the face of the challenges and problems of our time. You are here now in Manila with various suggestions or proposals on various issues that are important to the interest or welfare of our local governments.

And it can also be said that we are now in the midst of a national effort that highlights the importance of the role played by our rural areas in development activities throughout the country. I am referring to the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran, which is one of the main topics or agenda of your meeting today.

I would like to go over this with you one by one, because this issue is important to both you and our citizens, and we should take advantage of it because opportunities like this, where we gather together, are rare.

First, I will mention the political situation in our country today, and the various government policies related to the opposition, legitimate or not.

I would like to mention immediately, that there is no doubt that with the full establishment of our normal democratic government, after the amendments to the Constitution in April 1981 and the establishment of our New Republic in June of last year, we fully recognized the organization and activities of legitimate political opposition in our country.

What does this really mean?

First, this means that any citizen is free to establish and form political parties or movements that wish to challenge the political leadership of the government through democratic means. Political opposition is legitimate and is protected by the Constitution and our laws, especially if its objectives are focused on gaining political power through election.

By virtue of this protection or recognition, we have been lenient with the activities of the opposition, including defamation or attacks against the administration. There is no restriction on the opposition's desire to use the media for their opinions, whether they establish their own media or use existing ones. However, their expression of opinion does not need to violate any existing laws regarding libel or the like, and these, we all know, are at the discretion of our Courts.

However, it is a different matter if the opposition uses violence in their desire to gain political power. When this happens, it is not a legitimate force in our political system, and it is only right to use the law against them.

It seems not fully understood, in my opinion, the exact provisions of our Anti-Subversion Law, because one member of the Batasan filed a bill requesting the legalization of the Communist Party.

Although our Anti-Subversion Law or Republic Act No. 1700 clearly prohibits the Communist Party of the Philippines and similar associations, it was amended by Presidential Decree No. 885, which clearly changed our previous law except for acts that occurred before the Revised Anti-Subversion Law took effect. And this decree or law does not contain what is stated in the old law prohibiting the Communist Party, but only a declaration prohibiting subversive organizations or associations that aim to overthrow the government of the Republic of the Philippines or secede a part of it.

It is clear, therefore, that there is no legal obstacle to the establishment of a communist party that aims to gain political power through parliamentary or democratic means. What is prohibited is violence or conspiracy to use violence. And subversion consists of various acts aimed at overthrowing a government even by force, violence, deceit or other illegal means (“by force, violence, deceit or other illegal means” (Sec. 2, PD. No.885). And an unlawful subversive organization may be an association, organization, political party, or group of persons established for the purpose of overthrowing the government of the Republic of the Philippines. (Outlawed organization, political party, or group of persons organized for the purpose of overthrowing the government of the Republic of the Philippines”).

The line dividing legitimate and illegitimate opposition lies in the means it employs to gain power or political influence. But our Anti-Subversion Law clearly states in Section 6, that no part of the law shall be construed to mean “a restriction on freedom of thought, of assembly and of association for purposes not contrary to law as guaranteed by the Constitution.” Our anti- our Anti-Subversion Law specifically provides in Section 6, that nothing in the law shall be interpreted to mean “a restriction on freedom of thought, of assembly and of association for purposes not contrary to law as guaranteed by the Constitution.”

It is important for all of us to keep this distinction in mind, because we clearly need the services of a strong and stable legitimate political opposition, for a more effective political system in our country, not only during elections, but in the constant evaluation of the policies and actions of our government. And while the programs or platforms of these political parties differ in the administration of the government, the more opportunities are created for citizens to choose who they will put in office.

One might ask if the Communist Party of the Philippines or similar organizations advocating communism will one day participate in the parliamentary system and completely forget its ultimate goal of overthrowing the government through violence. But it is clear, we repeat, that our Anti-Subversion Law does not completely prohibit any underground organization.

This matter is very important not only to the national government but also to our local governments, because the danger of subversion and insurrection is focused in the countryside or local communities. We will be more effective in responding to these dangers caused by subversion if the laws regarding it are clear… and it should be remembered that legitimate or reasonable expressions or opinions of the opposition, which are clearly protected by our Constitution, should not be suppressed.

In our effort to consolidate laws that will revitalize our local government, the primary goal is to strengthen the system of our local government, and to highlight the capacity of each local government throughout the country. This progressive movement towards greater local autonomy is the result of the long-standing grievances and complaints of local leaders, and I fully understand your concerns as we move towards the full implementation of the Local Government Code.

There are two issues that are very important to you now, because opinions are divided on them. I have received your resolutions, first, regarding the question of your power to appoint Municipal Treasurers and Assessors… and second, regarding your power over the supervision or operational supervision and control of local personnel of the Integrated National Police.

On the first issue, we face the question of how public funds should really be managed: is this a responsibility that can be shared by different levels of government, as our local leaders view it… or is this a national task and needs to be centrally managed by the national government, as believed by our Ministry of Finance.

Although I fully know the position of local leaders on this, in my view, public finance, within the scope of our Constitution and our laws, is already one, because it refers to the totality of what is called public revenue, public expenditure or expenses, public debt or debts, fiscal administration fiscal policy, or policies and management of public finances. As our Prime Minister and current Minister of Finance said, there is in our system a total resource approach defined by the Constitution in its provisions on what is called the budget process.

Although the same Constitution recognizes the importance of local autonomy, the interpretation of the term autonomy is limited when it comes to public finances. The truth is, local autonomy should not be considered completely independent from national control or supervision.

From the point of view of an administrator, it is my policy which part of the government has the duty and responsibility for finances; and that is the national government. That policy is in accordance with the benefits of centralized management of public funds, and the major problems that would arise if the financial function were handled by local governments.

In accordance with the law and good governance, we must maintain the current determination of duties or responsibilities regarding public finances.

I would like to add, and we must remember that the different levels or branches of government should work together, and should never conflict. In this way, the entire government becomes stronger and more powerful. And any belief that local autonomy is completely free and has a fragmented purpose can only weaken the power and function of local governments. Local autonomy is strengthened and becomes more progressive when it considers the national government as an effective partner in an important development undertaking, such as that relating to finance.

In this regard, I also agree that the designation of Local Fiscal Officers should remain with the President and the Ministry of Finance in accordance with our policy of centralized administration of the national government regarding public finances. Establishing a different policy on this matter would affect the prevailing orientation in government service.

Regarding the issue of local government control over local personnel of the Integrated National Police, I support the expansion of the current policy, especially in troubled areas. Under this policy, clearly set forth in Presidential Decree No. 1162, which I signed on June 8, 1974, Governors, and concerned City and Municipal Mayors may be given the necessary authority relating to the calling or use of personnel of the Integrated National Police in their jurisdictions to maintain order in their areas.

In order to expand this policy, the police and the National Civil Home Defense Forces, upon recommendation of the Minister of Defense and the Chief of Staff, may be placed under the supervision of local leaders, if not command, through control.

This approach is more reasonable, in our opinion, compared to your request for immediate operational control and supervision of the police. I want to be frank with you, I am hesitant to completely transfer the police function to local leaders, especially considering our experiences in the past. But this does not mean that I completely oppose the opinion that the time will come when the police function will be re-shouldered by local governments. But careful and gradual steps are needed for this, and action should be taken in accordance with the situation.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that we are moving towards a concept of local government that is different from the systems we have experienced in the past, one that can be broader and more progressive than the current system. For now, we should focus or prioritize things that require stronger and more creative leadership in our rural areas and local communities. First and foremost is the role that local leaders should play in our national Livelihood and Development Movement (Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran).

Within the organizational framework of the KKK, the Municipal Mayor has a very important role in promoting livelihood in his community. Therefore, he leads the Municipal Development Council, a local body responsible for coordinating with various programs and operations of government agencies within his jurisdiction. He is responsible for identifying the livelihood opportunities available to his constituents within his area, and he has the power to provide detailed guidelines for establishing various livelihood projects in his locality.

This is a new role, in addition to the traditional functions of local leaders. Previously, local leadership lacked a vision for the livelihood of their constituents. Often, local governments were limited to controlling and licensing some businesses, and rarely did they strive to create livelihood opportunities for the benefit of their people.

The KKK is a challenge to the imagination and determination of our countryside to become prosperous and progressive. This challenge must first be addressed by local leaders.

The KKK symbolizes the second phase of our current efforts to rebuild and revitalize our society. We need to focus now on livelihood projects that can alleviate the lives of our small people, our poor neighbors. After we succeeded in stabilizing the political situation of the country, which was almost in danger almost ten years ago, what we need now is to stabilize the economy or the livelihood of the nation. The KKK is the unified mechanism that will revitalize our sluggish economy in the countryside, until its benefits become the most prominent part of the ongoing development in the country as a whole. The reactions we are receiving about the movement from various parts of our country since its launch seven months ago are a good indication that the movement is successful. But, we believe that the KKK is still an infant, so it needs further care and nurturing to become a complete success.

Because of this, we consider each of you as Chief Administrators of local governments who will first nurture our movement. It is true that the entire movement requires extensive cooperation to be implemented at all levels of our government, but you, as elected representatives of your communities, will be the first to know the basic needs of your constituents. You are on the front lines in our continuing efforts to achieve national development. We rely on you for the actual implementation of policies and programs that come from and are supported by the national government. The truth is, the success or failure of the KKK in your areas depends on you, while the national government provides leadership and direction.

As a final thought…

We are entering a new stage of our national life and public administration, especially now that it requires broader leadership and imagination from our local leaders. There are opportunities and challenges that our local communities must address, and the progress of each community depends on addressing these challenges and opportunities.

The national government is intensifying and further intensifying its assistance or support to rural or local communities.

In the proposed Local Government Code, which is likely to become a full law before the end of the current regular session of the Batasan, I expect to create a new framework for the further strengthening and effectiveness of local government throughout the country.

We can say that our local leaders have only now been given greater opportunities and challenges for meaningful action. And only now can we say that there are so many opportunities for our local leaders to demonstrate their ability and dedication to duty.

And in my conclusion, let me hope that all of you will be able to respond to these new challenges in your duties, and in our next meeting, you will proudly show your accomplishments. Not only in your leadership . . . . In your community . . . . . And in your barangay . . . . . . . But throughout the country.

Thank you and good morning to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.