Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand Marcos President of the Philippines A Homeage to Heroes

[Released on August 25, 1974]

Let me address myself this time to the young men of my generation, who, thirty-two years ago, exercised the ultimate freedom of choosing to die in battle rather than surrender.

It is to them that we owe the homage of remembrance, and they are, to begin with, part of the human constituency of the dead, the living and the yet-to-be-born that is the People.

I shall speak in personal terms, for although heroes belong to the collective memory— and conscience — of the race, we must yet regard them according to the individuality and wisdom of our singular experience.

Thus, to you, fallen and gallant comrades, I must speak within the context of the times, a time of anti-heroism and anti-heroes, a time when the heroic gesture is measured against the needs of, the moment. For three decades, we have transformed your glorious legacy into functional use, making of your gallant stand the inspiration of the given moment.

The essential meaning of your valor lies in the achievement of a dream that was unfulfilled in life. There was a time when many of us took your pledge to perish rather than to yield as the act of men who fought with former conquerors that we may not be conquered again.

Still, this was not enough. The eloquent rhetoric of the day placed Mt. Samat on the anvil of progress.

Thus, it had been said over and over again that you died that we might live in happiness, freedom and prosperity, that the purchase of your blood might be justified in terms of a growing GNP. You died, indeed, for a standard of living, low prices, abundance of commodities, and efficiency in the public service. And when all these did not transpire, there was a great temptation to say that you died in vain, without understanding that the question of your heroic meaning was meant to justify the existence of the living.

It is true that your valor, consecrated to the freedom and dignity of the race, was succeeded by an arrangement in which the community of the under-privileged many supported the society of the privileged few. The inequalities in privilege and opportunity, in comfort and convenience, between the few who were rich and the many who were poor have been ail too evident three decades after your finest hour in Bataan.

This was a real outrage to the sensibility, for how could a race which spawned at least two generations of young heroes suffer the impoverishment of the poor, the luxuries of the rich, and the fluctuations of the world economy?

If this be your dream, as many orators have suggested, know then by a stroke of destiny, by the recognition of implacable necessity we are beginning under the new discipline, to see our workers more productive, our bankers count their coins, our factories operate with maximum efficiency, and our scenic spots overwhelmed by tourists and their dollars. We are counting the economic blessings brought about by the decrees of the New Society, for these blessings are, I understand, an integral part of the dream which made you shed your blood here in Mt. Samat.

And yet I am troubled, and, perhaps, I am not alone. Philosophers and thinkers, incisive observers of the human scene, tell us that no one revolts for a standard of living. They tell us that human beings are moved by moral sentiments such as justice, liberty and equality. They speak to us of gallant gestures and heroic acts, gratuitous in the real sense, so that courage goes without compensation, resolution without calculation, and sacrifice without remuneration. They say that these are qualities – “crisis qualities”—which place men above “dumb, driven cattle.”

And so while widows, sweethearts, relatives, friends, and compatriots, commemoratively mourn your physical death, I mourn your spiritual demise. Heroes in our time cast long shadows in the life of the living, inspiring them to the valorous deed for the sake of valor, for what is fine, exalted and selfless in man. Theirs was the discipline of living fife according to the full exercise of one’s faculties, aspiring to the virtu that is characteristic of man.

No man should live in penury, no child should be born in the hovel, but we have somehow come to believe that penury and the hovel spell the destruction of human spirituality. Possessed with the materialism of the times, we would prefer the abundance of goods to the quality of our lives, and to a large extent, equate quality with affluence.

It has not been enough that we have liberated ourselves from the dependency of the past, that in claiming our destiny, we have the rare opportunity of turning the tide of mendicancy, helplessness, and passive expectancy. We have, by our own efforts, in daring to live dangerously for a purpose, averted the tragedy of a society awaiting passively the hand of its executioner. We would rather apply ourselves to the abundance of goods than to the efflorescence of faith, hope and confidence.

But to a certain measure, they should come together: the blessings of this earth and the resurgence of spiritual strength. I mourn, then, for your moral heritage, the defiance of fate, for that which is unpurchaseble in man: his freedom and his dignity.

I would that we shall bow no more. I would that we shall endow the gift of life with struggle, courage, and wisdom, rather than, pining for those creature comforts which could not be attained without strenuous effort. We should have understood by now that the authentic dimension of human development is man’s moral purpose on this earth.

Rest you, again, fallen comrades and heroic brothers. We shall yet be true to your exemplary gallantry. We shall yet learn that ultimately, what will make this nation stand is not so much the size and number of its factories but the height and strength of its people.

We shall try to match your stature…

My friends, thus do I address the silent judges of our enterprise, an enterprise conceived in danger and struggle, an enterprise worthy of our deepest commitment. If there are no heroes now, from whom will future generations derive their inspiration?

The generation that stands here now in Mt. Samat has done its part.

It is now up to us.

Source: National Library