Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Kick-Off Ceremonies of National Education and Fund Campaign of the League of Puericulture Centers

[Delivered at Malacañang Palace, November 16, 1970]

Defusing the Population Bomb

TO SHOW THAT we are supporting the puericulture centers, as are the other leaders here present, may I ask the First Lady to hand over our personal contribution to the puericulture national and educational and fund campaign.

I have just contributed a thousand pesos. The national government is contributing to the puericulture centers about P721.800 every year. And this year we will increase this contribution to the puericulture centers. It is quite true that the puericulture centers now constitute a permanent institution in our life. Fifty seven years ago, the first puericulture center was established. May I note, before was born. Since then the puericulture center has metamorphosed from conventional health center into a multi-purpose institution, and to an active agent of community development.

The puericulture centers are the clinics of the poor. By and large, the centers attend not only to maternity cases, as they were originally intended to do, but also provide general medical attention. This explains why the masses of our rural region regard the puericulture center as an important part of their lives. Now, you know why the First Lady and I are always here with you. Of course, the First Lady and I are always together whatever maybe the problems that we are facing.

But the reason we have taken these puericulture centers under our wing, as it were, is the fact that we, more than anybody else, realize the important role the puericulture center plays in the lives of our poor people, the disadvantaged elements of our society. Of course, the old puericulture centers have been further revitalized by the organization of the National League of Puericulture Centers which now sponsors this yearly program. It is a recognition of the role played by these institutions in our country that I have included puericulture centers in the major programs of our government since in fact I assumed office in 1966. In the health program, there are special or specific programs like, To Save a Life in Every Barrio which is under the supervision of the First Lady because it is a social welfare program. And puericulture centers play a major role in this endeavor.

In our miracle rice production program and in the home gardening or vegetable production program, among others, we have also harnessed the puericulture centers. Now, when I created the Population Commission sometime ago, before the election, before the 1969 elections — I was advised against tackling the population control problem before the elections because they said this was politically explosive and therefore I should not commit myself one way or the other before the elections — despite the study made by the leaders and their advice, I took a gamble because I realized that our people have strength and foresight, and so I went before the people, before the electorate and I said, the population problem is a problem that we must face now. We cannot delay facing up to it and any candidate for President or for any national office must take a stand on the population control problem.

I then appointed the head of the League of Puericulture Centers as a member, one of the leading members of the Commission on Population. I also appointed Bishop Gaviola to the Commission, to represent the hierarchy. Bishop Gaviola, the Secretary General of the Catholic Church, and I were taken aback when we saw the resolution being prepared; we were taken t aback because we felt that there might be opposition from the members of the Church hierarchy considering that the resolution adopted by the Population Commission left to the individual conscience the matter of determining what method may be adopted in family planning, whether the artificial or the natural method. And, as you know, these are quite controversial. But Monsignor Gaviola was in the Population Commission and he approved the resolution, and so did the members of the hierarchy of the Church whom I also consulted. And because of this, we went full force into the Population Control Program.

Today, the puericulture center movement has 802 centers while the Population Center League has 802 members. There are 1,400 municipalities or towns in the Philippines. There are also 1,400 rural health units, and, as you all know, of course, before I came to the Presidency, there were only about 300 complete rural health units. When I conducted a survey in 1966, I discovered that 60 per cent of the population of such regions in Mindanao and the Visayas and the Mt. Province never saw a doctor. Yes, 60 per cent of those who died in 1965 and 1966 had never seen a doctor or a nurse in their whole lives.

And so here was a country and a people, ostensibly living in a civilized society, in a progressive state and democracy, yet 60 per cent of those among the people who had died had never seen a doctor or a nurse.

We therefore looked around to check how we could supplement the medical and health efforts of government. It was touch and go for a while because there were many who thought that the public health program was a little too ambitious. To put one rural health unit in every municipality, they said, would bankrupt the government, but we went ahead. And now when they ask me where a lot of the money spent by the government went, I point to the rural health units, to the doctors and nurses, to the dentists and the midwives, and to the puericulture centers, to the PACD, all the health facilities and services which have gone into the rural areas. In many parts of the country today, the puericulture center has preempted or taken the place of government in helping the medically indigent.

We are now about to start the medicare program which is at the core a program for the medically indigent. We are just waiting for the time when we can gather enough resources. Commissioner Sychangco is here. Commissioner Sychangco has grown old from raising funds for the programs of our government.

My dream and my goal is to see a puericulture center established in all parts, in all centers of population, of the Philippines. That means you still have 600 centers to go, that you will need 600 more before you will have a puericulture center in every municipality of the Philippines.

And while I am President, I will extend you all available help and support in order that you can attain this goal.

One of my proposals to Congress was for government aid to the puericulture centers, and this bill was introduced by Congressman Sanchez sometime ago, but you know we were facing so many urgent problems then as now, so the bill did not go through. It was proposed that P6,000 be given as aid to every puericulture center without a maternity unit, and P8,000 to every puericulture center with a maternity unit.

When the Congress will consider this I do not really know, but perhaps you can exert pressure on the members of the House and the Senate, especially the latter. Maybe they do not realize the importance of the puericulture centers in the provinces, but you and I know. Our people depend on you, on the puericulture centers and we must persist, patiently perhaps but unremittingly in pushing through this bill so that we can get enough funds for this particular program.

I need not go into the unselfish manner by which you have obtained help for the puericulture centers. Most of those who are working for you are volunteer workers, I believe. Do you still have volunteer workers in the puericulture centers? Yes, well most of you realize that this is the highest form of cooperative action that we have in our country. These workers are a diverse lot, and they are well spread all over the nation. You have extended help not only to the health program, but also to the Community Development Program, my Presidential Arm for Community Development. And your success in reducing infant mortality alone is already a monument to your work. But then you see by helping to reduce infant mortality you have also created another problem, and this problem is population explosion.

Before I go any further, may I acknowledge the aid that has been given by the USAID to 164 puericulture centers.

We are grateful for this help given to those 164 puericulture centers, and I understand that this financial assistance has boosted significantly your in-service training and family planning program.

I have been informed that you have had some modest success as well in promoting family planning among our people. And perhaps it is now time for these 802 puericulture centers throughout the country to get involved in solving one of the most crucial human problems of our time — population explosion.

It is my plan that we shall harness not only the government offices and personnel to the program pertaining to population control, not only the health worker, but also the teachers and other personnel of the Department of Education, the Community Development, the Agricultural Productivity Commission, and all local officials, from governors down to the capitan del barrio, because our problem, this problem is also their problem.

The problem of runaway population growth is frighteningly real. We are multiplying at a rate which our pace of economic development cannot sustain.

The statistics are familiar to you. The average Filipina bears six children. I have only three so far. Two babies are born every minute. The average population growth ranges from 3.2 to 3.5 per cent or an increase of 1 million Filipinos every year. At the end of this day, some 3,200 babies shall have been born throughout the country.

Our population grows at more than 50 per cent of the world average. Our population right now is a little over 37 million. By 1980 or roughly nine years from now, it is expected to re-explode to 51.4 million, 69.8 million by 1990, and 110 million in the year 2000 or thirty years from now.

Roughly this means that we have to feed, clothe, house and provide jobs for Filipinos on a radically wider scale than we are doing now.

And we must meet our present backlog in these areas which is already tremendous. To provide for the needs of the succeeding generations requires no less than an overnight success in our efforts at economic and social development.

Of course, it is tempting to remain complacent and fold our hands and say, that is not our problem, that is the problem of the President in 1980, or the President in 1990, the President in 2000, because the terrifying consequence of population explosion will come in the future. We don’t perhaps feel it too much now, but the world of the future is your world too because it is the world of your children.

It has fallen, too, upon this generation and upon this leadership now, not tomorrow but now, to act decisively on this grave issue. We are called upon to alter a course of destiny which the future generations would have no way of coping with. We are asked to secure for our children a better quality of life.

Knowing all these projects and the probabilities in the next 20,30 years, we cannot ignore this challenge without being recreant in our moral responsibility to safeguard our civilization. To do so would be an act of cowardice no less for this question is not merely a matter of comfort, it is a matter of security, of national security.

We are actually feeling now the effects of a vigorous population growth. The slum colonies, the competition for jobs, traffic jams, criminality, the increasing demand for public services — these are manifestations of the stresses created by population explosion.

Of course, we are accelerating our effort at development to confront this issue. Economic growth has increased tremendously in the past four years. Total food production is up. Our manpower and youth development program has buoyed up employment opportunities. Our industries continue to grow. There will be no stepping back in our drive towards a more affording society.

But to be realistic about it, we do not now have the capability to meet the requirements of our present rate of population growth. It is a race that can be won only over a long period of time. And we must begin now.

Another thing to consider is that even if we institute population control measures right now, this minute, we will not see the results until after about 15 to 20 years. Population control takes time. And time may be running out on us.

In our country, the consequences of the population problem afflict not the rich and the middle class but the already teeming poor.

It is the poor who bear the burdens imposed by population explosion. It is the poor who are likely to reap the Malthusian after-effects of uncontrolled population growth in the years to come. It is the poor who suffer and there are a great many of them in our country. And a suffering poor means an unstable society and an unstable society means a threat to all, even to the rich and to the middle class. And, therefore, I call upon every segment of our population every sector of our society, to support this program.

The prosecution of a family planning program in the Philippines must be taken in the context of our economic situation. The poor need not suffer because of lack of information or assistance in family planning.

Our present program calls for the dissemination of knowledge and the provision of facilities for scientific family planning.

Now, I wish to state that it is not the purpose of government, or of the government leadership, to impose birth control measures on the citizens and to make family planning a compulsory policy. No, far from it.

Such a decisive step must be left to the judgment and conscience of the individual, as the resolution of the Population Commission says or states. Our concern is to impress on the people the urgent need for controlling the population. And this is the information program, in which all of us must participate. Everyone, everyone who realizes this problem will become an active agent of population control. And if we can, we shall see to it that every citizen will receive information on the urgency of action on this problem.

There is a moral dimension to this issue of course. In the end, family planning is a matter of choice. And I have reason to believe that our people would choose to have and to raise children in an atmosphere that assures them a decent and relatively comfortable life.

Family planning, in the main, calls for a higher form of discipline. It is an assertion of the will, an exercise of our right to shape our destiny, to dictate the quality of our individual and national life.

I am pleased to acknowledge now, formally the participation of the National League of Puericulture Centers in this great endeavor. We should now increase our financial and material assistance to these centers not only to promote family planning but to help them expand all their services.

I am also pleased to acknowledge the participation of the private sector, presented here by some of our prominent leaders in business and of the of the various churches in our efforts to promote family planning. The writing on the all is too stark for us to miss it. Briefly, the message is that rapid population growth is a bomb that must be defused. And we can defuse it. We can defuse it acting now. We must, therefore, act today. It is my hope that you will spread this message to every municipality, to every area of our country. I know the role you play in the local community. I know the role played by the puericulture alters. Most of the mothers come to you, indeed most of the members of families come to you for advice. I ask you, therefore, to get together with all the leaders of your community, the teachers, the government men, and spread the Lord that we must now engage in population control. We will leave to the individual the right of choice on the means he will use, but he must do something about it. I repeat, this is something which is crucial to our country and to our people. Yes, we will be engaged apparently by other urgent problems, but his problem which every right thinking man must think of today. It is a problem that can be easily staved off, it is a problem which perhaps you and I could easily keep away, from which we can stay away. It is a responsibility we need not bear on our shoulders, because we tell ourselves it is after all something which neither our children nor we ourselves feel now. But heaven forbid that our children should ever curse us in the future, 15 to 20 years from now, for, having failed to take any step whatsoever to solve this problem, when we could have solved it by initiating the steps that would defuse this bomb.

And so I urge each and everyone of you to adopt this program as your primary program in the next several years. I repeat, while I am President this will be one of the principal programs of the national government.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 3). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].