Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On advertising and its social purpose

[Delivered on November 3, 1981]

I am pleased to add my welcome to those already expressed by the organizers of this Congress. I especially wish a pleasant stay in the Philippines for the participants from the ASEAN countries, Japan, Hong Kong, Papua New-Guinea and the United States.

I am sorry that this morning you’ll have to be content with second best: Mrs. Marcos has had to fulfill an urgent engagement at the General Assembly. I shall try to represent her as best as I can — though, I’m sure that however I try I can never look half as nice.

I am told that this will be a “learning” Congress: that its workshop will bring to you the latest state-of-the-art in advertising and marketing from the West — particularly from the American industry’s acknowledged expertise and sophisticated technologies.

The Congress’ objective — to make the Philippine, the Asian, advertising industry more professional and more effective — is one that I can wholeheartedly endorse, particularly since we so want to improve the attraction of our product-lines in the export markets of the rich countries.

Beyond this coincidence of purpose, I am pleased to be asked here this morning. Politicians and advertising people do have a natural affinity, in that both our professions depend for their success on their ability to persuade their constituencies and their markets.

Even the social criticism of our two professions raises the same question: “persuasion to what purpose?”

Persuasion is, of course, the basic instrument for the exercise of power in the modern state. Yet, politicians are often accused of wanting power merely to perpetuate themselves in office.

And how often have you yourselves been labelled as the “hidden persuaders,” who entice people into buying goods they do not need, to satisfy wants they do not really have?

Advertising’s social purpose is increasingly being questioned — not only in the affluent West but by statesmen and thinkers in the new countries.

The Western and the Third World critics approach the question of advertising’s public purpose from opposite ends.

For instance, Professor Galbraith indicts Madison Avenue for creating popular wants merely to absorb the excess productive capacity of Western industry — productivity that should really go to redressing scarce public investment, and so put an end to public squalor amid private affluence.

By contrast, Third World statesmen fear that advertising may be raising popular wants beyond the underdeveloped economy’s capacity to fulfill them. It is in this spirit that the Indonesian government, for one, has (since April this year) banned television commercials, concerned over their harmful effects on overwhelmingly rural audiences.

Both criticisms imply advertising’s ability to manipulate the consumer — a widespread fear that I think is somehow related to the controversy over “motivational research” in the 1950s.

The fear among poor-country leaderships that advertising inordinately raises popular wants, and should therefore be stifled, seems to me especially significant. For it was not so long ago that we all regarded advertising as a handmaiden of economic growth, as a motive power of development.

I think that this fear reflects the generally chastened spirit of today’s poor countries — a spirit so different from the euphoric hopes raised by independence.

For political freedom has not on every occasion brought economic development as its logical consequence. The revolution of expectations has been largely submerged by a counter-revolution that Professor Galbraith has recently identified as the “equilibrium of poverty.”

Taken together, the poor countries do sometimes feel as though they are slipping back — exhausted from the gigantic effort to wrench themselves free from the gravitational pull of tradition.

We in the Philippines have chosen to open our economy to most influences from the outside world. Our linkages with the international economy are stronger than those of most developing countries. Yet we too often feel this pull of accustomed ways, of values older and more comforting than our new hankering for the products of modernity.

It is by now a truism to say that cultural attitudes help determine whether or not economic development will take place. How much importance a culture awards to work, to material possessions, to consumption, and saving — all of these will influence its rate of growth.

Naturally, political leaderships and governments seek to reinforce in their constituencies those cultural values that favor development, and to deflect those that do not. In this work, we recognize advertising as a natural ally, whose immediate purposes coincide with ours.

Our Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran — a new livelihood program founded on local self-help and resources at town and provincial level — enjoys the active support of the Philippine advertising community. So have our earlier programs of political reform and social development.

We do have our differences — government and the advertising community — and I for one have not minced words in protesting what I regard as the exploitation of sex, for instance, or the exaggeration of violence, in some forms of mass-advertising.

By persuasion, by incentives and by force of law if necessary, we fully intend to keep Philippine advertising focused on its social purpose as much as on its commercial viability.

In the West and in Japan, I have noted the increasing proportion of commercial advertising devoted to topics like ecology, conservation, culture or public health. I should be most pleased if Philippine advertising takes a similar interest in these public-service causes.

While I regard advertising’s reputation of being manipulative as somewhat exaggerated, we in government do recognize its potential power as a factor in the development of mass-media.

We are necessarily concerned about its well being, its level of technical skill, and its degree of professionalism, I for these reasons, I reiterate my welcome ot this congress; wish its deliberations all success; and congratulate its organizers and participants.

Thank you very much; and a good morning to you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.