Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Upon acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa , from the East-West Center, Community of Hawaii

[Delivered in Honolulu, Hawaii, September 26, 1966]

Chancellor Jones, President Hamilton, Governor Burns and Mrs. Burns, Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen:

I accept this degree and this honor for and on behalf of the Filipino people. I shall hold this award and offer it at the altar of our freedom, a freedom which is symbolized by the diversity, the liberty, enjoyed in this state and in the entire United States of America.

For, as I have repeatedly stated, in this kindly land of America lies the fountainhead of many of our liberties. It is from America whence came the general impulse that was to allow a new birth of freedom in the Pacific. Truly the Philippine Republic is a sister of the Republic of the United States of America.

To this great country belongs the prior honor and credit for having initiated one of the glories of our age, which is the widening of the horizons of freedom and the emergence of sovereign nations throughout the world. One point eight billion people came to know freedom after the Second World War.

For your noble experiment in democracy in the Philippines had rendered untenable colonialism, not only in Asia and Africa but everywhere else. Thus, as I accept this award, I am reminded of the very essence of democracy.

As I came in, I noted that the Philippines does not have a monopoly of placard-bearers and demonstrators. I noted that there was a plea on a placard calling for peace in Vietnam. This has been my purpose and objective. It will be noted that when I spoke before the General Assembly of the United Nations, as well as in the United States Congress, I said then that we sent the engineer construction battalion with security troops with one directive, one order, and one objective; and that is to go on a mission of peace. They go to reconstruct what has been destroyed. They go to seek the rehabilitation of what has been wrecked, the physical symbols of the freedom that must be given a people to determine for themselves what society and what government they will establish in their own land, an option which is sought to be preempted by a power strange to and outside South Vietnam.

Today, at 11:30 this morning, I issued a call to six nations for a summit conference or a conference of all the heads of state of the six nations that participate in the South Vietnamese conflict, namely: the head of state of South Vietnam, Thailand, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand and the United States. It is my pleasure to announce here that South Vietnam, Thailand, and South Korea have previously agreed to this arrangement and while the date set, October 18, may be somewhat awkward for some nations like the United States, in view of the approaching elections. I just received word that the Prime Minister of Australia has willingly agreed to attend the conference if it is set on October 18 of this year. It is my intention to hold the conference either in Manila or in Baguio City, the latter our summer capital.

I did speak to President Johnson about the necessity of immediately taking steps to attain peace in South Vietnam, either by negotiations directly or through the intermediaries whom we have approached. It is my belief that President Johnson will attend this conference and through this forum on this occasion of the awarding of the Doctorate of Laws on my humble self, I appeal to the President of the United States to attend the conference on October 18, 1966 in Manila.

This conference will, of course, reassess the present positions of the allies of South Vietnam in this war. But emphasis will be laid on the non-military, the non-violent aspects of the South Vietnamese crisis. It is my hope that the principal purpose will be to adopt a common stand in order to attain the final objective of peace in South Vietnam. But beyond this, for the question of South Vietnam does not answer the question of stability in Southeast Asia, or in Asia, or for that matter, the whole world, beyond this it is necessary to plan and envision not only rehabilitation but also regional cooperation with the support of this great power, the United States of America, in order that there may be an economic development in accordance with the Honolulu, Declaration of a social revolution in the whole area of Asia.

It is my hope that this conference will, during the period of two or three days, be able to arrive at definite plans for regional cooperation, economic, mostly, and social. It is my hope that emphasis will be placed on civic action in South Vietnam.

The Philippines has a history of fighting communism. For if you will remember, when the United States of America dismantled its colonial machinery and proclaimed the independence of the Philippines on July 4, 1946, immediately thereafter, there was initiated a revolution by the Hukbalahaps , otherwise well-known as the Huks, the armed elements of communism in my country. The Hukbalahaps numbered from 20,000 to 30,000 armed men with a base of about a hundred thousand. The Hukbalahaps mounted a rebellion that lasted from 1946 to 1951. From 1941 to 1945, the Filipinos participated in the Second World War. The casualties among our people totalled more than one million Filipinos who died in the Second World War.

The brutality of the Second World War left much anger within the hearts of the Filipinos. There too, was anger in my heart, for I lost my father, who was hanged from a tree, as penalty for my refusal to surrender after the surrender of Bataan and for my insistence in leading a guerilla group in the mountains of Luzon. But this anger was dissipated when this Hukbalahap movement was initiated and rebellion flared up. For the same brutality and the same viciousness that was shown, was demonstrated by our own brothers in this revolution. There was rape, there was pillage, there was burning, there was destruction, there was killing, and there was massacre. And these were all perpetrated by the Hukbalahaps , by the Huks , some of them men who had fought beside me during the war. And so all of us realized then that it was not the nationality of a soldier that drove him to brutality and viciousness but rather the motivations of war. And we realized then that communism, which sought to impose upon us a definite kind of totalitarian and monolithic-structured society and government, was our enemy and as our enemy, we have fought it since then.

There had been efforts to compromise with the Hukbalahaps . I have personally participated in these efforts. But these efforts have always proved in vain. Every time there was an amnesty granted to the Hukbalahaps , such amnesty was utilized by the Huks to consolidate and strengthen their position. No less than five times the Hukbalahaps were given an opportunity to lay down their arms and join the duly constituted government. Lately, too, I sought the counsel of leaders of the Hukbalahaps , disregarding the requirements of security, I have had conference with the leaders of the Huks. But unfortunately, the die-hard and the hardcore elements of communism in my country refused to compromise.

It is for this reason that our position has come clear, and that is to press the battle against the hardcore elements of communism that seek to destroy the democratic institutions of my country, a firm policy carried out by the military. To those who are misled by them, the great majority of our people, the peasantry, to the mass of the people of the Philippines, we will give total friendship, embodied in programs of civic action, rehabilitation, resettlement, improvement of the means of living, increase of per capita income, application of all the scientific and systematic methods of agriculture, for seventy per cent of our people still earn their living from agriculture.

I speak of this because we know communism at first hand. It is my hope that fou will never come to know communism as we have known it, that your country will never be infiltrated by the armed elements of communism and that they shall never occupy your towns and your countrysides, that you shall never be intimate with the cruel connotations of guerilla war and insurgency, that you will never see your towns, and villages wrecked by the counterparts of the Hukbalahaps.

It is my hope that you will never know the sorrow of your brothers dying by the hands of your own countrymen. For there is nothing certainly more disastrous than for a people to be divided by political ideology. But this precisely is the purpose of communism throughout Asia today.

Throughout Asia, the one single purpose of communism is to infiltrate and divide, and dividing, wreck the institutions established within the country. They cannot export war by exporting men, so they export the idea of perpetual revolution. Perpetual revolution, world revolution, war by proxy, this is the meaning of communism as we see it. And so to my friends in America, I can only say: Listen to those who have met subversion face to face and identified it, isolated it, and known its meaning- Learn from these lessons that come from that area where communism is most active, and learning it, judge for yourself.

But I am carried away by the subject of communism. Allow me now to proceed to acknowledge my indebtedness to the university for this degree and to the East-West Center, a dream that has become a reality. The East-West Center is the meeting of the Occident and the Orient, through scholars and the exchange of scholars. I am happy to note that some of my countrymen, sir, are here in the East-West Center, and some who have passed through this institution.

I extend the congratulations and the thanks not only of my people but also, I am certain of all Asia, for this idea that has been implemented so well.

Indeed, as a great mind has said: “it is education which probably is the answer to human conflicts. It is an internationalizing agent, for the man who has acquired enough education, rises above the national frontiers and feels the well-being or the ailments of a nation that is a neighbor nation as if they were its own.”

Thus, we hope success for the East-West Center, We shall pray for this Center and we hope that it shall extend its influence not only here in Hawaii but all over Asia, Let it be the means which shall encourage not only the appreciation of oriental cultures but shall point out the fundamental identification of Oriental cultures with that of the Occident.

Asia has haunted memories of colonialism, I need not go into the centuries of conflict that had been the experience of Asia. That Asia with its 1.5 billion people from the Middle East to the subcontinent of India, to the mainland of China, to the Indo-Chinese and Malaysian peninsulas, and to the two archipelagos of Indonesia and the Philippines. These 1.5 billion people constitute not only a drag on the prosperity of the world but a potential threat. They constitute the dreadful potential of triggering a Third World War. It is, therefore, necessary that the Western world understand Asia and the 1.5 billion people that inhabit it.

Always, Asia will be remembered for the violence of the past several years. It is from Asia and Africa now whence come the serious threats against peace and the challenges to the authority of the United Nations. For sometime to come, Asia will be the focus of attention of the whole world. And thus it is that for some time now, the revolutionary spirit which resulted in the independence of many nations of Asia was identified as Anti-American, anti-colonial.

However, it is a happy development that after the realization of political independence, it was also realized that emancipation would not be equated with economic progress, that it was different from revolution and establishing a government, different from winning economic emancipation. The energies, the enthusiasm, the dedication and devotion of the revolutionary had therefore been rechanneled towards the efforts to attain economic progress. Thus, we need the leaders that have been trained here in the East-West Center. These leaders understand Asia. These leaders will be able to transmit to the Western world the image of Asia and articulate, the true feelings of the Asian who feels that the days of colonialism are over and that for the establishment of a lasting peace and stability in Asia, there must be an understanding between the Western world and the Eastern world, an understanding that has come about between the United States and the Philippines.

We are happy to participate in extending such an agreement, such understanding, to all the nations of Asia and it is my hope and purpose to do my part in clarifying the intentions of the United States, so that these shall be understood in any part of the world.

For the experience of the Philippines in colonialism under the United States has been a happy one. Immediately, the United States did establish the conditions for freedom. There was immediately initiated in 1902 a universal system of education, a system of education, which created a bold, strong, comparatively strong, middle class in my country of technicians, merchants, professionals, entrepreneurs, which now constitute the hope of our people and of my country.

The Filipino nation believes in democracy. For we have organized a government, a Republic, that was patterned after the American Republic. It is a government and a republic which has adopted the principles that are embodied in your Constitution and in your way of life. It is a government that recognizes diversity of opinion and understands that freedom means the capacity for honest dissent and the tolerance of differences of opinion. For the American policy was less repressive than the others. It is the feeling of all Asia that perhaps Dien Bien Phu would never have occurred had the French followed the American colonial policy, or even late in the day, had the French agreed to promise independence to French-Indochina, to the three countries composing it now, at the start of the rebellion against the French colonial regime.

At the same time, it is the belief of the Filipinos that the mainland of China would never have been lost had the leadership of Nationalist China recognized the fact that dissidents and malcontents are always the spawn of poverty, ignorance, and disease, and that concurrently with military victory there must be economic and social reforms. But unfortunately, the Chinese leadership in the mainland of China insisted that these reforms should occur only after the attainment of military victory. It is my hope that the American leadership realizes the importance of these lessons of history in Asia. I am assured, however, after conferences with President Johnson, that the American leadership do recognize the importance of what I have called the second front, the economic front, in South Vietnam.

Because of the mass education system in the Philippines, the Philippines has political stability. Since 1907, by virtue of the Philippine Bill of 1902 approved by the United States Congress, we have been electing our representatives to the House of Representatives of our country. And since 1916, by virtue of the Jones Law, we have been electing senators to our Senate.

I am the sixth President of the Republic of the Philippines. There has been peaceful transference of political power from one party to the other and from one person to another. This certainly indicates that if we are to judge the validity of the political institutions of the Philippines by the test of Aristotle—”the election of magistrates by all, out of all,” then the Philippines indeed is a democratic country.

We are proud of this achievement. But in addition to this, there is change and dynamism, which are facts of our national life, and openly, frankly, and in candor, we place before the people the option to choose—the free way of life as against the importunings of communism to world revolution. The true revolution, the revolution that Is perpetual, for it constitutes the continuous mobility of elements within our society as in every democratic society, is the revolution which allows those who belong to the lower classes to rise up by sheer competence, and by the development of their God-given faculties, to rise up into positions of leadership. Accident of birth shall not determine nor demean the ultimate achievement and attainment of man, nor prevent him to rise up. And those who are now at the top of the social class can go down only by virtue of the weight of incompetence, of abuse and lack of dedication.

This, to us, is the more important revolution. It is a revolution that exists and continues within our society. For the leaders of my country, the leaders of the Philippines have come from different classes of society, from the lower to the highest. And more often than not, our leaders have come from the lower classes of society. This is the revolution which we offer in exchange for the world or so-called perpetual revolution of communism.

In Asia today, we look around and see fear in the hearts of the leaders of the small nations. For all over the world, it seems as if while the United Nations has been organized on principles derived from the basic ideas of the League of Nations, a dream that died, this restatement of the capability of man to establish a society that shall be able to maintain stability throughout the world, this new decalogue of faith in the new century, this, it seems, is again being challenged.

And while unity is the rallying cry in this organization of nations, indeed the name itself denotes its purpose, that of unity. The world is fragmented into many groups of nations. There are the big powers and satellites. There is an Eastern and a Western world. And now there is a developed and an underdeveloped world. And again we fear a new development. There is a continuous bipolarization, economic bipolarization of the world. And the lines seem to be drawn along the same old lines of colonialism. The nations that are rich are the colonizers, the nations that are poor and becoming poorer are the old colonies. To us, this constitutes a serious threat to peace which must soon be met, confronted not merely contemplated, by the United Nations and by, the individual nations of the world.

Thus it is that when we see the use of force to justify a policy in order to impose a kind of government upon any nation, there is fear within our hearts,, for we know then that we might be returning to the heresy of traditional politics, which is that, in order to maintain peace we must prepare for war or fight a war. In order to attain stability, we must manufacture nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction. Thus it is, we believe that the mortal basis for the presence of the United States in South Vietnam is the question, whether we shall allow might to be recognized as right over again, as it was before Grotius, the father of international law. Shall we disregard this vision of the social and legal visionary? If might dictates what is right, then properly small nations will gather together as satellites around the big powers and as satellites, they must permit the continued erosion of their respective sovereignties.

Thus, we return slowly, step by step, to where we started. To that of dependence upon a strong power. For there is a narrow dividing line between world colony and dependence because of power. The moral basis, therefore, of the presence of the United States in South Vietnam is clear and it is that once and for all, we must determine whether power, military power, will be allowed to dictate what is right.

For if the United States withdraws from South Vietnam, or does not participate in this fight in South Vietnam, then, ladies and gentlemen, we must admit that power and force had dictated and determined the future and destiny not only of one small nation but all other small nations, and all protestations about the existence of an international law will be to no avail-It is also our feeling that the Philippines has more advantages than any other country in the establishment of democratic institutions. It is our feeling that the Philippines must succeed in this democratic experiment. It must demonstrate to the world and to all of Asia that despotism is not a necessary ingredient in the development of a nation and for it to attain economic progress. There is a feeling current among Asian leaders that democracy is inefficient. And that we must telescope in a few years economic development that was arrived at by other countries over several centuries. But the Philippines is certain that even alone in a sea of communist or neutralist forces, it can succeed-At the same time, the presence of the United States of America in South Vietnam is dictated by what we believe is a military basis.

And this has been stated by no less than the heir apparent to Mao Tse Tung, Marshal Lin Piao, who is the prophet of the leader of Communist China and who said: “the rural areas in the world today are Asia, Africa and Latin America and the cities are Western Europe and the United States of America.

In accordance with their experience in the mainland of China, the Red leaders say and conclude that when the rural areas are overcome, the cities will ultimately fall. So even if Asia should first fall, the ultimate objective is the United States of America.

From the view point of necessity, therefore, and from the view point of the military, now is the time to upset this plan of Communist China. For it is possible that if you allow the attainment of political hegemony that is the objective of Red China in Asia, no matter what the differences are between Russia and Red China, inasmuch as they believe in the same political ideology, ultimately these differences will be settled. And the United States will be reduced to a second class power before the might of a united Red China, overwhelmingly dominant in Asia, and a Russia that has all the weapons of mass destruction at its command.

Thus it is that while there are the present commitments in Vietnam, we look beyond Vietnam. I observe and I would like to reiterate that there is no nation in Asia today that can balance the power of Communist China, whether alone or jointly with other Asian nations. Thus it is necessary that during this dangerous security gap, these other nations of Asia must look to another power for the shield of protection. And the only power right now which seems acceptable to Asian leaders is the United States of America. Beyond this question of security and economic development, are the fundamental issues of freedom, dignity of man, and of democracy. And these can be attained after the settlement of the crisis in South Vietnam, but at the same time may I reiterate the warning of history in Asia, that these things cannot be won by military victory. That to preserve the dignity of man, democracy must be made to work, and must demonstrate its capacity to uplift the ordinary human being in Asia, at the same time that military victories are being won.

It is the quiet role of the Philippines today to seek to mediate, to bring about a dialogue between North and South Vietnam through other intermediaries. The Philippines is willing to step back, the Philippines is willing to allow other nations to lead, but certainly the Philippines will take the initiative to bring about a conversation, such a dialogue wherein those engaged in the conflict may determine their respective positions in Asia.

Right now, we don’t have the counterpart of the organization of the African states. We do not have the counterpart of the organization of American states. There is no political forum to which can be referred any critical issue like Vietnam. It is my hope that we will be able to organize such a forum.

These, then, ladies and gentlemen, are the ideals that come from Asia. But the ultimate purpose is to build a world for all, a world that shall be dedicated to the future of the human species. It is my belief that all of mankind is wise enough, has enough will to organize itself to meet the dangers that now confront it.

Yes we look towards the day when a more enlightened generation will probably populate the earth, a more enlightened generation that shall do away with the paradox of a world of plenty that has hunger, a world of science that has disease, and a world of wisdom that knows war This more enlightened generation perhaps is your generation, you, especially who are here in the East-West Center of Hawaii.

It is my hope that your generation will not know the mistakes that have been committed by my generation and the generations before me. We are merely the trustees of human civilization, for we shall transmit it to you ultimately. And transmitting it to you, it is our hope that we shall hand down to you a legacy that shall be better than what we have received from those who have handed it to us, the generations before us.

To each and every one of you of the East-West Center, I wish to quote the oriental philosopher who said: “Make well of this day for every today well spent makes every yesterday a dream of happiness and every tomorrow a vision of hope.”

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1966). Speech of President Marcos upon acceptance of the degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa, from the East-West Center, Community of Hawaii, Honolulu, September 26, 1966. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62(48) , 9010-9019.