Speech of the President First International Conference of Muslim Women in some Asian and Middle Eastern Countries 14 December 1981

In the Philippines, our way of welcoming friends and honored guests is to say, Mabuhay! Which means “long live”; on this occasion, I want to greet you “Assalamu Ala-Ikum Wara-Kamatulahi!”

I am sorry that my wife cannot be here, though she was most anxious to share with you this memorable day–which brings together Muslim women from many parts of Asia and the Middle East countries in a common endeavor to discuss the problems affecting themselves, their societies and the whole community of mankind.

I shall try to represent her views to you, as well as my own; though, of course, no matter how I may try, I cannot look half as pretty.

Let me begin by saying how pleased we are that you have chosen Manila for the site of your First International Conference. We regard your presence here as a recognition of the high and honored place that we Filipinos award to women; and an endorsement of our efforts to lift our Muslim communities to full social, economic and political development.

Islam, as you know, reached the Philippines as long ago as the fourteenth century–although some of our scholars now tend to support the theory that it came some 200 years earlier. Between 1380 and 1571, when the Spaniards took the Muslim settlement of Manila, the Muslim missions in the south expanded until they encompassed the Sulu archipelago and much of Mindanao island. Had they chosen to use force, as the Spaniards did in their conversion of the Filipinos, Islam might have penetrated much deeper into the Philippines.

But the Islamic-peoples of the Philippines explicitly obeyed the injunction against compulsion as a means of winning adherents. In our experience, therefore, Islam has been — and continues to be — a religion of peace, propagated not by force of arms or superior technology but by saintly Imams and Makdumin working alone among the people.

In all my readings in Philippines history, I have yet to come across any data that could support the common-enough western view of Islam as a militant and aggressive faith spread by fire and the sword. On the contrary, Islam in our country has helped preserve our Southeast Asian heritage; it has helped us hold on to our distinct identity throughout the centuries of colonialism.

Like the other great religions that came to Southeast Asia, Islam to a great extent adapted to indigenous practices, traditions and beliefs. This adaptation extended to social relationships prevailing even before the coming of Islam. Thus, to the conservative, Muslim Filipino women may seem somewhat unorthodox and even “modernist,” though this, of course, detracts not one bit from their adherence to all the basic tenets of Islam.

In Southeast Asia, women have always enjoyed an honored a very high-place in society, whether these communities be Hindu, Buddhist, Muslim or Christian. There have been periods in our regional history when women had ruled great empires and commanded mighty armies. The famous Moroccan traveler, Ibn Batuta, described the court of Princess Urduja of Luzon, which historians now believe to be mythical. But, in the Philippine south, we do know of societies where women led armies in war and ruled their people wisely.

One of these heroines was Pangiyan Inchi Jamila, mother of Sultan Jamalul Kiram II. In 1881, she was recorded as leading army against Spain, which had tried to install a pretender to the throne of Sulu; until in 1897 she was able to install her son as the rightful heir to the Sultanate.

A Muslim Filipino heroine of a gentler type was Hadja Mantaya Salih, a native of Basilan island off Zamboanga, who became the first Chief Nurse of the only hospital in the southern Philippines during the early American period. At about this time, Bai Matabay Plang was pioneering in education; she is truly one of the most outstanding women of the Philippines. And there are a legion of other Muslim Filipino women who have — long before “Women’s Lib” — distinguished themselves in business, management, politics, civic work, civil service, education, literature and other careers.

In the Muslim women of the Philippines, we see the felicitous conjunction of an egalitarian social culture and an equally egalitarian great religion. Our social institutions have reinforced the religious one in creating an open society that has allowed women of talent and energy to fulfill their life-missions as freely and as fruitfully as any man.

Over the past few years, the big lie that Islam is threatened in the Philippines has been circulated in the Muslim world by a small minority of rebels and secessionists in portions of our Muslim communities. Though these conspirators have been vocal in their sensationalism they have not succeeded in this effort — because the Muslim peoples have seen through them and their plots. They themselves are the gravest threat to Islam in the Philippines, for they have created havoc in the Muslim communities they have misled — by disguising their secular ambitions in the religious cause of Islam.

As the facts now stand, their pretensions to being leaders of the Muslim communities have been exposed. The majority of those who were misled have returned peacefully to the folds of national society. These adventurers try vainly to fan the spirit of rebellion-not so much in the Philippine south but in the capitals of the Islamic powers in which they seek patronage.

We may say, perhaps, that to some of them “rebellion” has become a source of livelihood. As a result, the “central committee” of the so-called Moro National Liberation Front has become a factious group: fighting over the spoils; leaving to government the task of rehabilitating, resettling and employing the victims of their violent mischief.

Others among the rebel — the radicals and ideologies-have allied themselves with communist guerrillas who have been trying to overthrow the Philippine government these last 15 years.

This alliance with our communists the radicals of the MNLF have entered into, even while exhorting the Muslim Filipinos–and the Muslim world–to support them in the name of religious solidarity. To us who are close to the scene, and of course know the true story, alliance merely confirms the MNLF’s ideological color, which is nowhere near that of the bright standard of Islam.

Even so, we continue to deal with them using both restraint and forebearance–recognizing as we do the complex and historic roots of discontent in our Muslim communities. Thus, we remain prepared to welcome them back into national society: even to tolerate their continuance in opposition, as long as they conduct themselves within the constitutional limits of political dissent.

I am sorry if I seem to digress: but, of course, peace is just as much the concern of women as it is of men, and it is of social tranquility in our Muslim communities in the south that I speak.

As you begin your conference, I ask you to add your collect we voice — and it is a powerful one — to those of us who urge restraint and patience and understanding to men of whatever religion and whatever ideology in whatever part of the world, who have taken up arms to fight for what they see as their right.

It is proper and fitting for men to bleed and die for their honor and their loved ones’ right to life. But the time must come when the bleeding, fighting and dying must end: and reconstruction, reconciliation and the works of peace begin again: work even more honorable and blessed, in which our women can lead and take part.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library