Speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, at the UP College of Agriculture Campus

THE CHANGE IN THE LAND

The history of land reform can be said to have originated here in Laguna. It is no secret to the public the struggle waged by Rizal to liberate the farmers in the town of Calamba from slavery. And the more than two hundred uprisings of foreigners were rooted in the grievances of the people regarding land and their right to cultivate their own land.

Because of this, we consider a moment like this—the opening of another land reform area—historic. Another thing that highlights this day is the fact that this is the first opening of a land reform area outside of Central Luzon, and the first in Southern Tagalog.

The social situation in Central Luzon may be more sensitive, but land reform is not only our response to the various insurgent groups. Land reform is a program that our administration will implement not because it is our defense against Communism or any undesirable ideology, but because it is demanded by social justice and it is demanded by our own stance as a democratic and humane nation. In the future, once our government has sufficient capacity, I will ensure that many more areas in our country will be opened as land reform areas.

I have proclaimed through the Land Reform Council the second district of Pampanga as a land reform area. I have proclaimed 23 municipalities in the province of Nueva Ecija as land reform areas.

Today we proclaim 12 municipalities of Laguna as land reform areas. My dream is that before my term as President ends in 1969, I will be able to declare all provinces and towns in Central Luzon as areas of land reform or “land reform areas.”

When the “land reform code” was approved, when I was still the President of the Senate, the source of funds to buy the lands was removed. The taxes included in the bill in Congress were removed in the amendments in the Senate. Because of this, the Land Bank has difficulty finding money to buy the lands. But now, my friends, I am pleased to inform the entire country that I requested from Congress, and Congress approved, that I be given the power to sell the lands and properties of our national government so that the money from the sale of those lands and properties can be used by the Land Bank in the land reform program of our government.

I have the honor to inform you that notwithstanding the fact that there is no authority or specific special fund up to now for land reform, notwithstanding the fact that those who opposed land reform in 1964 and 1965 in Congress succeeded in removing the source of funds for the operation of land reform in the Philippines, I have insisted upon the sale of government properties that are not urgently needed in order to raise funds for the purchase and expropriation of landed estates. I am happy to inform you that we have been able to raise P11.5 million, which shall go to the Land Bank to be utilized for land reform operations. This is just the beginning. It is my hope that we shall continue.

Five large lands in Central Luzon have already been purchased and 30 more lands in Central Luzon are currently being investigated for possible purchase. All of these will be divided in accordance with the land reform law to be sold to our fellow farmers.

I would like to clarify to you for a moment what the proclamation we are making now means. The effect of the proclamation is to cut off all contracts as tenants. If both parties do not agree on a new arrangement different from tenancy, the law assumes the existence of a new arrangement—leasehold.

In the past months, I was embroiled in many troubles because many opposed this proclamation. This proclamation has been the subject of controversy. I have been studying it since last year. It has been recommended by many groups during the convention of the Free Farmers Federation, headed by Gerry Montemayor. I said then that as soon as we have settled some of the questions involving not only the law but also the question of the capability of the tenants to assume the responsibilities of leasehold, I would proclaim the first district of Laguna as a land reform area.

Only six towns are requested by our farmers to be proclaimed or subjected to 'land reform.' But while the tenants requested that only six municipalities be placed under land reform, it is my belief that it is necessary now to increase the areas covered by land reform inasmuch as the same situation prevails in the other towns. That is why today we proclaimed not only six municipalities but 12 municipalities in the province of Laguna.

The proclamation will take effect on October 7, 1968. This does not include the coming harvest. It will cover the year of harvest where planting or preparation for planting will begin after October 7, 1968. Landowners will remain owners during the existence of leasehold. And the communication or negotiation between both parties—the owner and the tenant—may continue during the proclamation.

The new arrangement—leasehold instead of tenancy—does not mean compulsion or expropriation. The government under the Agricultural Land Reform Code cannot take lands with an area of less than 75 hectares. If this government takes land, it will be done by buying the land offered or donated by the landowners themselves.

This proclamation is voluntarily made by your current administration, but it is worthy to mention the help of the farmers' movement in Laguna. The Federation of Free Farmers, headed by Gerry Montemayor, helped in this proclamation; so did the leaders of Laguna, such as Senator Lagumbay and Governor San Luis, and even the landowners, through their understanding acceptance of this proclamation, also helped a lot. It is true that many opposed this proclamation. But the course of history cannot be stopped, and land reform is an essential need for our progress, not only here in Laguna, or in Central Luzon, or in Tagalog Region, but throughout the Philippines.

During the previous administration, land reform existed only on paper and was merely the talk of those in power. Now, under this administration, the dream of land reform has become a true reality, and behind it, I dedicate the full power of my office as President of the Philippines.

Now I ask you, both farmers and landowners, to unite so that we may implement this proclamation in a peaceful and successful manner. The success of land reform depends on your unity. Respect for the rights of each individual under the law should be the basis of such unity, in addition to the fact that, as one people and one race, our feelings beat as one.

I greet the great people of the first district of Laguna on this historic occasion. I greet the leaders of Laguna under Gov. San Luis, I greet the senators, the representatives. I greet our mayors. I also greet the students represented by Miss Espino here in our program.

I know that the ultimate fruits of what we are doing now perhaps I and the men and women of my generation may not see. But what we seek is the salvation of our country and the progress of our nation and this entire program of land reform, for the younger generation will be the generation that shall harvest the fruit of this program.

It is my hope that you, the younger people, will understand what I have said. I proclaimed land reform areas, not because of fear that there will be war or there will be a revolution, but because it is the right thing to do. We proclaimed land reform areas because it is a policy that is based not only on wisdom, but on righteousness. Because if we are to return the dignity of the human being to our countrymen we must dismantle the old feudal estates, and if in the process it should become necessary that any man be blamed, do not point to any man, I assume responsibility. I assume responsibility for this policy. I have staked my future on it, and I stake my entire political career on it.

I have said it before and I say it again; if and when I cannot do what I think is right, it will be time for me to retire from public life. I repeat, I consider this as something that is urgent and right, and so we must do it now. I call upon each and everyone to help the government and the administration in pushing through land reform.

I thank you all again. For giving your humble servant, whom you helped and supported in the past elections. I have already thanked you through words, and now this is my thanks to all of you for your support and help during the past political battles. This proclamation of land reform, which I promised you when you chose your humble servant as President, is based on nothing other than the welfare of the entire Philippines and not on self-interest.

Thank you and good morning.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1968). Speech delivered at the UP College of Agriculture Campus, Los Baños, Laguna, September 14, 1968. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 64 (39) , 9776-F-9776-J.