Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Executives Congress

[Delivered in Baguio City, May 23, 1981]

THE LEADER AS EDUCATOR

To speak from day to day before groups of political partisans, and then one morning to address an assembly of education executives, is a journey between two worlds. One travels from a milieu of partisan conflict and enters the ambience of tranquility; the vocabulary of particular interest gives way to the language of reason.

Nevertheless, education has an authentic excitement and fascination of its own, for it is the most ancient of the humanist profession, and it is the youngest of the modern arts.

The family is the oldest school in the world, the parents the first teachers. The word education came from the word Latin “Ducere”: meaning to rear, to teach, to lead.

In modern societies, where so much of the national welfare depends on effective leadership, the role of leader is not fully developed until it is graced by the role of educator. Some people mistakenly believe that leadership is leading a herd of carabaos or a flock of sheep. In fact, in a human society as in all human organizations, the leader cannot lead well unless his behavior, his policies and values, his life, are an education to his people.

A president inevitably preaches to the people, for that is part of his role as leader, but if his words do not inform, inspire, enlighten or elevate, he is essentially a nagger, even if a good orator, because then he will fail to educate the citizenry.

A word that is related to education is “Educe”. It means to draw forth, to evoke, to bring out. The leader, as educator or teacher to society, educes or brings forth from his people the best and noblest in themselves.

The cultivation of the best and the noblest in people makes them become more and more like the men and women that they ought to be. Their contributions to society are richer and enhanced. In consequence, society is the better and human society, and the freedom, safety, justice, prosperity and happiness that the good society affords to the people in return are the certain fruit of what the people gave to it in the first place; my friends, although I address you in the midst of an election campaign, I speak to you in the vocabulary of conventional values. There are those, notably in the opposition, who regard an election as a mere contest for political power. They think of politics as who gets what, when and how. They are casualties in the pervasive erosion of moral and ethical values in the modern world.

For it is not only species of Flora and Fauna that are dying out from the relentless pressure of massive populations and ecological imbalance. Speeches of traditional behavior, such as those showing respect to elders, are all but extinct. Many of the sounds and music of our childhood are gone. Species of lifestyles that we fondly remember are abandoned. Many of the conventions and much of the traditional civility of but a generation ago have disappeared — debris of an ecology of cynicism and moral imbalance.

And so, for some people in the opposition, an election is now simply war without values — without national purpose or personal ideals, without the sense of duty and sacrifice, without heroism, nobility, obligation, even without romance — in short, an election stripped bare of the ideals and values that are at the heart of a human community and a democratic society.

If I were merely a creature and an addict of power, desirous only of staying in the presidency regardless of the people’s will; if I were not moved by decency, constitutional duty, and by an elemental respect for the sentiments of the sovereign people, I should not subject myself to election.

The constitution of 1935 lapsed into history in 1973. None of its provisions, not any of its articles, is enforced today, except where expressly stipulated otherwise or embodied in the present constitution. Articles 17, section 3 of the constitution of 1973 provides that I continue to exercise the powers and prerogatives of the presidency under the 1935 constitution, as well as those vested in the president and prime minister under the 1973 constitution.

The present constitution does not provide for a termination date of my tenure as president. It merely states that I continue as such until I call upon the interim legislature to elect an interim president. In this case, the constitution provides that the president shall be elected from among the members of the legislature by majority vote of all its members. Now, I am the head of the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, and we hold more than 160 seats out of the total 180. Under these circumstances no opposition candidate has the tiniest chance of winning the presidency.

And so, had I wished merely to continue in my position, vested with the powers and prerogatives of the presidency, all for an indefinite period, I should have deferred the lifting of martial law, I should have vetoed the amending of the constitution subjecting me to an election and fixing a date for the termination of my tenure.

But an election is not simply a contest to determine who shall hold authority. For there is a basic value which all who hold political and governmental power should always respect and defend, should nurture and never allow to die out. This is the value of accountability or answerability. In other vocations, such as education, it is essential that integrity be paramount. But in politics, specially in democratic politics, accountability is vital.

The vesting of power by the people upon an officer or upon a leader is a covenant. A reciprocal undertaking. In the act of vesting power, the people manifest that they recognize the leaders exercise of that power and accept its consequences upon the nation. The leader exercises that power as a matter of course. But if this were all to the contract, it is an unfair and an unlawful agreement because it is a contradiction in terms — a one-sided contract.

What redeems the political contract, that which legitimizes the grant of political authority, is the leader’s accountability to the people.

Insubmitting myself to the suffrage of the people, therefore, I and the people warrant that the grant of power to me was, and is, a valid and legitimate contract, not only a legal but also a lawful covenant, and the people now exercise their right and duty to affirm that my use of power was licit and proper or to condemn it as unwise and undeserving of renewal.

This covenant between the people and their public officers is called a contract of political obligation. It is essential to democracy and republican government.

Let no man scoff at this covenant by rejecting the right of duty and suffrage. Let no one confound his personal offense to the constitution by preaching to others to withdraw from this contract of political obligation. Enfranchised citizens are bound by this contract to cast their vote for democracy by voting, according to their conscience, either for or against this or that candidate.

The key to this obligation of suffrage in the constitution is conscience, that moral and ethical sensitivity in each of us which tells us what is right and wrong, what is better and which is worse to society to deny this voice of individual conscience to the collective will or judgment of the community is to place onself beyond the pale of the community’s law, and the citizen guilty of this renegade path is in danger of forever losing the privilege of holding public office in our republic.

The individual’s moral and ethical sensitivity to the community’s well-being is sometimes called by the social scientists “socialization.” A better word is “civic conscience”. It is manifested gloriously and dramatically as patriotism, often heroism, in defense of the motherland against its enemies.

Yet it is just as necessary, although much less romanticized in the day-to-day ordinary life of a community at peace. We all recognize that the evocation of nobility and sacrifice is much more difficult in time of peace. Because there is no state of siege, and survival does not seem at stake.

This is the reason why societies seek to imbue their citizens with civic values in a sustained and systematic manner over many years, through the educational system. Viewed in this light, the inter-generational process of education makes it unlikely that radically new shapes and forms of education often emerge, as the theme of your congress seems to call for.

The education of this generation is generally a legacy received from the earlier one. This legacy is transmitted by present experience and in turn conveyed as a legacy to the next generation. And so we are prone to adopt the medium dictated by our own circumstances, our own experience and employ the shapes and forms of education that are familiar to us or at least those that fit our perceptions of what are worthwhile and feasible.

Indeed, the more substantive innovations in education derive and spring from contempt rather than from form or shape. A society that has undergone a revolutionary experience of one that faces radically new challenges, is more likely to adopt significant innovations than a society leading an undisturbed life.

I urge you to reflect upon our recent civic experience, when we snapped the chains that bound us to oligarchy and warlordism, when we dissolved the myth of our smallness and inferiority in the family of nations, when we rejected the fiction that democracy is an excuse for impotence and inefficiency.

I invite you to contemplate the task that challenge us ahead — to provide for more than one million new Filipinos every year into the next century, to produce enough to rebuild old facilities and to establish new modern institutions for our future, to reduce to the utter minimum the stubborn inequities and deprivation that hound and oppress our poor, to build a new society that truly expresses our love for liberty, our need for safety, our right to prosperity, our instinct of creativity and our Filipino craving for gaiety and light-hearted joy.

And I now ask you to respond to this concern, not merely in a reactive sense, but to embrace and own them as our shared and common concern, to deliberately build them into the content and form of our educational system.

I am neither an instant curriculum expert, nor an educationist like you, and so I will not embarrass you or myself by making detailed curricular suggestions.

We will reshape our elementary school system to provide good basic education which must be available to all children irrespective of family income or place of residence.

We will improve secondary schooling, to make the general education stream prepare the youth for advance studies and for training in the professions; the vocational stream must provide young people with productive and employable skills.

We must regard elementary and secondary education as the formal educational experience that will shape the Filipino citizenry and the labor force in the last generation of our twentieth century. This experience must be the best we can offer, to celebrate the nation’s entry into the year 2000.

We will defend the academic freedom of tertiary institutions. The education bill will be passed by the Batasan soon after it resumes its sessions this coming July. It terminates many regulatory powers of the ministry of education and culture on academic matters in private colleges and universities. The state institutions will continue to be academically autonomous.

We can all enhance the value of academic freedom by understanding and exercising it properly. Those who exercise it must still be responsible, for it is only infants and imbeciles who are immune from the consequences of their actions. And the state, in protecting academic freedom as a right, has a role in divining that right which it is its duty to protect.

We will assign a high priority to technical education, with its own bureau to modernize the Filipino labor force, which must compete with the labor forces of other countries. Likewise, we will take advantage of the valuable learning, experiences outside of the structure of school programs, by making non-formal or continuing education and integral part of the nation’s educational system.

The review of education that we are undertaking in the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan and in the government focuses on teacher’s welfare, democratic expansion of educational opportunities, the complex field of public contributions to education in the private sector, and management capability of public school executives.

We are working towards a one thousand peso monthly salary for teachers, consistent with the nation’s resources. We are studying the prospects of implementing the constitutional provision on free secondary education perhaps before the next decade.

We are building up a one hundred million peso fund in the fund for assistance to private education expanding the number of scholarships for students who go to private institutions and exploring new forms of state contributions that should be available by the mid-1980s. We are, finally, designing a program of management development for public school executives, especially for school superintendents.

My friends, the rapport and civility that mark your assembly do not indicate the adventure and the challenge that characterize your mission. Our country is on the move. In sector after sector of national growth and development, we have posted success and progress.

The Philippines has been cited by the World Bank as one of the only two other countries, aside from Japan, that will become an industrialized country by the year 2000. In the forthcoming summit meeting of 20 of the world’s leaders to be convened in Mexico, only one leader from a developing country was invited, and this honor was accorded to the president of the Philippines.

The education sector, which may be viewed as the biggest industry in the Philippines, is and will continue to be, a lead sector in our national growth. You will make your contributions as one, for in this decade, the traditional distinctions between public and private will disappear — we will guarantee and respect a significant role for private institutions, but you have a common product: education, good education, for the Filipinos.

We must lead and we must educate.

Finally, it occurs to me that the ministry of education and culture is the most aptly named ministry in our government. For education is a vocation, a calling, a true ministry. I salute you.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.