Remarks of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the oath-taking of Regional Directors, Assistant Regional Directors and City Engineers

[Delivered on December 7, 1972]

A New Standard of Performance

I HAVE GONE out of my way to administer the oath to you personally, because we are moving into a new era in highway construction. And one of the principal deficiencies in the infrastructure program is the middle-level supervision and control. There is a missing link between the project engineers and the Department—the contact between the political leadership, the managers up in the higher echelon of government and the implementing groups. That missing link is you, for actually you belong to the implementing group. Since you are Regional Directors, Assistant Regional Directors, and City Engineers, you are actually the “Do Tank” that I have been talking about. The government is full of proposals and plans for development, but there are very few implementors. Hence, we are calling upon you now to act for and on behalf of the planners, and while acting for the planners, you must familiarize yourself not only with highways but with the entire economic development program. This is your responsibility to yourself, the highways, to the Department, and to me. And that is why administered your oath personally because you are my personal representatives. You are responsible to me, and I will support you whenever you perform your duty correctly. By the same token, if there should be any violation of the standards that we have set, I shall be constrained to enforce those standards with the coercive power vested on me.

I give you these guidelines because I do not want anyone to come to me, directly or through somebody, begging for a second chance. There will be no second chances in this particular effort because we must succeed in the reformation of our society, of our country. In such reformation you are the men who will participate most actively, for the things that most people see are the palpable, and the most palpable are roads. During the floods, what was the first thing that we thought of? Reinstate the communication system. We could not do anything about the dikes for the time being, but we had to go to look at the roads. So it is, that roads are a symbol of either achievement or of failure. If you fail me, the whole program of reformation will fail. Any weakness in the chain any weakness among you and the men under you is going to reflect, not just on the Secretary, but on me.

So, do your job well. I would do it if I were in your place. And I will be making spot inspections of everything that you are doing. Let’s not go back to the old habits—no more padded payrolls and no more of those 70 to 100 per cent losses of funds. I remember the nine hundred and ninety thousand pesos lost in Masbate in 1969. Nine hundred ninety thousand, it just disappeared. Why? Because that was the old society. Now we are creating a new one. I do not need to sermonize to you about the need for this reformation. There is unanimity of opinion among all the social and political sectors of the country and among the citizenry in general for reformation. But reformation must start from us, from the top. You are the guides, the leaders. Help out in this. As I am inflexible with myself I will be inflexible with you. But as I recognize and appreciate achievement and good work I will be appreciative of good work coming from you. Your appointment, and my personal effort to administer your path is an indication of my trust and confidence in you. Do not fail that trust and confidence.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1978). Presidential speeches (Vol. 4). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].