These are historic and joyous moments as we celebrate the triumph of justice long hoped for by our colleagues here today. Although it took a long time to achieve this triumph, and in accordance with the Filipino saying: 'even if the skilled are late, they can still be pursued,' we are deeply happy because we know that finally, our hundreds of colleagues will become owners of the land they inhabit, and from this day forward, a new life full of hope and honor dawns in their hands.

This is your day, all of you who have long waited for this great day, so it is only fitting that our countrymen and the government be part of this great day of your triumph.

We are gathered here today not only to witness the fulfillment of the dream of the residents of Tunasan Homesite who will receive the titles to their lands today. We are here, gathered, to once again affirm our faith that in our country, under the shade of the New Republic, we firmly believe in social justice and the principle of giving land to the landless and homes to the homeless. Together we pledge that wherever social injustice continues to exist, we will work together to ensure that the masses taste social justice; that wherever there is conflict over land, we will act promptly and firmly to ensure a just solution to the problem; and in all these conflicts, the rights of the majority will prevail.

The roots of the problem that lingered for a long time in the granting of titles to the residents of Tunasan Homesite originated in past eras when, like other parts of our country, vast lands were owned by the friars during the Spanish Period.

Even during those times, it was curious and unjust that the owners of Philippine lands were foreigners.

For many centuries, this land passed from one friar administrator to another, but it never became the property of the hands that tilled it diligently. And even when the government was established with the aim of buying vast estates to distribute to the inhabitants, there were still many obstacles and hindrances.

This is the experience of the residents of Tunasan Homesite, whose forty-two years of struggle ends in these moments.

It is a great honor for your servant that the great moment of triumph in your struggle happened during my administration. My only regret is that many of your ancestors and parents are no longer here to witness the fulfillment of your long-held dream and triumph.

When the government purchased this land in 1939, the sole intention was to distribute it to the poor. However, obstacles and hesitations arose, and almost half a century passed before the objective was fulfilled.

My only prayer in this historic and joyous moment is that those fortunate enough to receive titles will love and cherish this land long desired by your ancestors, and for those who were not as fortunate as you, may they also one day own the land on which their homes stand.

That is my dream, and as long as the government is able, your servant will strive to fulfill this dream. Your servant will always strive to use the position you have given me to fulfill the dream of every Filipino to have their own land and home, which will be a nest of happiness in all seasons.

Thank you very much!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.