Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the convention of the National Federation of Sugar Cane Planters

[Delivered on March 15, 1978]

The Crisis in the Sugar Industry

FIRST OF ALL, allow me to congratulate our outstanding sugar cane variety breeder, Mr. Felipe Aahla.

You may be surprised why there is only one recipient of a plaque here and that’s him. Because he symbolizes the individual’s efforts at trying to work out the problems of the sugar industry of which there are many. He is a graduate of the University of the Philippines, College of Agriculture of 1934. And he has been patiently working for more than 10 years to produce this variety. Perhaps, all of you know about this variety which they are apparently trying to get me to approve to be called “Marcos Variety,” with the idea, I guess, that this will increase my support for the sugar industry.

Well, I want you to know that it will not increase my support for the sugar industry because the support for the sugar industry coming from the President and the administration is already a hundred percent.

However, I am happy to be able to officially announce this variety as having been tested on a large scale. And the results have been very gratifying. Mr. Aahla should be congratulated for this effort because the old variety, as compared to this new variety is indeed quite inadequate to meet our requirements.

Let me present to you some of the specifications about these varieties. You remember that if we were to compare it to the Philippine varieties of 562 to 566 which I presume, we are all planting, besides other varieties. Of course, the maturity period is 12 months; the produce in tons of cane per hectare is 149 tons for the new variety, 6607 as compared to 80 to 99 tons of variety 56226 and 100 tons of variety 58260. As the average piculs of sugar per ton of cane — the new variety 6607 gives 249 piculs as compared to 136 up to 168 piculs of the Philippine variety, 56226.

You can see for yourself the impact of this new variety on the sugar industry. That is, if you can increase the piculs of sugar per hectare from 136 to 249, then this man may be contributing more than anybody else among us to the solution of the crisis of the sugar industry.

We have listened to Ambassador Benedicto and also to Congressman Gustilo. Of course, Congressman Gustilo, as usual, calls attention to the crop loans. That’s his favorite subject. He comes to see me almost every day and since then I had to move out of this Palace because the roof is about to fall on my head, which they are now trying to repair and rehabilitate. He has been here not less than a dozen times, I think, trying to follow upon this matter of a loan. And I am very happy to come to Negros or any other place to tell our planters to replant sugar, to participate in this effort. But we are in the middle of a state visit. The Vice-premier of the People’s Republic of China is here, and as you know, we have this awkward problems pertaining to both a leftist rebellion, the NPA„ and the Spratley island problem which we hope we can manage so that it will not explode into an international incident.

You know that we also invited Vice-Premier Nguyen Nuy Kien of Vietnam sometime ago precisely, again, because of the Freedom Island or Kalayaan or the Spratley depending on how you look at it. Vietnam has occupied some of the islands after we had occupied seven of them. And there’s the foreign press trying to involve us in a very embarrassing situation with China with the news that we occupied on March 4th a new island, which is completely false. It involves the island of Patag, which is small island, without water where every now and then we have to rotate the people who are staying there to resupply them. And naturally, on March 4th, there was a change of the guard as it were and there was a resupply. And the Western press considered this a new occupancy which is not true, because we have been occupying this island since 1971. And even earlier than that, as far back as when Admiral Cloma entered the international scene.

But whatever it is, this is a matter which could blow up in our faces. And so we talked to Vice-premier Nguyen Nuy Kien of Vietnam and we agreed in writing that any conflict or disagreement or any misunderstanding would be settled diplomatically in a spirit of a spirit of friendship and cooperation. And now we have been able to reiterate this agreement that I had with Vice-premier Teng Hsiao-ping in 1975 that any conflicts that we may have in an of the islands in South China Sea will also be settled through normal diplomatic channels, which means by negotiation and in on atmosphere of friendship and cooperation.

I am indeed very glad that you agreed to come to Manila because thereby, I save on travel time. I would like to say that the industry is in need of support from everyone. The ambassador, the chairman of the commission did not explain to you exactly to what extent the crisis of the industry has severely affected our government.

You know that in this political campaign in Manila, there have been speeches criticizing me for bringing down the liquidity of the Philippine National Bank because of the support of the sugar industry. (Notwithstanding the fact that the prices went down to seven cents, I insist on maintaining the purchasing price at P90 per picul even at a loss to the government.) My answer to them is: The sugar industry has been supporting the economy of the country in good times as in bad times; it’s about time the government and the people of the Philippines supported the sugar industry.

I have had to answer the criticisms: that even today, the Philippine National Bank is still indebted to the tune of more than one billion pesos because of the sugar operations. And we must admit that the market price rise from 56 cents in 1974 to 70 cents is something about nobody asked for or which nobody expect ed. We need something — the will power to bear up with the cynicism. Let all the critics of the sugar industry and the critics of the administration moan and wail and quash their teech and pull at their hair. But the thing is, the sugar industry cannot be abandoned, and for any one, for any right-thinking Filipino to say that the government should pull out of the sugar industry is, to say the least the most irresponsible statement ever made by any politician in the country.

Because that has been the theme of the opposition, that Marcos is supporting the sugar industry at the risk of the entire economy of the country. My answer is: No, it is a calculated risk. It is not at the risk of the entire economy of the country, that is, could be more serious, and the results could be more severe if the sugar industry were to collapse and if we were to abandon more than 60,000 laborers working on 300,000 hectares, plus some 240,000 more laborers engaged in marginal occupations. It would certainly be disastrous to the entire economy of the Philippines if the sugar industry is not helped during this period of crisis.

Yes, I have had to admit that we are losing one cent per pound on every pound of sugar that we are exporting. Because that is the fact, that is the truth. We are selling our sugar at eight cents, and we buy it from you at nine cents. But the truth of the matter is, if we lower the cost of procurement from you today, there would be worse suffering on the part of the sugar planters.

I have therefore, come here today to assure you once again that no matter what the temptation, no matter what the criticisms, no matter what the attacks against my administration, it is my intention to maintain the support of the sugar industry and to continue buying at 90 pesos per picul from you for the purposes of the export and domestic sugar.

But that is not all; it is my intention to see to it that the prices should improve, and I have reason to believe that the prices should improve. The trouble of course is that when the United States imposed this tariff duty on sugar last December, everybody tried to send their sugar into the American market before the tariff was collected. And what happened was an oversupply of sugar in the American market, which is a premium market. Before the IGA limits, our quota was 1,400,000 minus 15 percent which brings it down to 1,190,000 tons. And our consumption quota in the domestic market was increased from the original 180,000 tons in 1972-1973, to 1,200,000 or 1,100,000.

Whatever it is, it is now quite obvious my friends that all of us should get together and help out in the industry. The problem with some of our people is that when you meet a little obstacle, everybody starts crying out. That should not be the attitude of the new Filipino. That is not the attitude of the new economist, the new planner, the new worker for the New Society. I can only say to those who are spreading the gospel of pessimism that the sugar industry is going to recover, and we will be able to re-stabilize the sugar industry, I hope within the year. But the government and the people of the Philippines must continue to support the industry.

Now, it is easy for anyone to say, “We will support the industry.” But how do we intend to support this industry? The technicians know all about your problem. And I am surprised at this statement that not all the sugar crop loans have been issued.

Whatever it is, whoever is responsible, I would like to see to it that now and in the next crop loan, we do not delay any further. I understand that the crop loans supposed to be released sometime in September, but that you released some of the crop loans in December or was it March? Well, I can tell you this, though, the Philippine National Bank had a little problem of liquidity because of the losses in sugar. And perhaps that had something to do with it.

But, whatever it is, it is my hope that the sugar bank become operational — I have ordered precisely that we follow the example of the coconut people. The coconut people have now established a strong bank. A bank with assets and with very much more cash than most other bank. I understand it is now the second biggest bank in the country. I do not see why, if this can be done in the coconut industry we should not be able to do it in the sugar industry.

So now, I hereby order that this bank be immediately rehabilitated, and whatever amounts are necessary to make this bank operational within the year should be advanced by the Budget Commissioner and the government of the Republic of the Philippines.

You are going to raise the money for this bank. But this will probably need some time. You are now borrowing about 600 million every year. And I have just issued an order that all the necessary schemes be utilized to be able to obtain the funding, if not from the Philippine government then from abroad.

I did not want to announce this today but it seems as if you are all so engrossed in financing. Last Monday I authorized the PHILSUCOM and the other banks to obtain the funds that will be necessary for the lending operations. I now direct that these funds be immediately obtained by the new bank, the sugar bank or if it is not yet operational, the Philippine National Bank through the PHILSUCOM, and the PHILSUCOM should see to it that all the crop loans are given out in good time.

We are still lucky that the credit of the government is pretty good. Our republic has been extended a $200 million accommodation for purposes of trading only. I hope that this will be sufficient to meet the requirements. But beyond this, it will be necessary for the Philippine National Bank as well as the Central Bank to come in. I am certain that this arrangement will work out and that your problems will be solved this year, at least with respect to funding. Now, that’s one problem.

But the important thing still is pricing. The price of sugar dictates the strategy of all men who are engaged in sugar production and sugar trade. The price of sugar has tended to move downward even after the signing and implementation of the international sugar agreement. The question that have been raised are: Why have sugar prices declined? And the answer to this is, there is just too much sugar in the markets of the world. And in all probability this will be true up to the middle of this year. But by July the forecast is that the price of sugar will go up. I have it from our experts that this is the opinion not only of our experts in the Philippines but from all over the world. Right now, we see the efforts on the part of the big countries to purchase sugar at a low price. They are hurrying up. They are trying to bring us down to eight cents and to sell at eight cents, so that when the prices go up next July they will be able to save quite a lot of money. All I can say is, we need immediate solutions to this problem — short-term and long-term solutions.

From my point of view, the immediate solution to this problem is to attend to the requirements of our sugar planters. We have explained to you all the plans. There is an immediate need to increase the efficiency of sugar production — from the sugar planters to the sugar mills. Many of the sugar planters will have to now start working on the new sugar varieties and increase their production, improve their efficiency. Most of our sugar mills I understand, are below par in their efficiency. The survey indicates that the sugar mills are contributing to the increase in the cost of production. The new mills, of course, will bring down the average cost. But they are not sufficient to overcome the inefficiency of many of the old mills. This is one of the medium-term problems which we have to settle immediately.

With respect to the immediate problems of the industry, the increase in production will come not only from the new variety but from the improvement of present technology. I do not need to go into all of this. We have the technology and the technicians of the Philippine Sugar Commission. And at the same time you are more aware of all these problems than anybody else. You know more or less that we have not tried intercropping seriously. Some of you have, but in general nobody has taken the problem of intercropping seriously.

It is now about time the sugar planters and sugar producers thought seriously of adding a second crop to sugar. Then, in addition to this, it will necessary to utilize what are now being used as waste products. In short, to increase your income from sugar and to add other sources of income. I gather there are studies going on for the utilization of waste products of the industry from which additional income can come.

I urge the sugar planters now to think not only in terms of support coming from the government which the government is already giving, but also in terms of improving the efficiency of the industry — the planters and the sugar mills. We are at present finalizing the implementation of the plans that have to do with this aspect of the problem.

As you know, the problem goes all the way to 1974. At midnight of July 3, 1974, the trade agreement between the Philippines and the United States terminated. Subsequently, the sugar legislation also terminated. This terminated America as a premium market for sugar. All our problems now go back to the problem of America encouraging us to plant sugar and then leaving us out and alone, apparently dictated by either domestic policy or confusion. But whether it is, we are challenged to diversify our markets, and we tried to do so. And in the first few years we succeeded.

But the termination of the Laurel-Langley Agreement also raises the question of the production aspects. And again, we come to the more controversial question: What is the cost of production of one pound of sugar. I have been asking this since I became President in 1965. Up to now I have not received a clear and exact answer. The reason for this is, your cost of production can never be averaged. Many of you can produce at a very competitive price or cost; the other claim that they cannot. Now, these claims always raise the question of attitude and that of government policy.

It is not the policy of government to find fault with the producer. We will take your word for it, provided it is not overdone. But sometimes it is a little bit overdone. Now, I would suggest that the sugar planters and the sugar millers work out by areas and by regions the average cost of production of sugar because we can no longer continue on the basis of elastic figures and statistics. You know that the economists and the financiers will not work with uncertain figures. They always ask us: What is your average cost of production? And, of course, Ambassador Benedicto and Congressman Gustilo always have a disagreement. They cannot agree on the figure. And how then can I come to a figure if the planters and the sugar millers, and the sugar commission cannot agree? I now ask that you agree on a figure, perhaps not immediately because we should not compound your sufferings by making you go through this exercise, this fearful and difficult exercise of determining which is your average cost of production. You will probably say, why do we talk about the average cost of production? Because the government must know how much losses it will entail in the next two years. I have told our economic managers that we will entail losses in the sugar industry in pesos, but we must continue to earn the dollar. Now, this is the balancing of the whole thing. We will lose in pesos, but we will earn in dollars. The question has been posed to me pointedly: Is it worth it to lose P150 million pesos every year in order to earn those dollars? And I have always maintained that yes, we should probably do so because we anticipate that in the coming year we are not going to lose P150 million. But if we continue to lose P150 million every year, if the government continues to put up this subsidy, we must face it with candor and deliberation and say: This is the price that we will pay temporarily, but later on, we will recover.

I wanted you to know my difficulties, because I know that you are also in difficulty. I am going to try to hold my ground. While we are fighting a common enemy, I will hold my share of the line. I want you to hold yours. And we will work out a solution to all these problems. I am not the overly optimistic type as you know. I always prepare for a rainy day. I prepare for any contingency. Whenever there is a situation, like a good guerrillero I immediately look for a way out. That was what was taught us from the beginning. You will re member, when we were fighting the enemy, we knew they were superior and so the tactics were — hit them as hard as you can and prepare your route for withdrawal. Well, that’s what we are going to do. We are going to prepare our outs and options. And as far as I can see, we will pull out of this crisis with everything intact. We will pull out with honor and we will win a few medals in the process.

That sounds like an exhortation that I usually make to my men just before a desperate battle. Now, don’t get me wrong, this is not too desperate a battle. This is not a do-or-die business. No. It is just that we need some results. We need a little will-power. We need a little manhood. We need a little patriotism. We just need a little dedication. And we, of course, depend upon each and everyone of you to continue your faith and trust in the leadership of the government. Because I am afraid that if you change leadership, this industry will collapse in no time. That I can tell you. And I am almost sure about it, considering what their speeches sound like. But no matter what it is, now we have come to the point where each and every one of us must continue to share in the solution of the crisis. I know that you have shared the difficulties, the sacrifices, the embarrassments, the awkwardness. I know that you are asking and your families are asking how long this is going to last. And my answer is: I believe this is a crucial year—1978. This will be the turning point in the sugar industry.

I came here to tell you that this is my belief. And I think we are supported by data and statistics and so my advice to you is, hold on. We will hold on for this year. Things will turn around and the prices may improve and the crisis will be over and before we know it we will wake up from this bad nightmare and say, “what was that all about?” It is always so after every crisis, just like when they were kidnapping everybody around here. They tried to kidnap Secretary Carlos P. Romulo in 1972, and all the Cabinet members were asking for security. I don’t think they will kidnap you, I told Secretary Romulo, because they know I won’t pay a single centavo for you.

Now, that the whole thing is past and he is campaigning around here in Manila without security and delivering speeches, making fun of the fact that he cannot speak in classical Pilipino or Tagalog because he is a typical example of the product of the colonial period.

But we are a new country now. We are in a new society. We are moving into normalization. I gather some of the candidates were here. And the mayors are here and the governor of Negros is here. I don’t see the governor of Iloilo. Whatever it is, Region VI has been committed. I note the pride with which they announced the fact that Region VI is committed to KBL. I am gratified. I am very happy about it.

I want you to know that you are committed to the right cause. I want you to know that this dream that we have of the new Philippines is not just my dream. It is your dream. It is the dream of every Filipino. It is the hope and the plan and scheme that every right-thinking man from the beginning of our history has been dreaming of. Everybody, every generation or every set of generations often have their own peculiar history for that period.

In writing the history of the Philippines in the book Tadhana, I broke up our history into hundred-year periods. Actually, when I started working on this book I realized that the history of our country can be divided into 50-year periods. Five generations — one generation is usually one decade, and each generation, I noted while working on this history, had its own dreams about the Philippines. And these dreams evolved. All these fascinating ideas about freedom, about democracy peaked when we had our revolution of 1896, and yet we established a dictatorship. You know that we were motivated by freedom and yet our republic was a dictatorship. Why? Because it was necessary that we tie up all the various tribes together, the various factions. It was not only a dictatorship that Aguinaldo put up; he had to eliminate rivalry. You will re member that on Mount Buntis, the two Bonifacio brothers were liquidated by Order of a court martial. It was a forcible unification of leadership.

On the other hand, under the New Society we are trying to unify our people by voluntary mandate of our people through referendums, plebiscites and now the elections. Because it will be necessary, in order to meet the problems of our country, to be united. The idea of factionalism may be correct in big countries. The idea of various groups clashing and finally ending up with consensus be speaks a maturity which discards the quarrels arising out of temporary political and partisan strife. What I am saying is: We Filipinos do not seem to have acquired the habit of banding together after an election. Even after an election, the schism, the division is there. You look at all the mayors who are here. Whenever I campaign, if the mayor is not with me, can always expect to find somebody who is against him. In every town, this is my experience and also the experience of every politician I have talked to. When I ran for senator in 1959,1 would go to a town and if the mayor is not there with me, I ask about the opponent in the last election. And more or less you’ll find the town divided into almost evenly two factions. Why? Because this is the weakness of the Filipino character, that after an election there is no forgiveness for the excesses and abuses, exaggerations committed in a political campaign. And it is again factional warfare that brought us down before the colonizers, whether Spanish, Japanese or American. For the Spanish, any faction could always be taken in to either spy or fight for the Spaniards. Who fought the Dutch when they attacked the Spanish navy off the Visayas? Filipinos. They were in the pay of the Spanish. But those same Filipinos also fought the rebellions that were fought by their own brother Filipinos, because we were divided. There is always some kind of factionalism throughout our entire history.

The Americans came, what happened? The same thing. Who captured Aguinaldo in Palanan, was it the Americans? No, Filipinos captured Aguinaldo.

And this is why you saw the same thing happen during the Japanese occupation. Who killed who? There are instances where there were more killings by Filipinos against Filipinos than Filipinos against the Japanese. You and I are aware of this. And now that same fatal weakness, sickness of our people, that same fault in our character is beginning to show. There is always a tendency to envy the leadership. There is the tendency to bring him down to the common man’s level. If he is brilliant, they degrade him; if a leader, they turn him into a common part of the common mob. Factionalism, is if it is not me, then it should be nobody else. This is our principal weakness as a people. And unless we discard this fault our people will remain the workers, the hewers of wood, and the bringers of water for the united, for the strong. And it will always be like this no matter what we do, no matter what kind of a government we put up, whether it is a democratic government or any other form — unless we remember that we belong to one race.

Look at the secessionist movement — can you imagine anyone who is brown like me, who speaks almost the same tongue as I do, who can stand before his own tribe and people and claim he is of a separate race and, therefore, must put up a separate state? This, to me, again, demonstrates the weakness of our people. That he can kill a brother Filipino to assert this claim— this, to me, is the tragedy of the Filipino as an individual, and the tragedy of the Filipino as a race.

It shall be our purpose — yours and mine, whether you are a sugar planter or not — it shall be the duty of every Filipino to assume this obligation to cast away this devil of factionalism that has haunted us for many centuries and many years. And this is why we now seek to achieve this unification, not by force that was known to the revolutionaries of 1896 and the guerrilla fighters under the Japanese. You remembers how it was with the guerrilla fighters — I know, because I was a part of that force — even when there was doubt about the guilt of collaboration on the part of a Filipino, often he was liquidated. And this thing should never have happened. But they happened and they haunt us. They will continue to haunt us to our dying day.

But the next generation of Filipinos, I hope, will be more broadminded, more tolerant, more patriotic, more intelligent, more competent, more forceful, more courageous. Our generation will lay the groundwork. Our generation, you and I, who knew the war, who knew its deprivation, its difficulties, who know these economic crises, who know the troubles, the hatreds, and the obstacles that confronted us — we are going to face all of them. And by our example, it is my hope, we will unite our people; irrespective of all these harassments, this small harassments that arise out of individual conflict, we will be able to weld our country into a single nation. That is what we are working for. That is what the Bagong Lipunan is all about. That is the meaning of the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan.

When you say KBL, you mean many things. It is not just the fact that the KBL, the Bagong Lipunan will support us. It will support our country. It will support the dream of our nation. And it has started to build the nation which is dignified, which is truly independent, which now has a plan for a destiny. That is our purpose. More than anything else, we have rationalized, we have dignified and ennobled the Filipino people.

Why do they listen to us now in the international council? When you, for instance, send a representative to the international sugar council, why do they listen to the Filipino representative? Because he represents a people that now have a front of unity. Because he represents the Filipino people that have suddenly liberated themselves and realized their capabilities, and who now seek to fully develop their God-given faculties. This is the meaning of the KBL. This is the meaning of the Bagong Lipunan.

Why do you see all these roads being built and why do we have so much funds available for infrastructure? Why do we talk about, say, geothermal? Because there is a plan, and that plan leads to our destiny. That plan must be implemented by each and every one.

And, therefore, to each and every one of you, I say, yes, let us support the Bagong Lipunan. Let us work for a new society. Let us work for our country more than anything else. Discard all these temporary harassments. We shall face crisis after crisis. If necessary, we will fight to the death, for our bodies are at the disposal of our motherland; but more than that, our honor. Our honor, more to be valued and treasured than even our lives and our possessions. This has been the pledge of those who treated this trail ahead of us. And this pledge, we also make before our people.

And so, to each and every one of you, I say thank you once again. And may you continue to help in working out the problems of the New Society. Rest assured that so long as I am President, so long as I lead this government, we will continue to help and support you in your legitimate desires, especially for the sugar industry.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].