Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Celebration of the 102nd Birth Anniversary of General Antonio Luna

[Delivered at Fort Santiago Shrine, Manila, October 24, 1968]

THE CONTEMPORARY RELEVANCE OF ANTONIO LUNA’S MILITARY DOCTRINES

ANTONIO LUNA, the man whose birthday we mark today, occupies a relatively minor rank in the pantheon of Filipino heroes. This is due not certainly to lack of personal gifts—lie was just as talented as the other renaissance men that our country produced in the nineteenth century—nor to the quality of his contributions to the Filipino nation but mainly to the controversy that surrounds his violent death in Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija. Whether justly or unjustly, the mysterious circumstances of his assassination have obscured his very distinct personality and his valuable contributions to the making of the Filipino nation.

A Man of Many Parts

Antonio Luna was a man of many parts. He was a scientist, a writer, an athlete, and a soldier. His accomplishments in the fields of science and literature were slight but they bore the’ imprint of an original and meticulous mind. However, Luna will be remembered not for his scientific and literary achievements, but for his military accomplishments. It was as a soldier that Luna was transcendent; it was as a commander that he towered above his contemporaries; it was in the field of battle that he was able to express fully the drives of his complex personality. He was certainly our first military genius.

Seven Battles

In the battle of Santo Tomas on May 4, 1899. Luna was wounded in the leg. He was given a medal and on this medal was engraved the legend:

5 de Febrero 1899—La Loma 10 de Febrero 1899—Caloocan 25 de Febrero 1899—Caloocan 24 de Abril 1899—Pulilan 25 de Abril 1899—Calumpit, Bagbag 27 de Abril 1899—Apalit, Rio Grande 4 de Mayo 1899—Sto. Tomas

Seven major battles in four months! And all of them fought with such skill, cunning, and gallantry that even his enemies were moved to proclaim his genius. Seven major battles that are now epics of Filipino heroism!

His Military Contributions

His famous three-tiered defense, known now in history as the Luna Defense Line, succeeded in prolonging the life of the First Philippine Republic and hence of a free Filipino nation. His ideas on guerrilla warfare have remained relevant to the present day.

On Guerrilla Warfare

In La Revolution Filipina , Mabini said: “After the capture of Calumpit bridge by the American forces, due principally to the scarcity of munitions, Luna came to see me in San Isidro and entreated me to aid him in convincing Aguinaldo that the time had come to adopt the system of guerrilla warfare.”

Luna had worked out a plan for guerrilla warfare which Aguinaldo later implemented in part. The Luna plan was astonishing in its foresight, in its grasp of the essentials of guerrilla warfare. His ideas on guerrilla warfare anticipated many of the ideas of Mao Tse Tung, Giap and Che Guevara, three of the world’s leading authorities on guerrilla warfare.

It was the memory of Antonio Luna that inspired me to reactivate the Special Forces units of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, like Luna, I came to the conclusion that in case of another war, we have to resort ultimately to guerrilla warfare. These Special Forces units are designed to harness to full advantage the resistance capability of our people in the event of war.

Three Lessons

The Philippine-American War and the Second World War have taught us that an organized guerrilla effort, conducted by a properly motivated and ably led population can fight a powerful enemy to a standstill or even possibly defeat him.

These two wars have also taught us that guerrilla warfare must be conducted and coordinated to support and to augment the operations of regular military forces. In this sense, guerrilla warfare must fit into the defense plans of the nation.

And finally these two wars have taught us that the preparation for the waging of guerrilla operations as an instrument of national defense must begin during times of peace or well before the anticipated outbreak of any war.

The Special Forces

The Special Forces units of the Armed Forces are small teams of well-trained, highly skilled, and dedicated men whose tasks in wartime are to organize, to train, to equip and to employ guerrilla forces within designated operational areas. In time of war, they will be the core around which the resistance potential of the people can be developed and they will serve as the link between the resistance groups and the regular military forces. Each Special Forces unit has specialists in operations and intelligence, communications, demolitions, weapons, and field medicine—five skills which are essential to the long-range, independent actions which Special Forces units are expected to carry out. To increase their mobility, they are also trained in parachuting and aerial delivery techniques. In addition to his basic specialization, the Special Forces soldier is trained in one or more additional specializations so that he can readily take the place of any other member of his team who may become a casualty. It is furthermore a requirement for each man to be a good teacher, for a great deal of his time and effort will be spent in training persons with little or no military background. He also undergoes training in public relations in order to help him deal with the civilian population. But above all this, the Special Forces soldier is a skillful and tough combat soldier who knows how to fight with almost any kind of weapon and, if necessary, with his bare hands; who is equally at home in the jungle or in the city, and who can move fast and stealthily through any kind of terrain.

A Network of Resistance Fighters

If we should again be involved in another war, these Special Forces units will immediately organize a network of trained resistance fighters that will respond to a central command. A well-organized and trained citizenry, fighting according to a national strategy, is a powerful force that no aggressor, however superior, can easily defeat.

Homage to Luna

We can pay no greater honor to Antonio Luna than to make our national boundaries secure. We can pay him no greater homage than to absorb his military doctrines into the defense plans of the nation.

Like Luna, we, too, must be capable of saying: “The Filipino people want independence. I will defend it until I die, thus complying with the oath to my flag.”

Thank you and good day.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1968). Speech at the Celebration of the 102nd Birth Anniversary of General Antonio Luna, October 24, 1968, Fort Santiago Shrine, Manila . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 64 (46) , 11788-11790.