Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of the 20th Jaycee National Convention

[Delivered at the University of San Carlos, Cebu City, October 2, 1968]

THE WAY TO CHANGE

It is entirely appropriate that this convention of leading citizens is being held in this old and historic city because the Jaycees are a modern organization founded on the ancient principle of neighborly love. Your services to the community and to the nation have been synonymous with modern progress. For the Jaycee, modernism without spiritual loss is not a dilemma but a challenge.

Samaritans in Modern Setting

It is most significant, therefore, that you, the Samaritans of our age, have congregated here, in this city where the Cross of Christianity first entered the life of the ancient Filipino.

I note that the theme of your convention is “Leadership by Example.” I hope this is not merely a reminder to me as the President of the Philippines; if it is, I accept it gratefully. Coming from you, it is not a rebuke either to me or to any other leader but an expression of confidence for it denotes your belief that we can be leaders by example.

Spiritual Heritage

I prefer to view the theme of your convention, however, in another light. I think it reinforces the spiritual heritage that as pointed out at the beginning, we owe to this city as the cradle of Christianity in this country. For there can be no doubt that the example you speak of is example with a moral content.

Only on this understanding can leadership trully perform its appointed role, in any community and any nation, in every field of human endeavor.

Leadership By Preachment

The alternative to leadership by example is, of course, leadership by preachment. It is an alternative that, not being entirely without charm or appeal, has lured many men and many governments.

Human history, indeed, would be incomplete, and less instructive, if it did not include the large and small tragedies that have grown out of this alternative. Thus, in describing the various movements and upheavals in human society before the first World War, the historian Barbara Tuchman has outlined precisely that failing of leadership that led to the collapse of nations and regimes.

Those “Natural” Leaders

On the one hand, there have been rulers in the age of privilege, who proclaimed themselves as “natural” leaders and held authority accordingly. Invariably, such leaderships degenerated because of inaction, indolence and luxury, until they were completely ruined by the weight of their own decay, or by the force of violent social change.

On the other hand, there have been the leaders of revolutionary movements whose leadership consisted entirely of “marvelous paper models” and “tirades of hate and invective.” These were revolutionaries of what has been called “the anarchist rnillenium.” with its episodes of violence and vituperation, a period that sanctified the idea, without the ideals of change.

The “Devils of Loudun”

On the other extreme, in a period characterized by an excess of righteousness, there have been leaderships which perfected the edict as the foundation of authority. This was the kind of leadership that produced “the Devils of Loudun,” those fanatics of divine rulership about whom the late Aldous Huxley wrote with extraordinary vigor and eloquence.

Self-Important Leaders

A common characteristics of the leaderships I have cited is their enormous capacity for self-adulation. Their phenomenal sense of self-importance was their only mandate for leadership. It was inevitable, as history has shown, that society would repudate them before long. This kind of leadership producing nothing for the common good, is self-destroying.

By definition it is incapable of providing an example of conduct that would redound to the public benefit.

The Other Leadership

It is the leadership, on the other hand, that regards itself as the instrument of the public good which is able to lead by example. It is, necessarily an unselfish, self-abnegating leadership.

Fortunately, this leadership can flourish and be meaningful only in an atmosphere of freedom. The sense of responsibility which freedom generates is an indispensable element of sound and productive leadership.

With this sense of responsibility, a leader can in good conscience lead the way to innovation and progress.

Quality of Philippine Leadership

For this reason, a creative and persuasive leadership in this country is doubly difficult, but also, when it succeeds, doubly rewarding in terms of the public welfare. For, as the first democracy in Asia, we have a duty to prove by example the worth of the democratic life.

No matter what the difficulties are, therefore, I have always insisted that the national leadership under my administration shall engage the interest as well as the active support of the citizenry through the only means possible in a democracy—through partnership between government and people through continuous dialogue between the leaders and the followers,

The Administration’s Record

It is imperative in this partnership that government, in fulfillment of its classic role, shall lead the way and show it to be fruitful and effective. Over the past two and a half years, the government under this administration has endeavored relentlessly to provide the initiative for social and economic growth.

In line with this objective, we have redoubled the effort in many fields of the public service essential to national progress—in infrastructure, education, health, in the removal of social inequities, and more than anything else, in the renovation of the soul, the heart, and the mind of the Filipino people.

The New Perspectives

To arouse citizen action in putting these and other programs on a firm and continuing basis, the government has had to provide examples of conduct to introduce and to make new perspectives acceptable.

When we started the rice development program, the farmers refused to follow the scientific methods necessary if we were to increase our production. Example was the answer to this refusal. In every community, practically in every barrio chosen for this crash program, leaders were asked to set up examples, model farms, wherein all the inputs necessary in this production program for the field were placed and explained to the local farmers.

In all the programs where we have succeeded, as in infrastructure, in education, and now in the manpower training or human resources, conservation, and health programs, we discarded mere exhortation in favor of action, convinced that only by demonstrating the willpower and the discipline and sacrifice that purposeful action entails may we alter the habits of dependence and complacency that have for years impeded our advance.

Imperative of Progress

To inculcate self-reliance as an imperative of human progress, this administration from the very outset mobilized the skills and resources of government itself in an effort to set an example to the citizenry of the Filipino capacity to work out his own destiny. Fiscal restraint, the elimination of the pork barrel system, the conversion of the different organizations into a working theme, the vigorous action taken by the government within government itself have been instrumental in producing valuable changes among the people themselves.

The Moral Dimension

It is not physical growth that may have been produced that comprises the most significant accomplishment of our people over the past two and a half years. Rather, it is the moral dimension that we have given to Philippine society through the various acts of renewal and self-improvement that people and government have performed together. The will to prosper, the willingness to do the things necessary to transform vision to reality, the ability to withstand trial and face challenge both from friends and enemies— these valuable traits we have preserved and enriched; and through them we have re-stated the faith in ourselves and the strength of character that we as a people have always possessed but often have forgotten.

The People’s Role

The government claims no credit for these national traits; I claim no personal credit for them, for it was merely the role of the leader in government to reactivate them for the tasks at hand. And, as befits a free and progressive society, even this has been possible only with the support and encouragement of leaders like you in the Jaycee organization. The people, however, have been the principal instrument for change.

With this mutual cooperation between the national leadership and the population, and the intermediate leadership especially in the private sector, such as the Jaycee, I have great confidence that we shall reach the objectives we have set for government and our people.

(Open Forum)

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1968). Speech at the opening ceremonies of the 20th Jaycee National Convention, University of San Carlos, Cebu City, October 2, 1968. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 64 (43) , 10921-10924.