As you know, I have just returned from a state visit to the United States. In spite of the extensive publicity it received from the media, no one knows of a secret mission I had when I went there. I am now in a position to reveal it. My secret mission was to shop for an appropriate birthday gift for the Manila Hotel on its 70th Anniversary.

I am happy to announce that I have come back not with one but with three birthday gifts.

One is a Tax Treaty which, by eliminating double taxation and thereby encouraging United States investments in the Philippines, will naturally bring more American businessmen to this country. The second is a Tourism Agreement, which will encourage larger volumes of American leisure travelers to visit the Philippines. And the third is an Air Agreement which will provide more airline frequencies to take both businessmen and tourists here.

All this means more customers for the Manila Hotel, higher occupancy rates, more revenues, and more profits. Come to think of it, perhaps the next time the Manila Hotel declares a bonus out of its profits, they should include me among the recipients!

I am sure that with these three birthday gifts, I have helped to make this occasion a very happy birthday indeed for the Manila Hotel.

I am happy to join the many well-wishers of the Manila Hotel, not only in this country but all over the world, in celebrating the 70th Anniversary of this venerable institution, this durable Grande Dame . When I issued Presidential Decree No. 645 in 1974, it was not for the purpose of simply restoring a mere hotel. Otherwise, I would have yielded to the pressures of the designers and contractors then who considered the original Manila Hotel building too old, obsolete, and deserved to be completely demolished. They all suggested that a brand-new hotel be constructed on top of the ashes and debris of the old.

I recoiled at this suggestion and rejected it outright. It would have been a disservice not only to a durable institution but also to the country’s history. It would have betrayed our people who had the right to demand that their historical landmarks not only be preserved but be restored to them in their former splendor and glory. It would have been a pity if an institution that not even a savage World War could raze to the ground would finally cave in to the methodical and efficient destruction of a demolition crew.

That would have been an unforgivable desecration of history. For if these walls could speak and narrate the 70-year-old story of this institution, it would indirectly be narrating Philippine history, for the Manila Hotel’s story almost runs parallel to, and remarkably reflects, the broad sweep of Philippine history from the early 20th century on. To this history, the Manila Hotel has been a silent but active and affectionate witness.

The Manila Hotel was established in 1912, in the early days of American colonial rule. Characteristically, it was built as an establishment catering exclusively to Americans and from which — in typical colonial fashion — natives were barred as patrons, although not as employees. And just to emphasize the point that this was to be an American institution, it was inaugurated with lavish balls and fireworks on July 4, 1912, to coincide with the Independence Day celebrations of the American community here.

But as you know, the Filipinos’s fight for his own independence never stopped. The fight waged by Rizal, Mabini, Bonifacio, and Aguinaldo in the 19th century, starting in the intellectual and political battlefields and eventually breaking out as a military conflict in the Philippine revolution against Spain in 1898, continued as a war against the new American colonizers in 1898, until the efforts were defeated temporarily in 1901. I say “temporarily” because it did not take long for the campaign to resume, shifting once again to the political arena.

The Filipinos fight for the recognition of his own dignity and sovereignty in his own homeland was likewise reflected in the policies of the Manila Hotel. The initial barriers of social discrimination that existed between whites and browns, which effectively barred native Filipinos from access to the enclaves of the whites, eventually broke down in this hotel. It is significant that the drive to demolish these racial barriers was a joint effort between Governor-General Francis B. Harrison and then-Senate President Manuel Quezon. Quezon, as you know, led and inspired the country’s efforts to obtain its independence from the United States.

For about five years, this hotel became the residence of General Douglas Mac-Arthur, a close friend of Quezon and appointed by him as Military Adviser to the Commonwealth Government which President Quezon headed. (In order to avoid paying rentals, General Mac-Arthur was appointed Chairman of the Board of the Manila Hotel, also by President Quezon.) He occupied the entire top floor of the West Wing of the building. His apartments, according to historical accounts, were appointed with tasteful opulence. It housed, among others, an irreplaceable military library that Mac-Arthur, former West Point Superintendent and ever the military scholar, kept.

Indeed, according to his biographers, when Mac-Arthur was once asked what he considered were his happiest homes, he cited two. West Point was one. The Manila Hotel was the other. He nostalgically made mention of the veranda that overlooked the Manila Bay.

The story of the Manila Hotel continued to reflect the shifts and turns of Philippine history when General Mac-Arthur left for Australia on orders of President Roosevelt and the Manila Hotel, like the entire country, was taken over by the Japanese. It is one of history’s ironies that when Japanese Premier Hideki Tojo made his first State Visit to the Philippines on May 5, 1942, he stayed at the Mac-Arthur Penthouse. Its last occupant, before Mac-Arthur fulfilled his promise to return, was General Yamashita.

It is quite significant that, for the returning General Mac-Arthur, the long line of famous battles to liberate the Philippines, which included the historic landings at the Red Beach in Leyte and at Lingayen Gulf, was right here in this hotel. Mac-Arthur himself led a patrol to recover the hotel from the Japanese, who had converted it into an armed fortress and decided to make one of their final stands here. The Americans set up their artillery at the Luneta and trained it on the Manila Hotel building, which became the scene of floor-to-floor and room-to-room fighting.

General Mac-Arthur himself joined the patrol that rushed the hotel. It might be interesting to read his own words from his memoirs:

“I was anxious to rescue as much as I could of my home atop the Manila Hotel, and I accompanied a leading patrol of the division. It had been reported to me that the penthouse was intact, having been preserved probably because of two vases at the entrance which had been presented to my father by the former Emperor of Japan.

“We reached the New Luneta, but were temporarily pinned down on Burnham Green by machine-gun fire from the hotel itself. Suddenly, the penthouse blazed into flame. They had fired it. I watched with indescribable feelings, the destruction of my fine military library, my souvenirs, my personal belongings of a lifetime. It was not a pleasant moment.

“The patrol finally worked forward to the hotel, and, flanked by submachine men, I climbed the stairs toward the top. Every landing was a fight. Of the penthouse nothing was left but ashes. It had evidently been the command post of the rear guard action. We left its colonel dead on the smoldering threshold, the remains of the broken vases of the Emperor at his head and feet — a grim shroud for his bloody bier. The young Lieutenant commanding the patrol, his smoking gun in his hand and his face wreathed in the grin of victory, sang out to me, ‘nice going, Chief.’ But there was nothing nice about it to me. I was tasting to the last acid dregs the bitterness of a devastated and beloved home.”

After the Filipinos got their independence on schedule on July 4, 1946, the Manila Hotel reemerged from the destruction of war, during which it was damaged but not demolished. It became for two decades the social center of Manila, but this time no longer a colonial establishment but the Filipino’s own. That was the Manila Hotel of the Rigodon de Honor , the Kahirup, and the Mancomunidad, and the Manila Hotel of political conventions.

My own determined campaign for the Presidency of this Republic reached a milestone right here in this hotel, at the old Fiesta Pavilion, which was roughly where the present Champagne Room is, when the Nacionalista Party nominated me as its Presidential standard-bearer in the elections of 1964. As you know, I won that election, and every Presidential election ever since. Two other conventions took place after that: in 1968, when the Nacionalista Party nominated me to run for reelection, and in April 1981 when the Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, or KBL, gave me a mandate to run for President of the New Republic. Thus, three times have I taken the oath as President at the Luneta under the watchful eyes of the Manila Hotel. And I owe it to Divine Providence and the mandate of the Filipino people that 17 years later, in the same hotel where my Presidency was launched, I now stand here and address you, still as President of the Republic.

As many of you will remember, the Manila Hotel was temporarily outclassed from the mid-1960s by the brand-new hotels that emerged under the management of international chains. In 1974, I ordered the hotel closed and issued Presidential Decree No. 645. By virtue of that decree, the hotel was renovated, expanded, and modernized, but preserved the ambience of the original.

It was renovated, in other words, during the early years of the New Society. Once again, the Manila Hotel, served to reflect the great movements in Philippine history. Presidential Decree No. 645 liquidated the old Manila company and authorized the formation of a new Manila Hotel Corporation, which was placed entirely under the ownership of the Government Service Insurance System. The renovated Manila Hotel, preserving and enhancing its past elegance and glory, is now owned by the more than one million members of the GSIS, all those who serve and work as employees of the government and all its branches and instrumentalities. The profits of the Manila Hotel — and I am happy to note that it has been consistently profitable since 1977 — have been flowing not to wealthy capitalists and businessmen but to the country’s civil servants and military personnel — including public-school teachers, soldiers, office workers, policemen, street cleaners, and the like—in the form of social-security and -insurance benefits, as well as dividends. I believe this point is worth emphasizing: this majestic institution, this major business enterprise, is ultimately owned by ordinary workers in the government.

One can say with some flippancy that while the Manila Hotel’s customers are the rich, its beneficiaries and its owners are ordinary wage earners. But in all sincerity, we can call the Manila Hotel a powerful symbol of one of the New Republic’s social goals: that of spreading, and making accesible to the ordinary citizens, the opportunities for social and economic improvement. It may stretch it a bit too far to call the Manila Hotel an example of a successful KKK project. But the substance and spirit of our mass-based livelihood program is here. This enterprise, one of the counters best known landmarks, an institution well known all over the world, and financially successful and profitable, is owned by a million common citizens. The size of the enterprise does not matter: it can be as small as a bootblack business or as large as the Manila Hotel.

While the Manila Hotel provides a haven to our foreign visitors and the civilized pleasures of life both to our tourists and its local clientele, it it distributes the profits from its success to the oridnary people who own it.

Some may call this a hotel. Others may call it a landmark. Still others may call it a historical monument. But because it is widely owned by a large number of people earning ordinary salaries, it deserves to be called a social symbol, a paragon of the egalitarian social and economic goals of the New Republic.

At this point, allow me to congratulate all those who have been involved in the success of the Manila Hotel.

And in fairness, I must start with none other than the First Lady, who inspired and supervised the design of the renovated Manila Hotel, in accordance with her overriding philosophy that a project like this must reflect the true, the good, and the beautiful.

I would also like to site Mr. Leandro “Lindy” Locsin, the Architect, for the elegance that he has produced.

(The President may wish also to congratulate all those involved in the successful operations of the Manila Hotel, including the following:

Roman A. Cruz, Jr. Chairman and President; Manuel L. Lazaro, Executive Vice-President (also Government Corporate Counsel and Presidential Assistant for Legal Affairs); Mr. Frans Schutzman, General Manager; the 900 or so Filipino employees of the hotel whose charm and courteous services have won for the Manila Hotel its fame all over the world, and lavish compliments from a growing number of clientele, many of whom call it the best hotel they have ever stayed in; Minister Jose D. Aspiras, whose tourism program has contributed to the success of the Manila Hotel.

(The President may wish to conclude by extending his wishes for the future success and continued profitability of the Manila Hotel.

(If he so wishes, the President may offer a toast to the Manila Hotel and all its many friends in this country and all over the world.)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.