Speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, on Farmers' Day

This is the great day that the Filipino people commemorate our farmers, so I am very pleased that on this day, I can once again be with the heroes of the countryside here in Malacañang.

This gathering, for your servant, is a unique and sacred day to honor our millions of farmers in the villages, along with renewed attention to the problems related to agriculture.

On this great day, it is only fitting that we honor the outstanding farmers of the year in our country. In this way, we value the important role that our farmers play towards the development of the country.

Seventy percent of our citizens are farmers, and 55 percent of our workforce are farmers, and we owe 30 percent of our GNP to their hard work, as well as half of our export earnings. We all know that 49 percent of people's expenses go to food.

If we list the blessings from the farmer, there is no end to what we can say. But I am sure that no one will object if I say that agriculture is the foundation of our livelihood and farmers are the main partners in promoting economic prosperity.

Agriculture will continue to be the strength—or weakness—of a developing country like ours, especially in this time of global hardship. We can undoubtedly overcome major economic problems as long as our agriculture continues to progress.

Food and other products from the farmer's hard work are always our primary needs. No matter how dark the future of the world may be in the field of livelihood, we will not have problems if our food and other needs continue to come from our farmlands, which are the first priority of the government.

The decade of the fifties left us with an important lesson.

The focus then was only on valuing products from large estates without giving attention to other crops. We rushed into industrialization without paying attention to the production of the inputs for these industries.

Agriculture was neglected and industries lacked the necessary inputs. Textile factories had no cotton, there were canneries but nothing to put in the cans, the steel factory had no steel. And factories imported the necessary inputs when they could have been sourced locally.

When agriculture was neglected, yields and farmers' income decreased. Because of this, they had no money to spend on products made by the factories. Since there was no one to buy their products, even the factories began to close down one by one.

But, we learned from the mistakes of the past.

Therefore, in this time when our country is moving towards the establishment of various factories, the government's policy is to also promote agriculture.

That is why, as we stimulate industry under our eleven (11) major industrial projects, we continue our efforts to develop agriculture and rural areas.

This is why we continue to take steps to keep farms prosperous in the face of the increasingly difficult economic situation in all countries, large or small.

We hear the request of the farmers for the government to take action on the problems related to the decrease in farmers' income in light of the increasing production costs.

The orders I will sign have no other purpose than to give farmers a reasonable reward for all their efforts and hardship.

The welfare of the farmer is the welfare of the nation.

Support for the Value of Rice

Over the past few months, farmers have strongly requested an increase in the price of rice. To grant this request, I order that the price of rice be set at P1.70 per kilogram, up from the previous P1.55 per kilogram.

Now that we have set the price of rice at P1.70 per kilogram, the income of farmers will likely increase, even if their planting costs increase slightly.

In connection with this, I order the National Food Authority to purchase 15 percent of the harvest in our country at the new price I have set.

Fertilizer Value

We have already spent almost two billion pesos on fertilizer subsidies in the past eight years so that the price of fertilizer would be affordable for farmers. Since the price of fertilizer is going down worldwide, we will remove the subsidy.

At the same time, I order that the price of fertilizer be lowered, except for one. This is Triple 14, the fertilizer used for rice paddies. We will set the price of Triple 14 to be appropriate to its value in the world market.

According to the new proposal of the Ministry of Agriculture, the use of Triple 14 fertilizer will be reduced by one bag per hectare of land. Under this new price, the farmer's fertilizer expense will be reduced by five percent if the new proposal of the Ministry of Agriculture is followed. If the farmer does not follow this, his fertilizer expenses will surely increase.

The Purchase of Rice

The added value of rice will be meaningless if the rice is not bought from the farmers at the set price.

This is why the National Food Authority needs to buy a total of 15 percent of our harvest from October to December.

I direct the executive board to coordinate with the Central Bank so that the rice purchase of the National Food Authority can be properly arranged.

At the same time, the Ministry of Agriculture and the National Food Authority need to set the necessary amount to purchase rice and so that they can directly buy rice from Farmer Organizations.

(This section may be signed by the President for the LOI)

Direct Payment Under Masagana 99

In March, I directed the Prime Minister to find a way to reopen to farmers the opportunity to borrow the amount needed for rice planting. The Monetary Board, through the Governor of the Central Bank, sent me a Letter of Instruction (LOI) to expedite the release of loans by the National Bank and the rural banks that participated in Masagana 99.

In this LOI, an amount of P450 million will be allocated over three years. This amount will be circulated and managed by the Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation to expedite the collection by our prosperous banks.

This is what I will sign before you now.

Crop Insurance

We made this change to our Crop Insurance: we made the guaranteed yield 65 percent in areas that rely only on rainwater and even those with irrigation. Farmers who rely only on rain to plant can insure their harvest up to 65 cavans per hectare instead of the previous 40 cavans only, while if the farmer's field is irrigated, he can insure up to 98 cavans per hectare instead of the previous 60 cavans per hectare. The Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation, which is also chaired by the Prime Minister, has also set a lower premium. It has been reduced to only 2 percent instead of 3 percent. The portion to be shouldered by the government has been increased since this month. Because of this, both those indebted to Masagana 99 and those who are not, pay the same premium of two percent.

The Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation will also begin providing a 25 percent discount on the premium payment for rice insurance for the dry season. This will start in November. Especially in Luzon where there is no longer a risk of storms for crops during the off-season.

Crop insurance is one of the important changes that has occurred in agriculture in the Philippines. It is protection for the poor farmer who is often a victim of fate so that he is not permanently mired in poverty. It is the symbol of the New Republic's effort to fully develop agriculture.

Expanded Farm Coverage

One of the important reasons for our successful increase in yields is none other than the modern methods of farming that we deliver to the fields. What I am referring to are the personnel brought to the remote villages by the Ministry of Agriculture. They are capable and faithfully fulfill their duties.

Because of this, we will assign 2,300 new field extension workers to reach 15,000 of these personnel from the previous 13,000. With these additional personnel, I am confident that our yields will receive even more attention. They will be the partners of our farmers.

Irrigation

We will continue to expand the areas with irrigation. We will reach 1.8 million hectares of land with irrigation by 1986 from the current 1.36. Annually, 90,000 hectares of land will be irrigated. Irrigation is one of the important components to increase our yields because twice a year, farmers can harvest.

The supervising manager of the National Irrigation Administration is already undertaking this to prioritize the repair of irrigations that one day, the managers, the farmers themselves, will oversee.

Prosperous Program

Maisagana offers hope to our corn farmers, who are arguably the poorest among our farmers. Corn farmers have shown resilience despite consistently low yields, lack of technology, and low income. Whatever happens, they continue to plant corn, which is the staple food for 20 percent of our population. With the help of Maisagana, we are taking concrete steps to uplift our corn farmers. Finally, we will see the beginning of the progress of these farmers who are helping us strive for self-sufficiency in the field of livelihood. In 1984, we expect that we will no longer rely on imported corn because the corn we need will come from the harvest of our farmers.

Due to our success with the Maisagana program, I have instructed the Ministry of Agriculture to expand the area planted with corn to 100,000 hectares by December. We started with only 50,000 hectares.

Pastures

It is unfortunate to say that at this time, our country is still lacking in meat and products from our livestock. In fact, we import 98 percent or even nearly 99 percent of our meat and milk needs. The reason is that we do not have enough livestock to supply our meat and milk requirements.

If there are indeed a few cattle or carabaos that are a source of meat and milk in the yards of our farmers, large-scale animal husbandry requires extensive pastures. One of the reasons why we lack meat is because ranchers lack extensive pastures, so they cannot properly raise cattle. This was worsened by the fact that due to the rapid increase in our population in cities and villages, many ranchers complain that their pastures have been encroached upon by squatters and cattle thieves.

Over the past few years, there has been a gradual systematic management of our lands. The Ministry of Natural Resources determines the type of land according to its use, and then delegates it to a specialized agency for this purpose.

For example, the Ministry of Natural Resources has assigned the management of forests to the Bureau of Forest Development, and fisheries have been delegated to the Bureau of Fisheries.

Pastures are still managed by the Ministry of Natural Resources, but the Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for the animals to be raised in these pastures. I want this matter to be organized so that we know who should be accountable for the cattle industry. It seems awkward for the Ministry of Agriculture to be responsible for the animals, while the Ministry of Natural Resources is responsible for the pastures for these animals.

Therefore, I am transferring the administration of pastures to the Ministry of Agriculture and, in connection with this, I will sign an executive order regarding it.

Through this, I hope that we can focus on the development of our cattle ranches and thus, we will have an abundant supply of meat and milk and dairy products.

Integrated Area Management System

I want to improve the service to farmers. That is why, I have approved the establishment of the Integrated Area Management System which will create a framework for service in the fields and identify yields in a specific area. This is important to coordinate all efforts of the government and its branches whose function is to ensure the development of agriculture and rural areas.

The Ministry of Agriculture, as the office primarily responsible for agricultural development, will implement, with the help of the National Food and Agriculture Council, the policies, plans, programs and guidelines, including the integrated implementation of all things related to agricultural services and products. At the regional level, the regional board on Agricultural Land Classification will be responsible for identifying areas that can be used as farmland in all provinces covered by the region. In addition to land classification, research and training on agriculture may also be conducted.

The province will be the focus of the integrated agricultural services and products. The provincial governors will be responsible and will have the right to coordinate the administration with the government branches in the province. Regarding this, the National Offices will assist and direct their provincial heads or personnel to be under the supervision of the Governor to ensure the effective implementation of all plans.

The branches represented in the Provincial Agricultural Council are:

The Ministry of Agriculture will provide the necessary orders, instructions and rules to fulfill the provisions of the executive order that I will sign before you.

All of these policies and measures have no other purpose than to help farmers earn more and thus improve their living conditions.

You, dear farmer friends—the soldiers who provide food for the New Republic—you are the new heroes of our collective and shared effort to lift the newly developing world from hunger and lack of proper food. You, true heroes and cornerstones of the nation's livelihood, deserve only the highest and fullest support of the government so that your hard work and fatigue every day are properly compensated.

As long as I am your servant as President, you can be assured that our government will fully and unconditionally support you.

Thank you very much and long live… you farmers who the people owe their food to.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.