Speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, At the Tribute to the New Filipino

I am delighted and pleased to be with the representatives of the Kabataang Baranggay from various parts of our country again at this gathering which you have called a tribute to the New Filipino 1982. The youth are really different when preparing a program. I was surprised because I thought I was in Bulacan because of the skill of each participant in this program in composing poetry. So, your servant was also inspired to compose poetry.

Indeed, the young women and men whom we are honoring on this occasion are the true symbols of the principles and spirit of the youth barangay. They, more than anyone else, remind us of the new enthusiasm and vitality that continues to burn and mobilize our country and our New Republic. Therefore, it is only fitting to say that these moments are a true tribute to the New Filipino of our nation because the entire country is now hopefully looking at the new vigor and perseverance of the youth of our race.

Nothing can make me prouder as your President than to be associated with the rise to national importance of the Kabataang Barangay: both with respect to being a recipient of your invaluable service to government and our people, and also to the fact that in some way I have been personally of assistance to the advancement of your objectives as a national organization.

And on this occasion, I am honored and happy that my daughter Imee is with you and one with you in the great principles and works related to our country.

No one can deny your achievements under the umbrella of the youth barangay. In just a short period of this movement – which can be said to be younger than other youth organizations – the KB has already distinguished itself in various fields of service and assistance. You have proven that the youth can do many great things, and not just as instigators of principles.

True to the guiding vision and faith of the KB. As a catalyst for enabling the youth to do things for themselves and for their country, we have witnessed in so many projects for so many years now this ethic of work alive and full of vigor.

A day like this is therefore an occasion to telescope both the achievements of your organization and the growing scope and challenge of the work which you are engaged today.

I find noteworthy, first, the fact that at this point when you approach the end of the second year of your five-year K. B. development plan, you have achieved most of the goals you have set for yourselves, in such diverse areas as skills training, for out-of-school youth, self-employment assistance, scholarship grants, the organization of K. B. school chapters, theater workshops, choral competitions sports and athletics, and such special projects as the K. K. K. ng kabataang, the appropriate technology project, and international relations and youth exchange. The complimentary nature of your programs and projects in these areas provides all of us with an invaluable understanding and experience that will certainly be of great use in other undertakings now and in the future.

As your cooperation with the K. K. K., I have noted that the K.K. K. ng Kabataan you launched focuses on projects managed by the youth. In the past year, you have launched almost a thousand different projects similar to those being promoted by the K. K. K. You have truly been zealous in supporting this movement, and Imee told me that you might even exceed your intended goals in the next few years. Therefore, you have further impressed me, and you can be assured that the government will expedite the release of the funds needed by the K. K. K. ng Kabataan. I know that the majority of those benefiting from your project are none other than young people who were unable to continue their studies or out-of-school youth.

As your projects grow in number and complexity, there rises the urgent need to further strengthen your organization. In this regard and in response to your request, I will support the formal organization of the Kabataang Barangay National Secretariat. I am aware that the Secretariat is vital to the National K. B. Movement for the staff support and the increased management control that will be required your expanding operations. Likewise, we shall now look into your proposal to construct your own K. B. building on the premises of the Amoranto Stadium in Quezon City.

And in connection with the aim of further strengthening the already strong Kabataang Barangay, I believe it is time to further enhance the training of the next generation of our leaders. In line with the goal of strengthening, you need also to look into the flow of leadership and membership within your ranks. You must ever keep in mind the principal K. B. objective of providing the youth in the 15 to 21 age bracket with the opportunities for leadership training and its positive exercise. Thus, it is probably time for you to call for an election so that new leaders can be given the chance to learn from the experience which many of you have been sharing these past few years. If you have done as well in your leadership training programs, then you can rest assured that there will certainly be enough numbers to take over the burdens of leadership.

Almost always the crucial test for the stability and strength of an organization rests on its ability to pass on the torch of leadership from generation to generation, from one set of leaders to others. More so is this a crucial challenge to the Kabataang Barangay, for you are as it were a continuous river, where new members enter and others leave to take up the broader challenges of full maturity.

I believe that at this stage, as the Kabataang Baranggay enters another year, based on your achievements and your strong bond of unity, you will undoubtedly continue to tread the path forward to become even more exemplary and a true model for the Filipino youth who are ready to bear the responsibility on their young shoulders and contribute their intelligence, abilities, and everything they can do for the motherland.

On this day of honoring the New Filipino, I salute and congratulate those who have received awards, as well as all the leaders and members of the Kabataang Barangay. I hope that your concern and cooperation with this government, and with your servant, who has no dream in life but to bring the Philippines to the peak of success, prosperity, and peace, will not wane, in order to give meaning and fulfillment to the long-cherished dream of our race. We are already gradually tasting the fruits of all the efforts that I wholeheartedly offer to you, the next generation of Filipinos. Do not forget all our efforts, all our dreams, all that we are doing… there is no other destination and reason… but to prepare you for a stable future, because as the father of the nation, at all times, your servant thinks only of the fate and future of the youth and the Filipino race.

Long live the New Filipino! Long live the Kabataang Baranggay! Long live the New Republic!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.