In accordance with our tradition since the launch of the New Society, we are now here at Malacañang to honor Farmer's Day in our country.

Just a week ago, we also celebrated Labor Day in our country. We paid tribute to the men and women who comprise our National Strength. And now, we will honor the farmers.

On this day, let us once again recall the important connection of our farmers, our government and the country as a whole, which is very important for our national stability and progress.

Therefore, it is only fitting that on this day, once a year, we highlight the efforts and sacrifices of our farmers. In this way alone, we can collectively express our gratitude to those who till the land, along with our thinking and searching for new ways to further improve the government's care for farmers.

On this day, we should recognize and honor the outstanding farmers of the year, as well as the farm technicians of our government who assist our farmers. In these times of great trials, the tireless efforts and perseverance of these individuals are the measure of whether we will succeed or fail as a nation and race.

More than ever in our history, we now urgently need to strengthen the relationship between the government and farmers. More than ever, we have also proven this strong relationship which leads to a bountiful harvest throughout our country.

We overcame a difficult trial in our country, which almost caused the failure of all our efforts during the past period of change. While failed politicians and troublemakers inside and outside our country continue to sow hatred in the hearts of our countrymen, along with their laughter at the misfortunes of our country, our countrymen chose the hard path of effort and sweat. Because of this, we succeeded in our endeavor to avert the crisis we were facing.

In all our efforts to stabilize the country, the farmers are always at the forefront. The farmers have shown their great perseverance by harvesting abundantly in the midst of our great difficulties.

Even as the rice granaries of Central and Northern Luzon continue to be stricken by drought, palay production this year is projected to increase by 2.4 million cavans, thanks to the bumper harvests in the Visayas and Mindanao, where production has quickly bounced back from the effects of last year’s drought. Because of the record crops in the south, we are harvesting 157 million cavans this year or 1.6% more than the 154.6 million cavans we produced last year, despite the continuing drought in Luzon. This harvest, added to the stocks we have built up in previous years, assures the country of sufficient rice supplies for the rest of the year.

At the same time, our corn harvest for this year is expected to be the largest ever in our history: 67.7 million tons compared to last year’s drought-stricken crops of 62.5 million tons. We have therefore moved closer to our goal of achieving self-sufficiency in feedgrains, thus reducing the foreign exchange drain caused by mounting imports. Our 1.8 million corn farmers, who are among the poorest groups in the country, stand to benefit from the rise in productivity and incomes in our corn farms. Our Maisagana technology has boosted their yields to a range of 3.3 to 4 tons per hectare using new hybrids from the previous average of 1.4 tons per hectare using the old varieties.

The momentum of our production gains in the seventies has therefore continued. The greater challenge, of course, is how to further enhance farm production and productivity amidst a cost-price squeeze which if left unattended, could dampen our farmers’ incentive to produce. This challenge comes at a time when we must increasingly rely on agriculture to bolster our national economy and provide us shelter from the storms of international economic uncertainty.

Maximizing farm production and farm productivity entails availability and access to vital agricultural inputs. This is why our government accords top priority to fertilizer imports even with our foreign exchange difficulties. In order to ensure timely and sufficient supplies of fertilizer for our farmers, we have seen to it that fertilizer shipments arrive on schedule. During the past few weeks, several shipments have arrived, consisting of nearly 20,000 metric tons of various fertilizer supplies. And more supplies are coming through the quick-disbursing input commodity loans that we have arranged with the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank, amounting to $130 million and $150 million respectively.

It has become clearer than ever that our struggle for internal recovery and long-term stability will be won or lost in agriculture. The success of our efforts, however, will depend on how well we are able to sustain our farmers’ incentive to produce.

To this end therefore, we are adopting a set of policy reforms in pricing and marketing which should enhance farm productivity and incomes, thus strengthening the farm sector’s capability to propel the national economy forward. The general direction of such reforms is toward greater reliance on the free interplay of market factors as the primary force for inducing increased production and better productivity.

Our goal is two-fold: to sustain self-sufficiency in all basic food items, and to expand and diversify exports ad replace imports so as to increase agriculture’s contribution to the balance of payments.

In rice production, over the last three years, hectarage has been decreasing even though yields have continued to increase. This trend of declining hectarage has been particularly evident in rainfed farms as some rainfed farmers have been shifting to more lucrative crops because their incomes have been increasingly eroded by falling farmgate prices and rising production costs. Wire crop diversification is a welcome move over the long-term. We still need the harvests from our rainfed rice farms while we continue to expand our irrigated areas. The bulk of our rice lands still consists of rainfed farms, yet the gap in yields and incomes between rainfed and irrigated farms is sharply marked. In crop year 1982-1983, for instance, palay yields in irrigated areas reached an average of 59 cavans per hectare while yields in rainfed areas stood at only 38.2 cavans per hectare.

Where Masagana 99 used to concentrate on irrigated areas, we have now shifted emphasis to rainfed rice in order to bring up rainfed yields and incomes closer to irrigated yields and incomes. Our new trust directs rice-based multiple cropping technology, credit, and marketing support to rainfed farmers, who have been relatively worse off compared to irrigated rice farmers.

To reinforce incentives for our rice farmers, we shall adopt a more efficient system of ensuring higher farm prices through better procurement and exports whenever possible. At the same time, we shall continue to ensure stable retail prices for consumers through effective market interventions.

In line with the policy of reducing government interventions in the trading of agricultural products, rice exports shall henceforth be undertaken directly by the private sector with the exception of government-to-government transactions. I hereby direct the National Food Authority to issue the guidelines authorizing such private sector exports of rice whenever exportable surpluses are available

In corn production, the promising potential of yellow corn as a new and major export crop should serve to boost our program of reducing our balance-of-payments deficit. Now that viable hybrid technologies have been developed and have increasingly been adopted by our corn farmers, we have embarked on a program to develop yellow corn exports aiming at the huge and still growing feedgrain markets of Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea.

Under this program, four corn export zones in Northern Luzon and Southern and Central Mindanao have been designated, from which the private sector shall immediately be allowed to export yellow corn even while we are still net importers.

The main thrusts of this policy for yellow corn exports will be:

First, the development of a pricing scheme which will take into account prevailing export prices so as to encourage the planting of hybrid corn for export;

Second, the provision of sufficient credit to enable farmers to meet the higher production costs of hybrids through the continued rehabilitation of distressed rural banks and the utilization of non-institutional credit sources such as fertilizer and seed dealers;

Third, the construction of the necessary transport, storage, handling facilities, and roads in the designated corn export zones;

And fourth, the liberalization of imports and exports of yellow corn, thereby phasing out government’s exclusive role in such trade.

This policy of liberalized trading shall likewise apply to soybean imports, another vital feed ingredient.

These measures to promote the production of feed-grains for export are at the same time designed to accelerate our drive for self-sufficiency in feedgrains, which we foresee within two years. Once feedgrain self-sufficiency is achieved, our poultry and hog producers will be relieved of the high cost of imported feed ingredients, and exports of poultry and pork products can then commence at prices competitive in the world market.

Even as we continue to ensure adequate supplies of animal protein. We shall pursue the development of other cheap sources of protein for our people. This brings to the fore the significance of our vast fisheries resources which we could harness both for domestic consumption and export. Aquaculture is a highly promising field in this regard. To ensure the success of our two-pronged strategy for domestic consumption and exports of fish products, we shall provide vital credit support and eliminate processing and marketing bottlenecks.

The 600,000 subsistence municipal fishermen who produce 50% of the country’s total fish output are a major concern of our plans for the fisheries sector. We shall further accelerate the establishment of cold storage facilities and processing plants to rationalize supply distribution and assure municipal fishermen better prices for their highly perishable produce.

As we exert extra effort to increase foreign exchange earnings through increased and diversified agricultural exports. We shall have to reassess the importance of each commodity in our export products mix. Coconut and sugar. Our major dollar earners in the past. Suffered heavily from the global recession following the second oil shock of 1979. While export prices of coconut have recently perked up. Sugar prices remain at a low level

We are confronted with complex issues in these two major industries whose repercussions on our national economy are far-reaching. We shall have to look at the complete ramifications for us to make decisions that shall be for the good of all and in the national interest. We are thus undertaking a study of the coconut industry to determine the most effective means of reducing costs and enhancing benefits for producers, processors, and traders in sugar, we shall likewise study the issue of alternative arrangements for international marketing and come up with clearer guidelines on government interventions in the trading and pricing of sugar.

Meanwhile, we are intensifying efforts to strengthen the competitiveness of our other traditional exports such as tobacco and abaca in the world market.

Our intensive promotion of nontraditional exports such as mangoes, papaya, coffee, and cacao has produced encouraging results. Contributions of nontraditional agricultural exports to total sector export revenues are up by 60% over their 1978 levels.

At a time when we must save foreign exchange, we have placed greater importance on our import substitution programs in agriculture. In cotton, hectarage is being expanded even as research is ongoing to generate better varieties that could improve yields. In time, we should produce enough of the fiber to meet the requirements of 3ur textile millers. We continue to pursue our dairy program with the end in view of producing 15% of our dairy requirements in ten years. Research and production programs will be intensified to further develop soybean, cassava and sweet potato to replace feed ingredient imports.

In order to support our production and marketing thrusts I have described, we are taking steps to strengthen research, expand and improve irrigation, and enhance land management.

In research. The Philippine Council for Agricultural and Resources Research and Development (PCARRD) has adopted nineteen research priority areas for the next five years to support our priority programs in agriculture. At the same time, twelve regional research stations are already in place under the World Bank-assisted agricultural support services project to strengthen the translation of research results into viable location specific technologies.

In irrigation. We shall continue to expand irrigated areas to the extent allowed by our national budgetary resources. In order to encourage crop diversification and reduce the over-all demand for water, the national irrigation administration recently adopted a new policy of charging variable irrigation fees.

In land management. We shall accelerate the pace of land classification and titling and carry out a land management policy which will foster maximum and rational land use, prevent the diversion of agricultural land to other uses, and provide the basis for better land tenure arrangements.

In the light of financial constraints and the need to devote increased amounts of already scarce resources to agriculture, we are undertaking several measures to mobilize greater financial support for agricultural development.

The provision of adequate credit to farmers is of vital concern. It is imperative to correct the disturbing trend of declining agricultural credit due to credit policies that have increasingly favored other sectors. In this connection, i hereby direct the central bank to undertake a comprehensive study of agricultural credit which should address the following issues:

1. The need to strengthen the institutional mechanisms to mobilize and direct an adequate level of credit resources to agriculture, and

2. The need for a system allowing the informal or non-institutional sector to participate in agricultural lending in order to supplement credit from institutional sources.

While we have already begun to reduce subsidies in government-sponsored credit programs through revisions in the lending rate, it is essential to maintain a differential between the rediscounting rate for agriculture and the rate for other sectors. We need to keep this differential in order to provide sufficient incentives to banking institutions and compensate them for the inherently high cost and high risk of agricultural lending.

Along with the streamlining of agricultural credit policies and institutions, government is now in the process of finalizing a prioritized Sectoral Development Plan for agriculture, with a corresponding consolidated budget consistent with the priorities and objectives of the plan. This should result in more efficient allocation and utilization of scarce resources. We shall likewise review the Investments Priorities Plan (IPP) and realign all agricultural investment incentives to support this Sectoral Development Plan.

In order to streamline and strengthen sector management, we are developing an action plan to improve the coordination of the various government agencies involved in food and agriculture, with emphasis on integrating the production and marketing functions.

Finally, as an essential part of our policies for the agriculture sector, we shall accelerate our efforts in agrarian reform and align these to our national productivity goals.

Our main objective is none other than the mobilization of the entire agricultural sector to continue our economic progress.

Some of us say that with the magnitude of the problems of our time, we can no longer progress. This is devoid of truth. It is only the lament of people who have never learned to work hard or get tired like our farmers. This is the belief of prophets of doom who continue to insist on their false predictions even as they see the signs and indications of progress.

If we focus on agriculture, we will see good signs because we can always rely on farmers. Even now, we already know that the harvest this year will be higher than last year. They always strive even if they are not valued and not praised, to give us a better life in the present. And, without a doubt, they will wholeheartedly help us in our efforts to make agriculture the foundation of national stability. Our farmers today are the true beacons of hope and change.

Now that agriculture is given all the attention regarding our development, there is no doubt that we will emerge from this sea of uncertainty and reach the peak of economic stability.

With the help and support of the government, as promised by your servant, the farmers will surely play an even more important role in the life of our country.

This is a pledge we make once more, on this day of our national celebration of Farmer's Day.

This is a pledge that will give us inspiration and confidence to strive to reach the peak of stability in the future.

Thank you very much and long live the farmer-soldiers on the front lines of the fight against hunger!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.