Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines During the PMA Alumni Association Homecoming

[Released on February 29, 1984]

I can see from your rather brief roster of honorary members that you can be very sparing in your choice of individuals whom you admit into your exclusive fraternity. This year, for instance, only two among so many distinguished Filipinos are being thus honored: General Carlos P. Romulo, an accomplished writer, a great statesman and diplomat, and a compleat officer and gentleman in his own right, and Prime Minister Cesar Virata, a scholar and outstanding public servant who embodies the highest ideals of the peemayer: courage, integrity and loyalty. To find myself in such select company is therefore a great honor in itself. And to be raised above them as the most distinguished honorary member is infinitely more than what even your Commander-in-Chief can rightly aspire for. So I wish to thank you for bestowing upon me this supreme accolade you can give to one who never had the good fortune of graduating from the Philippine Military Academy.

There is still another reason why I consider it a pleasant obligation to join you here today, and it stems from my deep feelings of gratitude for your unequivocal endorsement of my leadership during the critical month of September last year, in rallying behind your Commander-in-Chief, you demonstrated once more your unflagging loyalty to the Republic, to its Constitution and to legitimate authority. You have upheld the finest tradition of our Armed Forces, the tradition of loyal and steadfast support for legitimate civil authority. By keeping this tradition alive and strong, the alumni of the Philippine Military Academy has set a fine example of firm adherence to the law and fidelity to the Constitution for the entire Armed Forces now and in the future.

Time and again, in war and in peace, the Armed Forces of the Philippines whose core of leadership is drawn from the ranks of PMA alumni has proven itself to be a strong, true and faithful defender and ally of our people and our people’s ideals. This is an alliance which encompasses not only matters of defense but every aspect of national life as well. For while it is the soldier’s primary duty to defend the nation and secure the stability of society, the special circumstances in which we find ourselves today require his involvement and participation in other urgent national undertakings, particularly those relating to our economic life.

The soldier’s life today gains added dimension through his participation in the tasks of national development. The time has passed when the soldier can point to his role as keeper of the peace as his major contribution to the nation. It is true the soldier is sworn to defend our boundaries, to secure our national integrity and sovereignty, and to maintain internal peace and stability. It is equally true that in doing all these things the individual soldier and the entire Armed Forces ensure a climate of stability and freedom which is essential to growth and development. But our Armed Forces is being asked to do more today. It is being asked to participate fully and actively in the difficult task of nursing the nation back to health and promoting its economic well-being.

This is a task which the members of the Armed Forces should address with the same dedication and vigor as they apply to the defense of the nation. For development is a powerful weapon of defense just as internal security and national stability are essential tools of development.

I suppose I do not need to belabor this point further, for I have already seen with my own eyes the concrete response that the Armed Forces has made to this challenge of our times. In every military installation, the signs of your cooperation in the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran are very much in evidence. The PMA Alumni Association itself is spearheading the drive to involve its members as well as the ordinary soldiers in productive enterprises through the provision of literature on livelihood projects as well as through representations made with the KKK Secretariat for the facilitation of loan applications of members. And the Armed Forces, through its Chief of Staff, Gen. Fabian Ver, was among the first to make known its support of our program of self-reliance or sariling sikap.

Long before we launched Sariling Sikap, the concept of self-reliance was a established principle of our defense program. Our long-range defense plan calls for a Armed Forces that is truly self-reliant not only in men but also in materiel. Thus we have built up our manpower not simply in response to intermittent threats to national security but also with a view towards strengthening our defenses against external aggression. On a more modest scale, we have started to build up our capability to produce our own weapons and materiel in line with the Self-Reliance Defense Program of our Armed Forces. We have designed and produced patrol boats which serve better the peculiar needs of our anti-dissident campaign. We can make ammunitions for a number of small arms. We have refitted and repaired navy boats, trucks; communications and other facilities. We have, in short, taken the first decisive steps towards self-reliance in our defense requirements.

Today we should begin to find ways of accelerating these efforts and compressing the timetable for erecting a self-reliant defense structure. Of officers and men we have enough to meet any internal threats, and in case of external aggression, our citizen army has the number, the force and the will to carry on a prolonged struggle against any foreign enemy. But we must have weapons to fight, and it is time we begin to develop the capability to produce them.

In the fight against dissidence and separatism, we have always utilized our own resources. They have proven to be sufficient, and they will always prove enough so long as the Filipino soldier remains strong in his faith in our ideals and in his determination to preserve them. But against external threats, perhaps we have been lured into a false sense of security by our fragile web of military alliances with friends and allies. We have built our external defenses on the shifting sands of mutual defense agreements, and it is time we built it on firmer foundations, for in matters of defense the guarantees of friends can be modified to suit their needs and interests, as the history of nations vividly show.

Let us therefore prepare for the day when our allies shall have grown weary of their commitments. Our freedom as a people and our sovereignty as a nation are much too precious to be entrusted to friends. The safest guarantee to our freedom lies in building up our own strength and our defense capability through our own efforts and with the use of our own resources. In defense as well as in our economy, let us proceed towards our goals on our own, sa Sariling Sikap.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.