– – – – – –

Today we remember deeds of valor and audacity.

We celebrate the heroism and courage of those who wagered life in battle for values they hold dear.

But that was as of forty years ago. What about today?

Why indeed should we today remember courage or the patience and nobility of self-sacrifice?

And do we really remember the dead—the values for which they died? Or are these but the words we parrot to calm our guilty hearts?

Perhaps the answer is in the words of a soldier’s song that tells a soldier who in his grave hears the voices of lovers passing.

“Are these not” he asks, “the voices of them that love, that love and remember me?”

“Not so my hero,” the lovers say.

“We are those that remember not for the spring has come and the earth has smiled, and the dead must forget.”

Then the soldier spake from the deep dark grave: “I am content.”

Yes, the soldier in his deep dark grave would be content even if we did not remember him—so long as spring has come and the earth has smiled upon his sons and daughters.

But there is blood upon the flowers of spring and the earth in pain.

Forty years there have been of uncertain fate and irrationality—the meaninglessness of raucous quarrel.

Forty years if the routine of casual murder and terrorism—holding entire societies in bondage.

The passing of the years but heap more sorrow and blood upon the flowers of spring.

Today is a world tremulously balanced at the edge of push-button war—an impersonal combat.

Ang digmaang nukleyar na maaaring magsunog sa buong sangkatauhan ay tiyak na hindi magpapahintulot ng anumang magarbo na pagpapakita ng personal na katapangan.

Nations are uncaring about the solemn obligations of treaties. The pledged word is meaningless in the intercourse of nations. Trade has become as cruel as war.

Is not cunning, deceit and treachery the favored talents and virtues?

Certainly then, courage, resoluteness or self-immolation have no place in our modern world.

How then can we say that we remember the dead?

And we hear the dead soldier say:

“You will need courage to retrieve dignity for the weak against the grasping hands of the greedy.

“You will need patience and courage to infuse even your enemies with nobility in the pace of their insults and deliberate assault.

“You will need courage to forgive the petty minds and the craven hearts who would cheapen our society.”

From the deep dark bosom of his grave the soldier intones: “the earth is bright but bright with the flasshes of new weapons of destruction. Must I remind you there are things more priceless than life itself. For them you must be ever ready and able to do battle.”

And he cries out with the poet: hurry and be strong of heart for the way is long and the night is dark.

You will need courage for the innumerable battlefields more ardous than Bataan or Corregidor.

You will need courage if society is to survive these new dark ages.

Courage there must be if we are to bring about a new world.

So, not in unfeeling ceremony but with tears in our hearts we cry out to the soldier in the grave: yes, the dead we have not forgotten. The flowers of spring and the smile of the earth that he bought with his valor shall treasure and hold dear.

This we pledge, now and forever.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.