Speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, on Independence Day

Since 1946, we have celebrated Independence Day every year. This celebration has become a tradition for us. However, the speeches on this day often diminish, if not completely erase from the minds of many of us, the importance of our national freedom. This celebration has been obscured by a different interpretation, such that when others say we are free, we are truly free. But citizens will only be free if they are masters of their own land and if they shape their own destiny.

In the past centuries, we have been taught to examine our history and ourselves through the eyes of the victors, because the victors write history. Therefore, until we succeed in our continuing struggle for national freedom, we will remain examining ourselves through the eyes of foreigners.

It is true that we have taken important steps: we no longer use the words ‘granted’ and ‘restored’ in connection with our national freedom because of the change in the date of the celebration of Independence Day—from July 4 to June 12; the date of our Independence Day, which we achieved more than 80 years ago before it was first celebrated, has also been corrected, 35 years ago. Eight years ago, we were freed from the ‘Colonial Provision’ of the old Constitution—the ‘Commander-in-Chief Provision’—which aimed to subject the Commonwealth Government to foreigners. Our appreciation of this to save the Republic from disintegration and the Philippine society from extinction or death is a way of liberation. The drafting and ratification of the new Constitution is proof of the determination of the Filipinos—and not the order of any foreign power. In all, we have shouldered the difficult and sometimes frustrating sacrifice for National Freedom.

Why are we only saying this now? Were we not free when we raised the Philippine flag in Bagumbayan on July 4, 1946, 35 years ago? This is what the Convention of Nations says. But it was during this time that the Parity Amendment was inserted into our Constitution and during this time that military bases were re-established in our country. Our economy has ‘apron-strings’ and our foreign relations are based on the policies of the war of two superpowers. It is not because of stubbornness that great Filipinos like Claro M. Recto and Jose P. Laurel united to raise the banner of patriotism against any interference in our power and freedom. Over the years, every time we celebrate Independence Day, there are voices that are often unheard by the so-called ‘political elite.’ These voices call on Filipinos to redeem themselves for the blood, tears and sweat of their brave ancestors, of the great and honorable men and women who died in two wars, in the revolution of 1898 and in the Philippine-American War of 1898. But as we know, these calls become merely a repetition of history every time Independence Day is celebrated. Therefore, it is time to stop being enslaved, to open our eyes.

For a long time in colonialism, we are still strengthening ourselves as a race. We are still striving to be Filipino.

This is happening more now than at any time in our history. The past eight years that citizens have lived with the discipline needed for our survival as a national society have clearly exposed the contradictory feelings and habits of Filipinos. In the past eight years, fanatics and opportunists have tried to turn it into a ‘Manichean Drama’ of freedom and necessity. They did this without considering that in the history of all races, there have been times when freedom is an appreciation or introduction to necessity. Nevertheless, the events that took place during the crisis will be useful not only to us but also to future generations.

There was a time when to be a Filipino—not a Filipino with a colonial mentality—he had to be a ‘procrastinator,’ lazy and hypocritical. But being a ‘procrastinator’ under a colonial master means destroying or weakening his administration; being lazy means hindering his goals and being hypocritical is done to confuse him. Incidentally, these colonial habits disappear when the master is gone. And it is even more difficult to erase them when he remains in the patronage of those with a colonial mentality who will lead the government and society.

Thus, we have proven that our society is ruled by native colonizers. They were able to do this through their exploitation of their own countrymen—in the name of principles exalted in the country but disregarded in other countries by their former colonial masters.

It does not require much thought to understand that the democracy of that time was like a battle of the ‘single elite’ characterized by elections full of pretense in order to give the Filipino people hope and then mockingly push them towards failure. This democracy of a few had a National Gross Product (GNP) of five percent in good years, and from two to 2.3 percent two years thereafter due to expensive elections. Millions of pesos in ‘pork-barrel’ funds are given to politicians for roads, bridges and schools that were never built; for livelihood projects that were never implemented. The media is free to criticize their government and high-ranking leaders, but each administration rises and falls on the issue of graft and corruption. Corruption, my countrymen, is in society—in politicians, in the economy and in the abuse of those in power.

Now, the aforementioned colonial pretenses are further exalted by the remaining leaders of the old society who disguise themselves as the opposition. This is the only way they know to gain personal power. They argue that the old society is healthy, that the former politicians are democratic, that the former media is free. But they forget to mention to the youth that they also frustrated the hopes and needs of the Filipino people.

But the pathetic characteristic of the remaining leaders with a colonial mindset is their begging from America. Their prominent representatives ask politicians in America to remove military bases and aid to the Philippines on the mistaken belief that this government, this country, will fall without them. Let us assume they are right. Will they be able to lead as they desire? Or will another group, a disciplined group of rebels whose leaders and members defend the ideology they believe in? How can a party motivated only by a thirst for power—motivated only by the pathetic mindset of their constituents—succeed in a revolutionary situation? Patriotism does not belong to your leadership—to your president. But it entrusts confidence and hope to the Filipino people; it stands on the historical heritage—the legacy of the propaganda movement and the Philippine Revolution and not of colonial dependence or reliance on foreigners.

We are a people who love freedom. We should not believe that we will be free through what is called the ‘colonial elite.’

The lack of national honor and unity is the reason why many of our countrymen are corrupt, exploitative of their power and do not value the ideals of the New Society. They need to be awakened and they need to realize the danger of Materialism. This may require a radical change in the education system and in the media and even in society. But this must be done.

Any best solution to the problem will fail if—as Rizal said almost a hundred years ago—we do not have unity. National unity is the fulfillment of our aspirations; it is also our defense against anyone who offers us deceptive salvation and freedom that will lead to the loss of our National Identity, honor and dignity.

We should not doubt the importance of national liberation. Great rewards are not given to the fearful and the losers. Because we are a developing country, we have many needs. Because of this, we need great effort. There is no royal road to prosperity and freedom—and certainly no road to a ‘colonial mendicant.’

Only one thing we must remember: we will not fail.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.