Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines Before the FEU Law Alumni Association

[Drafted on May 23, 1981]

The Philippine Democratic Way of Life*

I have always said that if I had not been in politics, I would have been in the academe. Earlier in life, my ambition was to deliver lectures in class, rather than campaign speeches in political rallies. Once upon a time the utmost fulfillment of my ultimate goals was to be President of a university rather than President of the country. Let me then impose upon your patience this evening as I give vent to the frustrated dreams of a law professor “that never was”, and please allow me to give you a short review lecture on the basic concepts of “democracy”.

The Basic Concepts

In the international political vocabulary, probably the most emotional implications are associated with the word “democracy”. To us lawyers it is apparent that the term is used in many different senses. It is virtually impossible to define it in a manner which would assure general agreement. But the definitions may possibly be grouped into two major ideas: to one school of thought, democracy simply means a particular form of government in which “the people” or “the many” exercise political control; to the other school, democracy is a philosophy of life in human society, motivating and guiding the members of that society in their political, economic, social and cultural relations.

The etymology being of Greek origin, “democracy connotes “rule by the multitude”. From the sum total of these basic concepts, the logical conclusion is that a truly democratic nation must constantly strive towards “the good life” for all the people, must aim at the maximum of individual liberty consistent with the general security, order, and welfare, must provide the widest possible opportunities for all, to the end that men may become as nearly perfect in their human personality, and must provide for the active participation of the largest number of citizens in the processes of government.

The predicates, the assumptions, and the postulates of the central idea of democracy, are that the people are capable of governing themselves as reasonable, intelligent, and civilized human beings in a regime of liberty and equality.

The Basic Assumptions

There are certain propositions which political scientists have spelled out as the core of the democratic goals of life.

The first of democracy’s most basic assumptions is that man is a rational being, capable of solving his problems and improving his lot by the application of reason. The essence of the democratic process is government by consent, resulting from free, temperate and enlightened discussion. Only reasonable men can participate in the kind of discussion from which emerges the truth they stand for. The decisions of democracy as distinguished from “mobocracy” are reasonable and responsible decisions made by right thinking and rational men.

A second closely connected assumption of the democratic theory is that man is a moral being, considerate of the rights of others, and able to balance the social good against his own personal interest. This postulate implies that man’s action must be based upon standards rising above the level of pure selfishness and of gross materialism.

The third proposition assumes human equality, which means political equality but not the actual equality of human beings with respect to physical and intellectual endowments. Democracy does not seek a dead-level system of equality wherein every man is to be equal in all respects to every other man. The emphasis is on equality in certain fields, equality before the law, equality in voting, equality in opportunity, and equality in dignity.

The Basic Consequences

The basic consequences that spring from all these postulates is that if there be human rationality, morality, and equality, then man has within himself the mechanisms of self-improvement not only individually but also socially. It follows that social change does not have to be violent. It can be painless. As man becomes more rational, he is better able to control and guide the technological and ideological factors of social change which would produce the society and government he ideally desires. The control and guidance of these factors are in accord with policies democratically formulated through free and rational discussion. The will of the majority embodies a considered and reasoned decision. By its reasonableness, the consent of all the citizens is won, and all will then cooperate in carrying out the decision.

In this perspective, democracy is not revolutionary but fundamentally evolutionary . Its philosophy abhors violence, and to advocate it is to confess that man is not rational. The true democrat believes that evolutionary gains are won by stages and by persuasion. Ancient and modern history has shown that the convulsive results of revolution are frequently negated by counterrevolution and reaction. Progress is lasting when it is peaceful rather than coercive.

A second conclusion is that the best way to decide major issues of public policy is to put forward such questions to the entire people or to as predominantly large a portion of them as possible. Democracy involves majority decision-making either by the voters themselves directly or by their elected representatives indirectly.

In the modern democratic state, instruments of self-government can be availed of which express the people’s will indirectly. Thus, legislators, executives and administrators can make decisions in the name of the voters to whom they are responsible for their public acts. The principle of self-government through majority decisions does not always require consultation of the electorate on every minor question. But in momentous issues which affect the destiny of a nation, modern democracies avail of the reasonable use of the referendum to establish basic fundamental questions of policy intended to guide not only the present but the future generations. Self-government means government by consent . Obviously consent cannot always be absolutely unanimous, but the more popular is the mandate then the more democratic is the society that results from that mandate. The major task of democratic leaders is to derive a formula whereby the essence of popular government is preserved by reserving for the citizen’s direct determination matters both vital and basic, and delegating to their representatives matters either too trivial or too complex.

The third extremely important consequence of democracy which concerns liberty is predicated upon the concept of the freedom of an individual or group from external restraint or restrictive conditions imposed by other individuals, groups, government, or society. But liberty in organized society is relative and not absolute. The individual in that organized society cannot be absolutely free to exactly as wishes at all times and in all circumstances. Such absolute liberty will produce anarchy which is the complete opposite of genuine freedom. Liberty implies restraint. In democracy, this means social self-restraint exercised whenever necessary for the security, safety and welfare of the community. It is liberty in accordance with the will of the majority and based upon personal and group responsibility.

A major problem of every democracy is the reconciliation of liberty with authority. The never-ending task of democracy is always to strike balances between liberty and authority, which balances are ever new and ever changing, depending upon the problems that confront us at every given time.

The ultimate purpose of democracy is the advancement of man, the vindication of human dignity. The State is not an end in itself but only a means towards the realization of the potentialities of man. Since man has mind, body and soul, individual fulfillment must be intellectual, material and spiritual. In pursuing its ends, democracy must always use democratic methods. In the pursuit of democratic ends, government must use democratic means. Methods, ends, and means are inseparable since the most basic concepts of democracy – liberty, equality and popular sovereignty – are means in themselves as well as ends.

We cannot save democracy by destroying it. There must be frequent re-examination of the fundamental articles of democratic faith. We cannot identify democracy only with institutions, we always identify it with concepts. Democratic institutions alone and by themselves do not guarantee democracy. Nations must develop democratic traditions based upon their own experiences in self-government and in the creation of their own governmental machineries. But development is a process of evolution. When slow outmoded procedures which may have been eminently satisfactory in the past are no longer adequate to answer the demands of the present generation, when they fall out of step with modern times, they must give way to effective and expeditious techniques without abandoning the essentials of the democratic processes.

The Tests and Measurements

On the basis of these fundamental concepts, what has the New Society accomplished in the realm of the theory and the reality of democracy as a form of government and as a philosophy of life?

Have we established a system of government wherein decisions are predicated upon reasonable discussion and popular consent?

Have we established an equitable balance between liberty and authority?

Have we established necessary and meaningful changes by peaceful evolution?

The record shows that to all these questions we emphatically answer in the affirmative.

Our people have shown themselves intellectually, physically and spiritually capable of self-government, capable of participating in free, temperate, and enlightened discussion. Decisions on vital and fundamental issues have been made directly by the entire people in three plebiscites for the adoption of constitutional amendments. The referendum has been extensively used as means of discovering public thought and sentiment on basic public issues. The effectiveness of the interaction between the Batasang Pambansa, the President and the Cabinet in the formulation and implementation of basic national policies has demonstrated the palpable reality of representative democracy in the Philippines. The local affairs of the people are decided by popular consent in the deliberative forums of the barangay councils, and the “sanggunians” of our towns, cities and provinces.

The responsiveness of government to the voice of the people is effectively maintained in the latest charter amendments with the means to have the Prime Minister and the Cabinet replaced, and the resolution of fundamental issues by the people through the dissolution of the Batasang Pambansa.

Freedom and equality have been preserved, recognized and vindicated not only as human rights but as social obligations . Liberty has flourished in this country, and was undimmned and undiminished even under Martial Law. Hence, whilst we welcome with profound gratitude the recent U.S. Congressional Resolution commending us for the lifting of Martial Law, we hasten to stress that the people never at any time lost the freedoms guaranteed by our constitution.

We did take steps to balance liberty with authority – and the equipoise was always relevant to the problems that confronted our people.

By the judicious use of the commander-in-chief provisions the 1935 as well as the 1973 Constitution, constitutional authoritarianism was conceived and developed as a valid and effective mode for a crisis government, consistent with the supremacy of civilian over military authority, in an atmosphere of peace rather than violence. Juridical concepts have been so developed in this Philippine experiment that our experience has shown the efficacy of administering and dispensing Justice by the concurrent action of military and civil courts to effectively overcome the threats to national security and public order.

Under the New Society, meaningful thrusts have been made in the democratization and humanization of justice. Mechanisms for free legal aid to the poor have been organized, systematized, and coordinated through the Citizens Legal Assistance Office of the Ministry of Justice, legal agencies of the Ministry of Agrarian Reform and the Ministry of Labor, and the various chapters of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines. The grassroots level of dispensing justice through the conciliation system in the barangay courts has considerably eased the dockets of our trial courts. The Probation System has kept out of penitentiaries some 8,000 convicted law violators who would have otherwise suffered the consequences of incarceration, and who have instead continued to live in our communities under the care and guidance of highly trained probation officers and social workers. In fine, all the members of the legal profession in the Philippines, acting in concert and in mutual cooperation, have helped establish in the Philippines a legal culture faithfully reflective of our democratic traditions and development. Acting in unison, the Filipino lawyers have set-up effective and working safeguards against extreme activism, the excesses of radical communism, and exaggerated liberalism. Filipino lawyers have helped realize the dream of a regime of political stability, which will now henceforth find healthy growth in the new parliamentary participatory democracy under a strong President as adopted by the latest amendments to the Philippines Constitution. Filipino lawyers have channeled the minds of our people into ideological orientations peculiar to Philippine custom, tradition, philosophy, theory, system and culture. Filipino lawyers have successfully created the atmosphere conducive to the rule of law in the forums of advocacy and adjudication. At the vanguard of all these innovations and developments have been the alumni of the FEU Institute of Law, many of whom occupy positions of eminence in practically all the high echelons of government. Tonight I pay tribute to these alumni upon whom I have depended and who have stood at my side during all these years of my incumbency as the nation’s highest official. Into our collective hands our people have entrusted their hopes and their dreams, their present and their future. And these same hands we now join in prayer that we shall never, never fail them.

*(Draft of the President’s Speech before the FEU Law Alumni Association)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.