Speech of the Honorable Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On Youth Day

I extend a warm greeting to the leaders and members of the Kabataang Barangay, the primary organization of youth under the New Republic. Today we celebrate Youth Day as a recognition of the inherent strength and intelligence of Filipino youth. This is only right.

Youth are citizens too. They are an important part of the Philippine nation. Like their elders, youth have creative abilities. Many of them share in the work towards the progress of production. Although their thinking is young, youth possess the feelings and aspirations of the entire nation. They are aware of the problems and needs facing the entire country. Youth will grasp the correct path that Philippine society must take to fully achieve freedom and progress. Because they will be the heirs of the country, everyone should understand the anxieties of youth regarding certain things happening in our environment. We know that in their hearts is a sincere desire to participate in building a great and prosperous nation. Although sometimes their criticism of some of the shortcomings of our society is bitter, we must always remember that these criticisms are made by youth for the good of all.

Let us not repeat the discord that once in our history divided the youth and their elders. It has been more than ten years since we last witnessed the sad consequences of this misunderstanding. Destructive elements merely exploited this discord to exacerbate social contradictions. Many of the youth became mere tools of these elements who wanted to create chaos and anarchy to destroy Philippine society. Although this problem was also solved due to the government's prompt response, we cannot allow the mistakes of the past to be repeated.

We are once again witnessing the widespread mobilization of youth. Youth are once again demonstrating that they constitute a force that cannot be ignored by society. They are raising issues that have long been overlooked by the entire country. And surely there are some who disagree with the views and opinions expressed by youth. It is also certain that destructive elements will try to exploit the situation again, even though some of the grievances expressed by youth are justified. But I believe that these destructive elements will not succeed; that today's youth have enough ability to discern between those who truly love the country and those who only want to destroy our republic. My faith in this rests with you, with the leaders and members of the Kabataang Barangay.

In the past, youth were easily deceived because they had no organization and support like the Kabataang Barangay. They were misled into believing an ideology contrary to the traditions and aspirations of the Filipino nation. They were easily convinced by destructive elements, who were like vultures waiting for the unity of our society to collapse. These were the reasons why the establishment of the Kabataang Barangay was one of the main initiatives of the reform movement, standing as a shield for Filipino youth against destructive and disruptive attempts. I firmly believe that at present, youth, through the Kabataang Barangay, have enough ability to face and oppose any attempt against the stability of the new republic. As long as you possess patriotic and humanitarian feelings, no disruptive force can succeed. Always remember that the Kabataang Barangay is like a guard helping to ensure that our country and society remain safe.

Eight years have passed since we established the Kabataang Barangay. Since then, we have witnessed the growth and expansion of this organization as an important partner of the government. We have implemented various programs that have provided opportunities for thousands of youth to become productive citizens. Among these programs is the Batarisan In-Plant Training Program, which has given young people the opportunity to improve their livelihoods. We have witnessed the effectiveness of this program not only in improving the livelihoods of youth, but also in the development of industry. Because of this, the government is taking steps to further expand the scope of Batarisan. Before you all and by the authority vested in me by the constitution, I sign Executive Order No. _____ which provides additional incentives to companies and youth participating in the KB-NMYC Batarisan In-Plant Training Program.

We have already mentioned that youth are the heirs of the country. They will fulfill the aspirations and dreams of the country in the future. But it is important that even now, the leadership skills of youth are honed and developed. Since the establishment of the Kabataang Barangay, the involvement of youth in the political life of the country has become more meaningful. Youth representatives now serve even in the highest councils of government. The voice of youth is heard in every meeting, from the barangay and municipal governments to the national government. We should rightly maintain this right of youth.

In fulfillment and advancement of this principle, I hereby declare the appointment of the following as representatives of the Kabataang Barangay to their respective municipal and provincial councils:

From Region I Municipal Council Benguet La Trinidad – Estrellito Magliba Pangasinan San Fabian — Elizabeth Gosingan

From Region II Municipal Council Cagayan Baggao — Florencio Cabrido Piat — Nemecio Conag Quirino Aglipay – Dante Mariano

From Region III Provincial Council Bataan — Dominador Carunungan City Council Pampanga Angeles City — Don Rosve Yutuc Municipal Council Bulacan Malolos — Apolinario Nazario San Rafael – reynaldo s. Reyes Pampanga Candaba — Editha Paguinto Guagua — Amalia c. Zita Macabebe — Rolando c. Clarin Mexico — Merlinad S. Siron Minalin — Francisco G. Flores Porac — Gener L. Duya Zambales San Felipe — Daniel Florita

From Region IV Municipal Council Cavite Gen. Mariano alvarez — Ma. Antonieta Oracion Mendez — Perfecto Maraan Marinduque Mogpog — Joseph Montejo Quezon Candelaria — Carlos Reyes Mulanay — Antonio Morales Pitogo –Roda Gliane Rizal Antipolo — Joselito Samson Romblon Ferrol – Larry Suarez Calatrava — Erlinda Magayon

From Region V Municipal Council Camarines Sur Magarao — Rico Alvia Sorsogon Castilla — Carlos Mendina

From Region VI Municipal Council Iloilo Miag-Ao — Jose Noel Torrecampo Passi — Rey Deatras

From Region VII Municipal Council Bohol Duero — Gliceria Abueva Batuan — Clarito Nabas Cebu Boljoon — Saturnino Nicanor, Jr. Oslob — Judy Abines Negros Oriental Valle Hermoso — Merredith V. Fernandez Bacong — Rogaciano Vera Cruz Siquijor Enrique Villanueva — Chona L. Suminguit

From Region X Provincial Council of Agusan del Norte — Rechilda Braza City Council of Cagayan de Oro City — Crisanto Abellanosa, Jr. Surigao City — Alexander Ramirez Municipal Council of Bukidnon Lantapan — Rector A. Canda Pangantucan — Ligaya M. Salavedra Misamis Oriental Balingasag — Elisa A. Juevesano Surigao del Norte San Benito — Vences Noble

From Region XII Municipal Council of North Cotabato Antipas — Jessie L. Cadungon

I hope that those mentioned will be zealous representatives of the youth in their respective areas. May they all always remember the responsibility that comes with the honor bestowed upon them today.

Through their example, and through the example of other youth who have already been given positions, the intelligence and strength of the youth are proven. You embody the form and shape of the future of our country. Expect that the government will always extend any help and guidance that you may need.

However, your future is still in your hands.

Long live the Barangay Youth!

Long live the New Republic!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos. [Manila] : Presidential Library.