Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines On the 19th General Conference of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population

[Delivered on December 10, 1981]

Population study I am told, is a field that draws together scholars from many disciplines. I trust that any branch of learning broad enough to bear the expertise of demographers, medical doctors, biologists, sociologists, economists, and theologians is also strong enough to accept the non-expert views of politicians and policymakers.

I understand that researchers and academicians have a common complaint: that their work is not sufficiently appreciated by those who set policy or make decisions. They are not the only complainants on Population Policy, the Clergy have been equally critical and complaining.

I can well appreciate this complaint; and I must admit that it has some historical basis. All too often, rulers have been content to govern by their instincts, by improvization: by piecemeal adjustments to competing interest-groups. But I would hasten to add that the perceptions and practices of political leaders are gradually changing. This is true particularly of third world countries: impatient for development and yet made aware, from bitter experience, how difficult development is to attain.

In the Philippines, in fact, these changes may have been taking place a bit too rapidly for the comfort of some of us.

People often point out that a technocracy is emerging in the highest levels of the Philippine government. I regard this as a compliment rather than a criticism. Policy-making in our government now benefits considerably from the expertise of our economists, scientists, engineers, and other professional managers and technicians.

One example that illustrates the interaction between .our technical experts and policymakers is the Philippine Population Program. It was precisely from listening to what our demographers, economists and scientists have to say that our policymakers were able to grasp early on the implications of unplanned population growth, and to resolve to take steps to cope with it. But at the same time, we had to consider the religious beliefs and traditions of a predominantly Christian or Catholic country.

As a result, the Philippines was one of the first countries to sign the United Nations Declaration on Population in 1967.

A few years after that, and after intensive studies by our experts in demography and related fields, we launched a program that we hoped would transform the spirit of that declaration into meaningful reality for our people. This took place at the start of the 1970s, when population-related problems were putting undue strain on the foundations, if not the entire structure, of Philippine Society.

Looking back, I feel completely justified in making that decision. Had we wavered then—and we might have easily done so since population moderation then worked against the grain of dominant tradition—whatever actions we did later would have been more difficult and more expensive.

This is not to say that our efforts at slowing down population growth alone pulled us through those difficult years.

What I am saying, rather, is that our population program has been a valuable ingredient in the totality of our endeavors to overcome our problems and bring the fruits of development to the masses of Filipinos.

This concept, this recognition of the affinity between population and development, in essence guides our population programs in most third world countries.

Like other third-world countries, we believe that keeping our population growth rate at manageable levels is not an end in itself, but merely a means to bring about a better life for all our people.

After a decade of conscientious and dedicated work by our population cadres, we feel we have made some headway. We have been able to bring down our population growth from 3.01 percent in 1970 to 2.4 percent in 1980. We hope to reduce this further to 2.0 percent by the middle of this decade and to 1.6 percent by the year 2000.

At this stage of the Philippine Population Program, we need to consolidate our gains, and to speed up the process we have started off.

In our struggle for development, the population problem will continue to have a high priority; and the population program will continue to be one of our major means for dealing with it. This I spelled out in my report to the nation, when I received a new mandate from my countrymen six months ago.

This strategy gives substance and form to the spirit of our new constitution, which the Filipino people ratified in 1973. I am referring in particular to a provision of this basic law, which says: “it shall be the responsibility of the state to achieve and maintain population levels most conducive to the national welfare.”

Let me say that this provision was arrived after a deliberate study and with full knowledge of its implications.

I am sure you will find evidence enough of our determination to carry out this mandate—a determination tempered by reason, flexibility, and consciousness of our religion and traditions which enables us to adjust and to respond quickly to emerging situations.

To illustrate: our population program has transformed itself from an almost passive movement to a program that actively reaches out to the widest segments of our population.

Instead of waiting for people to come to their clinics or information centers our population workers have fanned out to the countryside, where more than seven out of every ten Filipinos still live.

We take special pride in our volunteer workers now living and working in the villages under the National Population and Family Planning Outreach Project. By the latest count, 46,000 such workers deliver information and services practically to the doorsteps of millions of rural Filipinos.

Their work gets active financial and administrative support from our local governments, as well as from other public and private agencies.

While our population program actively reaches out to our people, we have kept the ground rules we set for ourselves at the start of our program.

Now, as then, we adhere strictly to a noncoercive approach, in drawing people to the movement for responsible parenthood.

While we deliver information and services on what our policymakers consider as acceptable methods of contraception, we continue to respect and safeguard the right of every human couple to determine the size of its family and to choose for itself the method that conforms to its moral conviction and religious belief.

We have adopted the Policy of Choice by conscience.

We also remain firmly against abortion, despite what seems to be a growing trend in its favor in some other parts of the world.

And we intend to keep to these basic policies—because we believe they best suit the beliefs, values and temperament the religion—the entire culture—of our people.

Naturally, we have not confined ourselves to checking population growth. Our long-term goal concerns not so much the number as the quality of our population. We subscribe to that broader population policy which occupies itself also with individual well-being, family and community welfare, and the judicious use of natural resources for the benefit of all citizens.

Thus, we try to keep at least abreast of such emerging population issues as the effects of industrialization and rapid urbanization; the quality of health services; nutrition levels; education; employment; and migration.

I understand that these are precisely the issues this eminent gathering will discuss. To us, some of these issues are life-and-death questions.

In our country, regional migration, for one, has led not merely to a general loss of vitality in our rural areas: it has, in portions of Mindanao, provoked a violent rebellion from the threatened host-communities.

Their rapid growth is changing unavoidably the social environment of metropolitan manila and the other cities; despite our best efforts, not all of the changes enforced on us by headlong urbanization are beneficial.

And we are just beginning to realize how complex are the problems of nutrition. While we have recently attained a measure of self-sufficiency in rice and other basic foods, we are still some way from eradicating malnutrition and undernourishment among Filipinos. For, of course, these problems are as much linked to purchasing power, employment and social-welfare systems as they are to agricultural modernization.

As part of our development strategy, we are beginning to disperse our industries from the congested metropolitan areas to the less-developed and less-populous portions of our country. We have identified strategic “growth centers” for development in the various regions.

Our aim here is twofold. First, to distribute our population more evenly to ease the pressures building up in our crowded cities. Second, to hasten the development of the poorer regions by encouraging people to return to the countryside, to give them better chances to earn a livelihood, and consequently, to raise their standards of living.

In sum, therefore, our ultimate objectives are national development and family welfare. And we believe we should plan, work towards, and maintain population levels that will best enable us to attain these ultimate objectives.

Above all, we realize we have to exert even greater effort to control population growth in the short-and-medium terms, before we can attain our ideal population profile.

My friends, it is in this context that I welcome you to the Philippines and to this conference. I promise that we in the Philippine government, at least, will listen to your deliberations with great interest, and take your ideas and insights to heart. For the welfare of our population is too serious a business for us to leave it to the politicians alone or for that matter the scientists alone.

Thank you very much.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.