Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Testimonial Parade and review of the Armed Forces of the Philippines

[Delivered in Camp Aguinaldo, September 10, 1968]

LOYALTY TO PROGRESS

I THANK you for this reiteration of loyalty to the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.

In the past years, the armed forces have been more deeply involved than ever before in the crucial effort to rebuild and strengthen the nation. In tasks both of a military and a non-military nature, Filipino soldiers have demonstrated their sincerity and capacity to help me create the conditions for greater national progress.

Commitment to Welfare

The Armed Forces, in short, have by many productive courageous and innovating deeds translated into action their commitment to the country’s welfare. This in a larger sense is the commitment you are expressing anew today. I take it, therefore, that the occasion which brings us together here today is more than a mere ritual, but rather a compact with progress, expressive of your desire and readiness to lend your best effort to the task of transforming this country into a prosperous and a more secure nation.

Let there be no doubt that the loyalty you express here today is loyalty to the cause of national advancement, and that the pledge symbolized by today’s celebration is a pledge to support and advance that cause.

Our Common Cause

This is the cause to which I have directed my energies as President and Commander-in-Chief, the cause for which I have planned and implemented many projects and endeavors, including those in which you are actively engaged.

The large vision that planning for progress calls for must summon all possible hands, with their various skills and abilities, to join the national leadership in translating hope to reality. The Armed Forces have a special competence to accelerate this process of national growth. As Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, I am determined to utilize that special competence as much as possible.

Understanding of AFP Role

This determination, as you are well aware, is sometimes misunderstood or, worse, misrepresented. But I am confident that the majority of the Filipino people fully comprehend that the participation of the Armed Forces in many government undertakings is necessary to hasten the fulfillment of their hopes for greater abundance and security.

Their experience in the past two and a half years is their own best counsel against rash conclusions about the role of the Armed Forces. In that time, the beneficial effects of the program to mobilize the armed forces for progress have become an indissoluble part of the changing economic and social conditions.

Proof of AFP Competence

The stamp of armed forces competence is found today on the long stretches of new highways and roads that are to be seen everywhere in the country. In numerous towns and villages where many of our countrymen live, the medical units of the civic action teams of the armed forces bring not only health facilities but hope and faith as well. The sustained and dedicated work of these civic teams has indeed created in the people of many long neglected areas their first sense of government, their first real knowledge that their life of ignorance and misery can possibly change for the better.

Government As Agent of Change

The participation of the Armed Forces in health, education, public works and community development is one of our best guarantees that progress in this country will not remain a theory and a blueprint, as it has for many generations until 1965. Government under the present administration is the accepted agent of the great mass of our people for revolutionary change, for stamping out social injustice, for demolishing the old barriers which have circumscribed the lives of the poor.

Champion of the Discontented

It is my purpose to compel this historic reversal of roles, in which the government is the foe of the status quo, the activist for social change, the champion of the discontented. If this means harnessing the resources and the manpower of the Armed Forces to construct the framework of progress, to build highways and feeder roads and bridges, cultivate new farms, find and manage new sources of food for our growing millions, besides standing guard to repel foreign aggression—if all these must be done, I will not hesitate to order the Armed Forces to man more and more outposts in the great and relentless war I have begun against economic stagnation and massive poverty.

No Misuse of Armed Forces

I have been accused of preparing the Armed Forces to take the role in the still distant elections. If this means commanding the armed forces to continue their constructive work for economic growth and social action, so that with their help we can improve the lives of the people, then it is perfectly true that the armed forces have taken an active role in government work. I do not propose to change this fact for any reason.

If, however, the accusation means that the armed forces shall be utilized for partisan reasons, to influence the results of the elections, you yourselves can provide the answer. A charge like this, I think, goes right into the heart of an important question, the integrity and the professional pride of every officer and soldier. Your record in peace and in war, is the most eloquent argument against the fear that the Armed Forces may be misused.

Faith In Armed Forces

In response to your commitment to good government. I wish to express my faith in the ability of the Armed Forces to fulfill the increasing missions for the welfare and security of the country, as well as my confidence in the high purpose and the integrity of the officers and men in the armed forces.

Good day and thank you.

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Marcos, F. E. (1968). Speech at the Testimonial Parade and review of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Camp Aguinaldo, September 10, 1968. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 64 (39) , 9776-D-9776-F.