Speech of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the National Artist Awards Ceremonies

[Delivered at the CCP Main Theater, June 12, 1982]

As we honor today National Artists Carlos P. Romulo and Gerry de Leon, it is appropriate for us to place in proper perspective the relationship between the state and the arts. This is a tenuous relationship, as history would attest, but it is one that cannot be belittled or undermined. It produced varied schools of thought among the ancient Greeks and continues to provide a profound forum of debate among contemporary scholars. For the artist has always been a dynamic factor in social and cultural development, and art is always an essential vehicle of truth.

In the realm of human experience, the artist has to confront truth in various critical situations. Consequently, depending on his interpretation of urgent realities, he becomes either an advocate of change or an adversary of it. But he can never be uncommitted, nor irresponsible. In times like ours, where plans and options for governance shift with global exigencies, he must always guard against obstacles to national growth. While it might be true that in a free society art is not a weapon, circumstances may arise wherein that very freedom can be insured only if art assumes a resolute vigilance. This is necessitated not only by the common will. To survive but also by the common need for a meaningful life. The artist, like the statesman, must be willing to perish for the realization of the principles to which he dedicates his being.

The true artist, then, establishes his credibility through his works and his character. For art is not a chimera; it is the synthesis of the artist’s struggle to consolidate and permanize his heritage. Despite conditions of cruelty and suppressions, the artist concretizes his people’s aspirations; despite the shadow of war and persecution, the artist exemplifies courage under duress to serve as his nation’s voice and conscience.

And yet, it is lamentable that. The artist is very often ignored in his own country. It seems that in our push for industrial and technological advancement, we take for granted his vital contribution to the shaping of our national consciousness. Indeed, he is rarely consulted in the formulation of our programs for nation-building, as though he were a hindrance to progress, as though he would subvert our patrimony. The irony is that, as we have discovered, these programs for nation-building will only be half successful if the artist’s point of view is not taken into consideration. This is because more than anything, nation-building is a humanistic act. It concerns the very soul of society. And who has more sensitivity, more dedication, more ability, to know this soul than the artist?

This is not to say. That art should be given the forefront in governmental affairs, but it should certainly be accorded a significant role in our decision-making process. Art and statecraft, after all, are inextricably linked, for both are involved in the perfection of human being. The government intends to equip man with the necessary expertise for social excellence; art intends to make man capable of turning that excellence into a spiritual grace. The experience of beauty, vie must remember, is not the exclusive prerogative of any one segment of society, but the universal fountainhead of human progress. We in the government have long recognized this. As early as the first days of our martial law dispensation, we instituted the redirection of Philippine Art to harmonize with our objective of humanizing Philippine life. A Cultural Renaissance Program was begun, aimed at revitalizing our artistic disciplines and endowing proper recognition and impetus to the artists. Indeed, this very award that we are giving General Romulo and Director de Leon today is a manifestation of this renaissance. Furthermore, it is our intention to make our cultural program all-pervasive, all-inclusive, so that it will reach and benefit all our deserving artists, even those in the remote areas of our country.

With the National Artist Award, we have concretized the government’s concern for the plight of Philippine Art. It is, of course, just a small step, but it is, I believe, a step in the right direction. With added vigor and enlightened philosophy of humanism, with the concerted effort of both the government and the artists, the full fruition of our cultural program will be attained. I do not see how we could fail.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.