Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the distribution of land titles to residents of Barangay Maimpis

I am happy to be with the people of Barangay Maimpis, San Fernando, Pampanga. On this occasion, we once again celebrate the emancipation of the people from slavery to the land. You, the people of Maimpis, form a magnificent example of the fruits of the government and the people's efforts. The emancipation of people like you is the main principle of our New Republic. Long live the people of Maimpis! Long live the New Republic.

The New Republic is ready to help the poor. Today, let us refresh our minds with the efforts of our poor brothers and sisters. The success achieved by Barangay Maimpis is an example of what kind of government and citizens are needed to succeed in the principle. On this occasion, we witness the emancipation from poverty of the common people. We all worked wholeheartedly to achieve this lofty goal. The example of Barangay Maimpis is a sign of our success against the poverty that has long plagued the small people.

Poverty is not a natural occurrence. It is a condition not decreed by divine power. Poverty can be cured. Poverty in any society is an illness that can be cured. Poverty is not a condition imposed by any place; rather, it is a social ailment, where there is poverty, there is also a society in need of change. Breaking the chains of poverty that bind the small people is the main goal of our government; because these people, after all, are the reason why our government was established.

The government prioritizes the problem of the poor. We have already done many programs to fulfill the dreams of our poor countrymen. In this effort, the first thing we focused on was food, clothing and shelter. We have allocated a much larger amount to the construction of affordable housing for the common people.

The government's housing program, although in various ways, responds to the essential needs of the poor. Land that they can call their own; a home that shelters them and their loved ones; a barangay and an environment with sufficient comfort in life; and a livelihood that is an important component of a person to live with dignity and rise out of poverty. These are what can be seen in Barangay Maimpis, a former estate where the residents are poor. Maimpis is our legacy from the past when our ancestors were chained to poverty and bound to the land they tilled. But now? We are writing a new chapter in history that will end the sad chapter of the past. Today, our farmers are not only owners of the land they till, they are also owners of the land where their homes stand. Today, the distribution of land titles to the people of Maimpis is proof of the New Republic's continued effort to restore the native dignity of every Filipino.

For many years, our national leaders have promised land to the landless. Every administration and every president has promised land to the landless. But these dreams remained dreams, unrealized and frustrated. But when the New Society and the New Republic were established, the land reform program was vigorously and genuinely implemented, surpassing all that had been done by previous administrations. The American Government attempted to distribute the former mitra lands; through laws enacted in 1954 and 1955 distributing land to former HMBs, guerrillas, and poor residents of slum areas, as well as the so-called land reform program of 1963, all of which failed due to lack of support from national leaders who were indebted to the owners of large estates. In the face of these obstacles, land reform in 1972 remained steadfast because it was a symbol of an unprecedented desire for radical change in our society; and above all, millions of farmers had the opportunity to taste the fruits of social justice and prosperity that had been denied to them for many centuries. The most important and invaluable success of the 1972 land reform is the fact that millions of our farmers who were formerly only tenants are now owners of the land they till.

There is no doubt that in almost ten years, the achievements of our land reform have been greater than we expected. But our work that we started is not yet finished; we must continue to act so that our people can taste and achieve their long-unsiyami dreams. Because of this, land reform must be considered a program that does not end as long as we have not fully done everything we want to do. We have solved the slavery of our people to the land they till for many years in less than ten years. Our land problem is complex and not easy to solve and will not be solved by a leader who does not have a far-reaching vision.

Therefore, on January 9, our government launched a more comprehensive land reform program to grant ownership of the land where their houses stand to those residing in the former haciendas. Our objective in this program is to address the problem of those who have long resided in the haciendas. This will help transform the former haciendas into havens of prosperity and good communities instead of nests of poverty. Once again, the problem here is co-existence and land ownership, which is the root of the centuries-old problems of Philippine society.

From now on, we will call this program the National Bliss Program for Communities in the haciendas. The letters of instruction launching this program will have important foundational policies.

First, it will be the policy of the government to protect the right to the land where the houses of those who have genuinely resided in the haciendas for many years stand.

Second, the purpose of this policy is to resolve the problem and grant land to those residing in the haciendas who have long built houses in the aforementioned areas.

Third, owners of large haciendas will be prohibited from evicting those residing on their lands without the permission of the National Housing Authority.

Fourth, the NHA will create this program in coordination with Local Governments. The implementation of the National Bliss Program for large haciendas will be funded through a program based on annual policies.

Fifth, the necessary funds annually for this program will be determined by the NHA and included in the national budget. In addition, the NHA will be authorized to issue housing bonds under Decree 757, which will be its source of funds.

Sixth, local governments, with the help of the NHA, will provide assistance to these farmers and citizens in accordance with the Slum Improvement and Resettlement Program guidelines as outlined in LOI 555, 557 and 686.

Seventh, the NHA will assist and provide the necessary funds to local governments as outlined in this program.

And eighth, the NHA will select the estate or portion of the estate included in this program. This land will be divided and awarded to eligible families who will make monthly payments.

The national Bliss housing program for home lots is just one of our efforts to address our deeply rooted land problem through specific measures. What we want to solve is nothing less than the centuries-old root of dissatisfaction and unrest in our country. What we will do is a solution that will give farmers the opportunity to one day truly own the land they build their homes on without infringing on the rights and welfare of others. Moreover, this program will further invigorate our countrymen to fully trust the changes they can make with their own efforts and perseverance. It will also further strengthen the Filipino's faith in himself, in his ability to achieve dreams that once seemed unattainable.

Like other housing programs, the Bliss communities in the estates are also involved in our livelihood and development movement. We will continue the policy that it is not enough to simply provide people with a roof over their heads to say that they are in a home. These housing programs are about a thriving area where people have a livelihood and rely on their own intelligence and skills because every citizen has their own opportunity to earn a living and everyone is a useful part and component of the area they live in.

Our program of change is not only focused on the goal of solving centuries-old rooted problems; its goal is to instill in the heart and mind of every citizen his civic duties as part of society and the area he lives in. Only freely created entities with a sense of responsibility to care for and strengthen the framework of the stability we are building can accomplish this. Only freely created entities can truly carry out the struggle we have launched and are currently undertaking.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1982). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.