Toast of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Dinner in honor of Prime Minister Pham Van Dong

[Delivered in Malacañang, September 17, 1978]

A Mission of Peace and Cooperation

MRS. MARCOS AND I are honored and happy to be able to tender this dinner in honor of one of the legendary figures of Asia, a figure that symbolizes nationalism first, national will and determination towards the attainment of independence and self-reliance. For directly west of the Philippines lies the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, now united under the leadership of our guest, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong.

Mr. Prime Minister, allow me to extend to you formally tonight the greetings of the entire Filipino people and their government, the Republic of the Philippines.

These fraternal greetings and sentiments I express are deep-seated sentiments and emotions of the Filipino people, who realize that there are affinities in our histories and in our traditions that suggest that the Vietnamese and the Filipino might have sprung from one racial stock.

It is said by observers that it certainly would be difficult for anyone to distinguish a Filipino from a Vietnamese in a crowd. We are therefore proud to have the leader of the great Vietnamese people with us tonight. For the visit of Prime Minister Pham Van Dong is a monument towards the attainment of peace and cooperation in Asia.

As I welcome Prime Minister Pham Van Dong for and on behalf of the people of the Republic of the Philippines, I realize the historic and special meaning of his visit to the countries of Southeast Asia. For he comes on a mission of peace and cooperation. We therefore welcome the glad tidings that he bears for the entire region — we in the Philippines especially, in view of the closeness of our country to Vietnam.

At the same time, we realize only too well that the past divisions of countries and nations in the world by the cold war, in which small, developing and poor countries like the Philippines and Vietnam were involved, had succeeded in setting up the walls that separated our nations and our countries. Now Prime Minister Pham Van Dong comes as the proverbial messenger to break down the walls of fear, of distrust, of suspicion that have existed for many decades between our peoples. For this, allow me to congratulate the initiative taken by Prime Minister Pham Van Dong.

One cannot but realize that without the initiative taken by Prime Minister Pham Van Dong in visiting the Southeast Asian countries, the same atmosphere that prevailed in the past would immediately have involved the entire region in the difficulty in which we have discovered ourselves many years ago. This is not to say, of course, that we are not met with still horrendous obstacles towards the attainment of peace and cooperation in our part of the world, or, for that matter throughout the world. But so long as we have men of goodwill like Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, there is hope for mankind.

I therefore know that as we welcome you here, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, I express sentiments not only for our people but for all of mankind that we may get together in peace and cooperation. On the part of the people of the Republic of the Philippines, who themselves have a revolutionary tradition, and on the part of all men, who realize that the ultimate aim of small and developing countries for some dignity and some kind of control over their destinies is not only legitimate but necessary for world peace, the example set by Vietnam, indeed, inspires us towards further achievements and victories in this field.

Allow me therefore, Mr. Prime Minister, to say that you come to a country which having sought in 1896 to establish the first, if abortive, Republic in this part of the world, understands the revolutionary traditions which your leadership symbolizes. We welcome you therefore as friend and brother, and I hope that you will consider the Filipino people as your friend and brother.

During our conversations, we have pledged to each other continuing friendship and endless cooperation.

I therefore request all of you to rise and join me in a toast to the continued health and success of the leader of the people of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, and to the continuing and strengthening friendship between the people of Vietnam and the people of the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].