Toast of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Dinner in honor of Ambassador Stephen Bosworth

Mr. Ambassador, Your Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps, Ladies and Gentlemen:

It is our privilege to honor tonight the representative of a country and a people with whom our people and Government have long enjoyed ties of friendship and cooperation, and who in dramatic and exciting ways have figured prominently in the history of our nation.

To welcome you therefore among us tonight, Mr. Ambassador, is not just to express to you our goodwill and very best wishes, which assuredly we now extend. It is also in a significant way to renew much that is memorable in a very old relationship between our two countries and our peoples. And it is to call to mind the wonderful work of so many of your predecessors in strengthening these ties.

It was once observed by one of your foreign secretaries, Mr. Dean Rusk, that in the business of diplomacy, every diplomat has a duty to represent earnestly and vigorously and actively the interests of his own country. But he went on to say that there is an even higher purpose in diplomacy, and that is to constantly search out the common interest, the small steps as well as the large, upon which friendship and cooperation are built.

Of the service of diplomacy in the relations between our two countries, nothing perhaps is more remarkable and warming than the evidences of mutuality and shared interests that have been built through the years. Indeed, there have been times when our relationship has been described in terms that are embarrassingly purple, as “special,” “unique” or “unusual.” But however it is described, it has always meant for both our peoples a bond of friendship that has remained unbroken for over the length of this century.

And it is not an insignificant achievement that we have molded this kind of relationship, considering that it began in less than propitious circumstances, with the hopes of one side for national independence dashed by the other.

During these years, of course, we have had our differences — and these surely because we are two sovereign nations, in vastly different circumstances, confronting different challenges in their part of the world. But these differences have never led us to lose sight of the essential understanding and affection in our relationship; certainly we have been more than able to always seek out the venues for conciliation and resolution whenever they arise.

They arise but rarely, but they do arise sometimes, the way brothers and friends may occasionally differ.

We get an idea of this for instance in the way we inadvertently disappointed our American friends by our decision only recently to make Philippine-American Friendship Day — the fourth of July — a working holiday. That decision when taken was mainly intended to respond to economic realities in our country today, and specifically to the plea of many of our business enterprises for relief from holiday wages and stoppages of work. It will be noted we hope by our American friends that this in no way diminished the spirit of celebration with which we have traditionally observed Philippine-American Friendship Day. Even so, the decision did disappoint our friends in America and we can only consider ourselves fortunate indeed that we have adequate open lines of communications between us, including occasions like this, in which this kind of thing can be publicly acknowledged and explained.

That is on the lighter side of the occasional differences we have had to face. At a more substantive level we have had to face in recent years various problems in the security, the political and the economic spheres. And this because the last decade or so have been a major time of adjustment in our policies at home and abroad, for both America and the Philippines.

To speak firstly of security concerns, we have lived through a time of serious reexamination of our security relationship in the aftermath of the Vietnam War. We in Asia feared for a time the mood of withdrawal that seemed to sweep America at the close of that war; and we were uncertain especially about how America would now view her interests in our part of the world. Predictably enough, the status of our Military Agreements, including the Bases Agreement, came under review.

Yet it will be seen that if anything our relationship has emerged stronger from the questions we have posed and the new understandings we have forged. We have made important adjustments in our Bases Agreement, that have confirmed Philippine sovereignty over the bases without in any way diminishing the capability of these bases to help secure the peace and stability of Asia. The review and reexamination have served to clarify at least in American eyes the extent of our commitment to helping maintain a balance of power in Asia and to sustaining the capability of free nations to defend the peace.

At the same time, we took the occasion to assert in no uncertain terms our commitment to support and carry our own weight in all matters relating to the internal security of our country. This has been our policy since I became President. And this will remain our policy. And the day will never come I hope when we will, like others, invite others to fight on our own soil.

If there has been one misgiving in this area, it has been our fear that America sometimes does not fully realize or understand the problems of communist insurgency and subversion which we are facing in our part of the world and how these affect the approaches to democratic government. We can understand well enough when arms due from our Mutual Defence Agreement and our Military Assistance Pact cannot be delivered when asked for, for the United States have also its own problems to face. But it is disturbing to note when the United States does not fully comprehend the nature of the challenges we face, and permits such misunderstanding of our situation to color and influence its policies towards us.

This was much in evidence for awhile, particularly during the period of Martial Law in the Philippines and during the previous American administration. But as ever, we succeeded in resolving these differences, and with the present administration of President Reagan, we have placed our relationship on a new footing and plane of understanding.

We have a saying in our country that the best mirror is an old friend, and that we know who are our friends when we need support and understanding most.

In the recent difficulties that our country has had to face, in the crisis of international confidence that for awhile distorted perceptions of our country abroad, we have known the integrity and constancy of America’s friendship for the Philippines. In bidding farewell to your predecessor, Mr. Ambassador, we took occasion to publicly acknowledge the help of the American Government during this period of difficulty. We now renew to you our appreciation and thanks as we see today that assistance bearing fruit in terms of the greater stability and strength of our country and our people to cope with economic problems. It is already evident today that American Bridge Financing — comprising a $105 million loan from the U.S. Export-Import Bank, a $200-million loan from the Commercial Credit Corporation, and a $50 million advance from the Economic Support Fund — helped us through the period of the greatest stress.

We are not fully past the hump of crisis, but I believe the Good Ambassador, during the brief period that he has been among us, will already have seen the fortitude, the resourcefulness and the resolve with which our people are facing up to the challenge and perhaps too he will share in time our confidence that this hump will be surely passed, and that the Philippines will again be a major hub of development and modernization in our part of the world.

America need never fear, Mr. Ambassador, that in the challenges and trials of a new time, the Philippines will abandon or forsake what has been fundamental and dynamic in our trans-Pacific relations. We have never seen our relationship as simply a question of convenient arrangements, embraced and honored solely because of the advantages they confer.

We recognize as much as you do the commonality of interests we share — that higher kinship between nations which President Eisenhower once spoke of and which refer to shared values and ideals. It cannot be otherwise for the ideas we entertain of freedom and government, of rights and duties, of social institutions and citizenship, have their taproots not alone in our traditions but in American soil as well.

Neither should it ever be in doubt that in the Philippines, goodwill for the United States of America is as strong as ever. It is not forgotten here in our country that in the aftermath of the last World War, it was the United States that led the way in dismantling the structures of colonialism and imperialism in the world. And that the Philippines, with the implementation of the Tydings-Mcduffie Law, was one of the first to regain its independence while other powers tried to hold on to or regain their colonial territories, thereby setting off new bloody wars of independence, the United States spoke for the self-determination of peoples in doing justice to the Philippine cause.

It is not forgotten either that at the end of the last war, the United States stood alone in possession of the atomic bomb. Yet this circumstance did not lead it to extend its territory. Indeed it became the leading spur for the reconstruction of a devastated world, of defeated foes as well as allies.

The memory of these things, more than arms, is the fount of American influence in the world. It is of these that the fabric of American relations with the Philippines and the Third World is woven.

This is what we speak of finally when we say that we are partners and we are friends.

Ladies and Gentlemen, may I ask you therefore to join me in a toast.

(The President offers the toast)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.