Toast of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the Dinner in honor of the American Congressional Delegation

[Delivered on July 17, 1984]

Once again, we have the happy privilege tonight of welcoming a delegation of the American Congress to our country, to our capital city, and to this Palace of our people.

So much in the history of relations between our two countries is usually identified with our contact and exchange with American Presidents and their administrations, yet it has always been a fact since the beginning of our relations that the interest and concern of the American Congress has done as much to shape that relationship into what it is today.

And it should come as no surprise to anyone that there are names in the annals of the American Congress that in our country are remembered today with as much respect and affection as they are by their American brothers.

If we turn our attention for a moment to the early decades of our relations, we might mention for instance the names of two Americans — Francis Burton Harrison and William Atkinson Jones — both of whom served for a time in the U.S. Congress and dramatically touched in their own way the course of Philippine-American relations.

Of Francis Burton Harrison, we recall his years as Governor-General of the Philippines from 1913-1921 and his painstaking work to Filipinize the colonial administration and to press for the early achievement of Philippine independence.

At another remove there was William Atkinson Jones, who at the same time that Harrison was Governor General, was pressing in the halls of the U.S. Congress a bill that would ensure for Filipinos what he called “the incomparable blessings of liberty and freedom.” His was a vision much ahead of his colleagues in the Congress, and in the end Jones had to content himself with a qualified independence bill, the Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 which provided for autonomous government by the Filipino people and assured future independence from the United States. Qualified as it was, the Act opened a new stage for self-government in the country and fittingly enough the law came to be known as the Jones Law in the Philippines.

We might add by way of footnote that it is not known whether Congressman Jones ever got to visit the country and the people he did so much to encourage and help. But of Governor Harrison, it is known and remembered that his ties with the Philippines continued long after his term as Governor-General and that in death he asked to be brought back and buried on Philippine soil.

Harrison and Jones are compelling examples of friendship between our two peoples and Governments, but they are by no means unique in the history of our relations. Certainly, they have their counterparts today in those in our countries and Governments who labor to promote and strengthen our relationship.

Relations between nations nowadays are more often than not measured mainly on calculations of convenience and advantage. It is perhaps simpler and easier that way. But in our case, we must be prepared for the realization that there is in our relationship an indefinable and added dimension, a certain degree of caring and nagging, which indeed can be burdensome sometimes but is almost surely the key to what is vital and enduring in our relations.

I would venture to suggest that it is this which lies at the core of so much concern in America today in events and developments in the Philippines.

And it is perhaps this sense of empathy that alone can bring a delegation of American Congressmen to Manila at a time when there is so much excitement and drama in the American political scene today.

For this, we sincerely convey to you now our fullest appreciation and welcome. And we nurture the hope that by this visit, you, Ladies and Gentlemen, will see the resiliency, the resourcefulness and the resolve with which our people are coping with the difficulties before us. And that, through you, something of this, too, will in time reach you the understanding of other American leaders and the American public.

If there is one thing perhaps that may be considered a truly significant advance for our bilateral relations in the years since the recovery of our national independence, it is I suggest the achievement of the Philippines of an identity and personality of her own. For we have discovered if nothing else that our relationship has grown stronger and closer, as we on our part have imbibed the virtue of self-reliance, as we have learned to look to ourselves for the fulfillment of our destiny as a nation.

Whatever the problems we are facing today, the constancy of this direction has not changed. This is not to say that we do not seek the help and encouragement of others, for indeed we do; but there is precisely confidence today that we can succeed in our program of recovery because we look above all to our own efforts in this all-important task.

In much the same way, America may safely presume that the Philippines will continue to contribute her share to the peace and stability of Asia, honoring its commitments and agreements, and relying solely on its own resources and capabilities in meeting challenges to national security from within.

And finally it is also along those lines that you may be certain our continued evolution as a democratic state will proceed, perhaps not quite in the fashion that most Americans would wish, but certainly along traditions that nurture democracy and freedom.

Nothing, Ladies and Gentlement, is forgotten in this country about the heritage left by America in our midst, of the support and encouragement that have been given us through the years, even as we seek now those conditions of national life that truly define our being a sovereign and a free people.

Friendships and alliances, after all, do not derive their vitality from the dependence of partners and friends, but from their respective strengths and dynamism. And we have that kind of relationship today.

(The President offers the Toast)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1984). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.