Address of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines At the luncheon in honor of President and Madame Jose Lopez Portillo of Mexico

[Delivered at the Maharlika Hall, November 5, 1978]

A Sentimental Attachment

I GUESS IT is time to come down from heaven and back to earth. The First Lady and I are indeed honored and pleased to be able to tender this simple luncheon in honor of the President and the First Lady, and the members of their delegation, of the United Mexican States. Words must fail anyone who seeks to draw a parallelism between the two countries of Mexico and the Philippines. The natural affection demonstrated here by the participants in the program indicates that there is indeed no need for any articulation or assurance of such affection and of cultural and historical ties that exist between the two countries.

I am certain that when the world was divided in 1493, between Portugal and Spain, and the Treaty of Tordesillas entered into two years thereafter, it was not anticipated that two Presidents of these two countries that felt the imperial energies of the Spanish domain would meet under these very familiar, affectionate and sentimental circumstances. For indeed, it was the destiny of our two countries to be encompassed by the greatest empire the world has ever known under Philip IT of Spain. The great explorers and adventurers who crossed the Pacific Ocean to reach this hemisphere started with Ferdinand Magellan who, on March 16, 1521, landed in Homonhon island of Samar. Other expeditions followed, many of them starting from Mexico, ending with that of Legaspi and Urdaneta who established Spanish rule in these islands. Today, we are again reminded of the fact that the Philippines was a name brought by the fourth group of explorers to start from Mexico. Ruy Lopez de Villalobos, the leader of that expedition, named Samar “Felipinas,” which name ultimately attached to the entire archipelago. (Although in 1609, the word “Felipinas” could very well have embraced all the islands as far south as the Moluccas and as far north as Formosa.) These were my thoughts as a student of the relations between Mexico and the Philippines today. For Spain ruled the Philippines through the Viceroy in Mexico up to 1821, when Mexico declared its independence. And it was said that whenever there were any deficits in the budget for the appropriations required to run the government of the Philippines, the deficit was covered with funds from Mexico. To lighten the burden of administration in the Philippines, I could wish that this relationship be reestablished.

In view of the exploitation of oil of such vast proportion in Mexico, and the paucity and deficiency of our oil discoverers in Palawan, I should think that this will bring about circumstances that could reestablish such a mutual dependency.

But all levity aside, may I say that today marks the generous offer of President Portillo to extend to the Philippines all the technological and scientific assets that they may have in order that the Philippines may continue its exploration work and thus, if possible, acquire the capability to bring out the oil which we all hope is within the territory of the Philippines.

Today, let me therefore extend the heartfelt gratitude of the entire Filipino people and their President and the First Lady as their beneficiaries of this generous and certainly valuable aid that will be extended by Mexico through President Portillo. Thus we repeat the Manila-Acapulco Galleon Trade, which established the link between the Americas and the Orient, and it is a privilege of our administration to now revive such a trade and strengthen the ties of cooperation, mutuality, and of friendship that exist between our two countries.

Although we regret the shortness of the stay of President Portillo and Dona Carmen and the members of his delegation, it is our hope that the President and Madame will be able to return on a state visit as soon as possible. For never have I received or have we received a state guest who does not wait to be entertained, but entertains in return. And if there is any country that brings to the mind of the Filipino a fabled land of music, song, dance and horsemanship, it is Mexico.

And so, my friends, your Excellencies of the diplomatic corps, distinguished guests, may I request you to rise and join me in a toast to the continued health and success of His Excellency, President Portillo of Mexico, the continued progress of the people of Mexico, and the strengthening of the ties of friendship and cooperation that bind the two countries of Mexico and the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1980). Presidential speeches (Vol. 8). [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].