Toast of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines In honor of United States Vice-President George Bush

[Delivered on June 30, 1981]

We are indeed very honored and pleased to have this opportunity to honor at this luncheon today His Excellency Vice President George Bush and his gracious lady, Mrs. Barbara bush.

May I say first, Mr. Vice-President, thank you for visiting with us at this time of our inauguration as president of our country, thank you for your very kind and personal felicitations and good wishes, and for the messages of goodwill and friendship that you have brought to us from President Reagan and the American people.

There is both personal and symbolic significance when those of us who bear the burdens of public office meet in this way. What we cherish and treasure of the personal friendships that we have built over the years with one another, are made even more significant by the fact that we bear in our persons something of the countries and peoples we represent and the responsibility to nurture their friendship and links with one another.

Philippine-American relations has always been, I think, a rather pleasant task to nurture and promote, because the great cares of diplomacy between our countries have always been leavened by warm personal contacts and friendships between the representatives of our governments. In this way, we have always been able to enrich in strength and meaning our relations, despite whatever problems and differences we have had to face.

At this time, when American ties with the Philippines and Asia are being lifted once again by fresh initiatives in the direction of growth and cooperation, it is truly warming for us to know that in these undertakings for the present and the future, we in Asia will be working with such leaders as you, Mr. Vice-President.

You, Sir, are no stranger to the Philippines and to Asia. And still less are you a stranger to the world of diplomacy and international relations.

We are fully conscious, Mr. Vice-President, that in your long and distinguished career in public life, you have unfailingly devoted part of your interest, your talents, and your time to the task of understanding your great country’s ties with the world. It is especially good to know that for a time, Asia has been the special focus of your interest. You have served in our part of the world as an envoy of your country, just as in an earlier time when our world was at war, you served in the Philippines and in other parts of Asia the cause of the free world.

Indeed, it has been gladdening for us to note that in your campaign for the presidency last year, you spoke time and again to the importance of foreign affairs in the American agenda. That agenda, we are certain will be served in the light of the mandate which President Reagan and you have received from the American people. In trying to deal at this point with the many uncertainties of the future in international relations, it reduces in a sense these uncertainties that we have on both sides of the Pacific leaders and diplomats who understand and care deeply about America’s ties with Asia. It is a factor that will always tend to encourage hope and optimism, whatever be the obstacles involved, when we know that from your side as well as from our own, the personal element in diplomacy endures.

You may be sure, Mr. Vice-President, that brief as your visit to our country may be, it has immeasurably enhanced and deepened the resolves and the loyalties which have marked in the past our ties with one another and which today are rising anew because of the efforts we are undertaking together.

Ladies and gentlemen, I now ask you to join me

In a toast…..

(The President offers the toast.)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.