Toast of His Excellency Ferdinand E. Marcos President of the Philippines In honor of Secretary of State Alexander Haig

[Delivered on June 18, 1981]

General Haig, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:

We have with us today an eminent guest, the secretary of state of the United States, General Alexander M. Haig. It pleases me to say that General Haig requires no introduction. For the better part of a decade, his name has been a household word, with a reputation as a great administrator, a brilliant soldier and a statesmen with a comprehensive grasp of the complex realities of the difficult world in which we live today.

When General Haig was commander of NATO, it was said of him, as a compliment and in admiration, that no man came closer to being God. If he is not quite the deity, he continues in the apostolic succession, for today he occupies center stage as President Reagan’s strong right arm in the effort to re-establish American leadership in an increasingly chaotic world.

I do not personally believe that we can return to the bipolar world of yesterday. Too many new elements have entered the equation to permit international life to settle once more in the relatively cozy haven of the past.

But I do believe that the danger exists and may re-emerge in intensified form if we do not take the needed measures to contain that danger today.

Few have a keener appreciation of these realities than General Haig. In elucidating his country’s foreign policy, he attaches great importance, among other things, to two vital elements in America’s approach to the problem. First, the utmost importance of restraint and of reciprocity in the relations between the east and the west. And second, the strengthening of the relations between America and its allies.

We in the Philippines note these points with considerable satisfaction. As a nation, we condemn aggression in any form and are therefore prepared to support steps to curb the increasingly visible evidences of unrestrained armed aggression in nearly every corner of the world. As a developing country, we can ill afford conflict for it interrupts our pursuit of the goal of completing the development process on which we have auspiciously embarked. As a member of the community of nations, we feel that while conflict can not often be avoided, it should be managed solely through peaceful means.

Because we are an ally of the United States, we are heartened by the decision of the United States to strengthen its alliance.

The relations between our two countries have been of long standing. As General Haig is aware, these have had its ups and downs. But when problems do arise, we pursue solutions in the context of mutuality of interests in a wide variety of common endeavors and in the spirit of consensual agreement between sovereign equals.

Most of our problems revolve around the use of facilities in Philippine bases. For us, the hard-nosed realities carry a great deal of emotional content — a proof that nationalism runs deep in our veins. This has not always been appreciated by the United States, but today we have re-established what we had always felt was true from the beginning — the bases are sovereign Philippine territory.

The wisdom of the decision of the United States to recognize this fact in explicit terms after years of ambiguous pronouncements is proved by the fact that, by the admission of the United States government, those bases have acquired increased importance in the developing global strategic completion among the major powers. Unwilling allies do not make good partners, and it is the essence of good partnership that there should be consultations at all times. Too much, too often this has not been the case and this has therefore eroded the needed confidence in one another.

Another source of misunderstanding is the unnecessary and frequently gratuitous intrusion in internal affairs. We can achieve much together if we accepted the fact that there are many roads to freedom, that the political and social fabrics of nations are of necessity diverse, and that the requirements of modernization and the institutions on which they rest, again of necessity, vary from country to country. As General Haig himself has said in another connection, we must give each other the benefit of the doubt.

The re-assertion of American leadership is a welcome event. But as we all understand, no country can lead through the imposition of its will. If it does, it will fall in the vary same trap which American leadership seeks to combat. What is needed is a leadership among equals and, in the famous phrase, a leadership without hogomony.

America is a great nation and will continue to remain great. However the rest of the world may perceive its weaknesses, its greatness lies not alone in its arsenal of weapons but in the spiritual resources which, when necessity arises, its great people can summon at will. President Reagan recognizes this and as a friend we wish him well.

Excellencies, I invite you to join me in a toast to President Reagan, to General Haig, and to the continued growth in understanding between the Philippines and the United States.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Marcos, F. E. (1981). Speeches by President Ferdinand E. Marcos . [Manila] : Presidential Library.