Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 815

AUTHORIZING THE CONDUCT OF AN ORIENTATION COURSE ON FILIPINO IDEOLOGY IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

This Office should now assume an active role in the evolution and propagation of the Filipino Ideology as envisioned by the President. Towards this objective, our initial step is to generate consciousness and awareness of the nature and meaning of Filipino Ideology, allow our employees to articulate their own ideas and perceptions of the concept, and then enlist them in its propagation and dissemination to the general public. Our employees would only be effective propagators of Filipino Ideology if they are fully aware and knowledgeable of what it is all about.

Accordingly, pursuant to Section 1 of Executive Order No. 879, dated March 1, 1983, the Training Staff of this Office is hereby authorized to conduct an orientation course on Filipino Ideology with the following schedule:

Time

Date

Venue

Briefing Room

-do-

-do-

All heads of primary units are hereby enjoined to select at least two (2) employees holding supervisory positions in their respective units to attend the first series and at least three (3) employees holding lower positions to attend the second series. Participants who shall have completed the orientation course shall be required to conduct multiplier sessions on Filipino Ideology in their units.

Inasmuch as the Filipino Ideology is in a state of flux, continuously evolving to conform to the modifications and changing patterns of social reality, the herein authorized orientation course shall be a continuing program of the Training Staff of this Office.

For this purpose, pursuant to Section 1 of Executive Order No. 879, the Finance Office is hereby directed to include a specific amount in the OP annual budget to fund the program of orientation and dissemination of Filipino Ideology in this Office.

(Sgd.)JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 29, 1984

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library