Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 271

PROVIDING IDENTIFICATION (ID) CARDS TO ALL OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

In line with the security measures being instituted in the Office of the President, all officials and employees thereof, including those in detail thereto from other government agencies, shall be provided with identification (ID) cards.

The identification card shall bear on one face the inscription “OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES” with the seal of the Republic above the inscription, identification card number, and the name of holder; on the reverse side, the employee’s name, signature, photograph, the unit where he is assigned, and the signature of the assistant Executive Secretary.

The Administrative Office shall take charge of the preparation of the identification cards and the distribution thereof to the employees concerned. The employee shall be accountable for the identification cards issued to him. In case of loss, he shall immediately submit, through his chief of unit, a written report, giving the circumstances of the less, to the Administrative Office, furnishing a copy thereof to the Malacañang Provost Officer. The Administrative Office shall provide a replacement at the expense of the employee concerned.

In case of change of assignment and designation, the identification card issued shall be submitted to the Administrative Office for replacement. Holders shall surrender their identification cards to the Administrative Office upon separation from the service or termination of detail, as the case may be.

Each and everyone is enjoined to use his identification card solely for identification, and is hereby warned against the use thereof for any unlawful or illicit purpose.

Strict compliance with the provisions of this Order is enjoined, violation of which shall be sufficient ground for administrative action.

This Order shall take effect on the fifteenth (15th) day from the date hereof.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, February 15, 1972

Source : Malacañang Records Office