Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 45

RESPONSIBILITIES OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES DURING MOVEMENT OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE FIRST FAMILY BY RAIL.

In connection with the Presidential trips by rail the agencies, offices and AFP units enumerated hereunder are charged with the following responsibilities:

1. Office, Senior Aide-de-Camp

a. Inform PSU, PNR, PGE PGA, PC and such other agencies directly involved of the President’s trip by rail together with requirements thereof.

b. Prepare Manifest and disseminate same on the need to know basis.

c. Coordinate all matters affecting the President’s trip except security matters.

d. Arrange for transportation requirements of Presidential Party.

2, Presidential Security Unit

a. Provide continuous immediate close-in physical and technical security to the President and/or immediate members of the First Family.

b. Coordinate all elements securing the Presidential Party.

c. Inspect and secure the Presidential Coach during the 24 hour period prior to departure.

d. Inspect, secure and control baggage of the Presidential Party.

e. Provide the primary communication system for the Presidential Party.

2. Presidential Guard Battalion

a. Secure gang planks and corridors leading to Presidential Coaches and baggage cars.

b. Institute area security and crowd control measures in the absence or inadequacy of PNR and PC security elements.

c. Provide adequate security escort for the Presidential Party.

d. Provide the alternate communication system for the Presidential Party.

4. Philippine National Railways

a. Responsible for the maintenance and security and the safe and efficient operation of the explorer and Presidential Trains.

b. Provide services and facilities necessary for the needs of the Presidential Party while aboard the train.

c. Responsible for area security and crowd control at the Manila Railroad station.

d. Assist other agencies in securing railroad stations outside of Manila.

e. Assist PSU in the inspection and security check of the Presidential Train during the 24-hour period .prior to the train’s departure.

5. Any Command/Unit of the Armed Forces of the Philippines called upon to perform security missions for the President of the Republic of the Philippines and the First Family.

a. Secure route of the Presidential Train.

b. Primarily responsible for area security and crowd control at railroad stations outside of Manila.

c. Responsible for providing PSU with latest intelligence reports on areas and routes to be visited by the Presidential Party beginning with the 24-hour period prior to departure until the return to Malacañang.

d. Provide standby forces ready on call on critical points along, the route and in places of visit.

The Chief Presidential Security Unit shall be the over-all coordinator for the security of the President of the Republic of the Philippines.

Informations concerning the movement of the Presidential Train should, not be released except to properly identified Presidential security agents, competent military and. civilian authorities and Malacañang officials.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, September 7, 1966

Source: Malacañang Records Office