Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 240

CONSTITUTING PERFORMANCE TEAMS TO CONDUCT PERFORMANCE AUDITS ON: THE BOARD OF INVESTMENTS, THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL BANK, THE DEPARTMENTS OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY, AND HEALTH.

Pursuant to Administrative Order No. 271, series of 1971, there are hereby constituted four Performance Teams to conduct performance audits on the government agencies indicated here-under, to be composed as follows:

To audit the Board of Investments

To audit the Philippine National Bank

To audit the Department of Commerce & Industry

To audit the Department of Health

Names of representatives to the various teams shall be submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat, Malacañang by telephone not later than July 2, 1971.

In the conduct of performance audits, Performance Teams shall be guided by the provisions of Administrative Order No. 271, series of 1971, and the Development Performance Evaluation System Operations Manual compiled pursuant thereto.

Activities related to the conduct of performance audits shall take precedence over all other duties, and for this purpose, all team members, except those from the Commission on Reorganization, are hereby placed under the full-time operational control of their respective Team and Assistant Team Leaders, for the duration of the audit.

Members assigned from the Commission on Reorganization shall participate in the performance audits on a part-time basis, with the specific purpose of keeping their respective Teams informed on the Commission’s evaluative findings relative to the agencies scheduled for audit, and ensuring that the teams do not duplicate aspects of organizational evaluation already accomplished by the Commission.

Transportation requirements for the performance audits shall be provided by the Agencies scheduled for audit. Administrative and technical support shall be provided by the Development Management Staff, Executive Office and the Development Performance Evaluation System Secretariat.

Performance audits of the designated agencies shall commence simultaneously on July 12, 1971 and shall be conducted for a period of not more than twenty-two working days. The Final Report of each Performance. Team shall be submitted to the Development Management Staff, Executive Office, not later than August 10, 1971 for transmittal to the President.

All bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Board of Investments, the Philippine National Bank, the Departments of Commerce § Industry, and Health are hereby enjoined to cooperate with and assist the Performance Teams accomplish their assigned tasks, consistent with the aims of the Development Performance Evaluation System.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, June 29, 1971

Source: Malacañang Records Office