Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 603

FURTHER AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 102, SERIES OF 1964, AS AMENDED, BY PRESCRIBING A NEW UNIFORM FOR LADY EMPLOYEES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

Memorandum Order No. 102, dated September 11, 1964, as amended, requiring all lady employees in the Office of the President to be in uniform during attendance in office, is hereby further amended so as to prescribe a new uniform as shown in the attached sketch with the following specifications: the materials shall be a one-piece “ponti de roma” dress in tailored A-line cut in plain navy blue, with belt, read-and-white necktie made of “quiana” materials and a metal seal of the Office of the President in color.

The wearing of the new uniform herein prescribed shall begin on October 17, 1977, with the following variations: the necktie shall be worn only during Mondays and Wednesdays; Friday is “Wash Day,” which means that the wearing of uniform is optional; and the metal seal shall be pinned on the lapel, upper left as indicated in the sketch, at all times that the employee is in uniform.

Whenever in uniform, the employee must wear black shoes as required in Memorandum Circular No. 402, dated December 21, 1973. Wearing of sandals, step-ins, slippers, clogs, and the like is not allowed. At no time will pantsuits be considered as acceptable dress anywhere in the premises of Malacañang.

Newly appointed lady employees shall wear the prescribed uniform starting not later than 15 days from the date they are issued the materials for the uniforms.

Exempted from the provisions of this Order are lady employees mourning during the period of their mourning, as well as lady doctors and nurses in the Malacañang Clinic who, including male physicians, shall wear the traditionally known nurses’ and doctors’ attire at all times when on duty.

Under pain of appropriate disciplinary administrative action, those concerned are hereby enjoined to be always in the prescribed attire during attendance in office.

Strict compliance with the provision of this Order and those of Memorandum Order No. 102, series of 1964, as amended, and Memorandum Order No. 371, series of 1973, which are not inconsistent herewith, is hereby enjoined.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 23, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library