Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 44

REDESIGNATING THE OFFICE OF THE MILITARY ADVISER TO THE PRESIDENT AS THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ASSISTANT ON MILITARY AFFAIRS

To expedite coordination in the handling of military matters and provide military staff assistance within the Office of the President, the Office of the Military Adviser to the President created under Memorandum Order No. 58, series of 1963, is hereby redesignated as the Office of the Presidential Assistant on Military Affairs (PAMA). It shall be under the Executive Secretary.

The Office of the Presidential Assistant on Military Affairs shall have the following functions:

1. To act as clearing house for military matters other than those pertaining to the Office of the Senior Aide-de-Camp to the President, Presidential Guard Battalion and the Presidential Security Unit;

2. To assist the Executive Secretary in National Security Council matters;

3. To handle and secure classified military matters; and

4. To perform such other duties as the Executive Secretary may direct.

All the functions pertaining to military matters heretofore handled by the Administrative Division pursuant to Memorandum Order No. l, series of 1958, shall be performed by this new Office. Other military and civilian personnel for the clerical requirements of the office shall be assigned by appropriate orders to be issued by the Executive Secretary.

The personnel and records of the Office of the Military Adviser to the President are hereby transferred to the new Office.

“Military Advisers” appointed by the President shall be in the status of consultants who, at the pleasure of the President, may be consulted from time to time for advice on military matters to supplement that provided by the Chief of Staff, AFP and the Secretary of National Defense.

The organizational structure of military office in the Office of the President shall be as indicated in attached organization “chart.

This order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Incl: Organization Chart of Military Office, Office of the President

Manila, August 31, 1966

Source: Malacañang Records Office