Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 247

PERFORMANCE TEAMS TO CONDUCT PERFORMANCE AUDITS ON THE NATIONAL POWER CORPORATION, THE NATIONAL ELECTRIFICATION ADMINISTRATION, THE DEVELOPMENT BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES, THE OFFICE OF ECONOMIC COORDINATION, AND THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

Pursuant to Administrative Order No. 271, series of 1971, there are hereby constituted four Performance Teams to conduct performance audits on the government agencies indicated hereunder, to be composed as follows:

To audit the National Power Corporation-National Electrification A dministration

To audit the Development Bank of the Philippines

To audit the Office of Economic Coordination

To audit the Department of Labor

The GSIS, the NPC and the PHHC shall not be included in the management audit of the OEC group as these corporations are being audited separately.

Names of representatives to the various teams shall be submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat, Malacañang, by telephone not later than August 6, 1971.  (Tel. Nos. of Cabinet Secretariats PLDT – 40-30-24; 47-41-86)

In the conduct of performance audits. Performance Teams be guided by the provisions of Administrative Order No. 271 series of 1971, and the Development Performance Evaluation System Operations Manual compiled pursuant thereto.

Activities related to the conduct of performance audits shall take precedence over all other duties, and for this purpose, all team members, except those from the Reorganization Commission, are hereby placed under the full-time operational control of their respective Team and Assistant Team Leaders, for the duration of the audit.

Members assigned from the Reorganization Commission shall participate in the performance audits on a part-time basis, with the specific purpose of keeping their respective Teams Informed on the Commission’s evaluative findings relative to the agencies scheduled for audit, and ensuring that the teams do not duplicate aspects of organizational evaluation already accomplished by the Commission.

Transportation requirements for the performance audits shall be provided by the Agencies scheduled for audit.  Administrative and technical support shall be provided by the Development Management Staff, Executive Office and the Development Performance Evaluation System Secretariat.

Performance Audits of the designated agencies shall commence simultaneously on August 16, 1971 and shall be conducted for a period of not more than twenty-two working days. The Final Report of each Performance Team shall be submitted to the Development Management Staff, Executive Office, not later than September 14, 1971 for transmittal to the President.

All bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the National Power Corporation, the National Electrification Administration, the Development Bank of the Philippines, the Office of Economic Coordination, and the Department of Labor are hereby enjoined to cooperate with and assist the Performance Teams accomplish their assigned tasks, consistent with the aims of the Development Performance Evaluation System.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 28, 1971

Source: Malacañang Records Office