Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 197

CREATING AN AD HOC TECHNICAL COMMITTEE TO STUDY THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMPUTERIZED NATIONWIDE CRIME INFORMATION SYSTEM.

WHEREAS, a nationwide crime information system will permit the centralized storage of criminal records and other crime information in a Philippine Crime Information Center; and from, where, stored information can easily he retrieved and made available to any user agency (law enforcement or otherwise) on a “direct inquiry” basis, and

WHEREAS, the early establishment of a nationwide crime information system will redound to the benefit of the law enforcement community and better serve the cause of peace and order in this country;

NOW, THEREFORE, an Ad Hoc Technical Committee is hereby created composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following duties and functions:

1. Determine the types of “input” and estimate the probable “workload” of each participant agency.

2. Prepare the implementing plan to Basic Plan “COMPUTE.”

3. Conduct a canvass of the different computer systems available in the local market to determine what “configuration” is most appropriate for the purpose contemplated and which “supplier” can provide same at the most advantageous terms to the Government.

4. Prepare a Memorandum of Agreement which shall bind the Executive Agency and the participant and user agencies with regards proportionate contribution to the cost and manning of the Center and into management and operation of the system.

In order to perform its functions and responsibilities effectively, the Committee is empowered to call on representatives of any law enforcement and other government agencies without membership in the Committee.

Periodic report on the status and progress of work will be submitted by the Committee to the Secretariat, Peace and Order Coordinating Council.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, 25 August 1970

Source: Malacañang Records Office