Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 55

EXEMPTING OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES IN THE MALACAÑANG HOUSEHOLD AND THE MALACAÑANG GARAGE FROM THE PROVISIONS OF MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 54, DATED FEBRUARY 1, 1967.

Officials and employees in the Malacañang Household and the Malacañang Garage who, in view of the nature of their duties, are required to render service to the First Family after the regular office hours, are hereby exempted from the provisions of Memorandum Order No. 54 of this Office dated February 1, 1967, pertaining to certain limitations on the payment of meal allowance for overtime service, subject to the following conditions:

1. Not more than seven (7) employees in the Malacañang Household shall be authorized, for overtime service rendered, to draw meal allowance of two (2) units each per day everyday of the week, and not more than seventeen (17) other employees therein to draw meal allowance of two (2) units each per day during Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, and whenever parties and other social or state functions are held in the Malacañang Palace on ordinary days. The rest of the employees therein who may be required to render overtime service shall be authorized meal allowance of not more than one (1) meal unit each per day.

2. Not more than twelve (12) employees in the Malacañang Garage shall be authorized, for overtime service rendered, to draw meal allowance of two (2) units each per day everyday of the week, and the rest of the employees therein who may be required to render overtime service, to draw meal allowance of not more than one (1) meal unit each during ordinary days and not more than two (2) meal units each during Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.

Payment of the meal allowance herein authorized is subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

This Order takes effect as of February 1, 1967, and until further advice.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, February 21, 1967

Source: Malacañang Records Office