Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 51

CREATING A COMMITTEE ON WARMING SYSTEM (COWS) AND PROMULGATING GENERAL PROCEDURE ON ITS OPERATION.

A Committee on Warning System (COWS) to provide advance and adequate warning information of impending or actual disasters, calamities or emergencies to the general public is hereby created, composed of the following:

It shall have a headquarters (HqCOWS) which shall:

1. receive, process, evaluate and coordinate reports received from member agencies;

2. disseminate warning information and instructions to all member agencies, private entities and the general

3. provide, operate, and maintain continuous and reliable communication facilities between HqCOWS and member agencies;

4. provide the necessary logistical and administrative support .to all COWS members.

The following general procedure is hereby promulgated for more effective coordination and dissemination of warning services:

1. Any information of an impending or existing disaster, calamity or emergency received by a member agency shall be transmitted immediately to HqCOWS and to agencies directly affected.

2. Upon receipt of the report, HqCOWS shall alert all other agencies for possible utilization of communications or warning facilities.

3. Upon receipt of alert from COWS, agencies primarily concerned will implement their own and COWS standard operating procedure for the type of emergency or calamity impending or prevailing.

4. HqCOWS shall receive and relay requests, reports and information to different agencies involved in emergencies or calamities.

5. Member agencies whose services or facilities are drafted shall advise HqCOWS of action taken, if any.

6. Upon termination of the emergency, HqCOWS shall advise member agencies.

7. All member agencies alerted for active participation shall render 24-hour operation of their communication facilities.

The Committee is authorized to issue such other rules, regulations and operating procedures as it may deem necessary to provide for a systematic and coordinated nation-wide emergency warning system pursuant to Republic Act No. 1190.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, January 16, 1967

Source: Malacañang Records Office