MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 790

AUTHORIZING THE HOSTING BY THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT THROUGH THE BUREAU OF FOREST DEVELOPMENT MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES, OF THE FIRST ASEAN FORESTRY CONGRESS, TO BE HELD IN METRO MANILA ON OCTOBER 10-15, 1983 AND PROVIDING THE NECESSARY FUNDS THEREFOR

Pursuant to the agreement reached during the Fourth Meeting of the ASEAN Ministers on Agriculture and Forestry on October 8-9, 1982 at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, as recommended by the ASEAN-COFAF Coordinating Group on Forestry, and upon representation by the Minister of Natural Resources and further in line with the Government’s commitment to ASEAN, the hosting of the First ASEAN Forestry Congress by the Philippine Government to be held in Metro Manila on October 10-15, 1983 is hereby authorized.

The Minister of Natural Resources shall create an Organizing Committee whose functions shall be to direct and monitor all preparatory activities and implementation of the Congress, including the administration of the funds that will be provided therefor. The Committee shall be headed by the Director, Bureau of Forest Development and composed of representatives from the herein mentioned agencies who shall provide the necessary support to ensure the success of the Congress:

Office of the Minister, Ministry of Natural Resources Ministry of Foreign Affairs University of the Philippines at Los Baños, College of Forestry Forest Products Research and Development Institute Philippine Committee on Wood Industries Development Bureau of Tourism Services Philippine Convention Bureau Philippine Wood Products Association Forest Research Institute

The Minister of the Budget shall set aside and release from the International Commitment funds authorized in the 1983 General Appropriation Act (BP Blg. 230), the sum of one million five hundred thousand pesos (₱1,500,000) to cover the necessary expenses for holding such Congress. Any deficiencies thereof shall be covered by the proceeds of registration fees which the Congress is hereby authorized to collect at the rates of $150 or its peso equivalent from foreign and local participants and $100 or its peso equivalent from foreign and local observers, and by contributions from the Office of the Minister, Ministry of Natural Resources; Bureau of Forest Development; Forest Research Institute; College of Forestry, University of the Philippines at Los Baños; Forest Products Research and Development Institute; and Presidential Committee on Wood Industries Development, out of their respective appropriations, in such amount as the Minister of Natural Resources may determine in consultation with the heads of said agencies.

The registration fee, travel expenses, per diems and other allowable expenses of local government participants shall be charged against the appropriation of their respective agencies.

The Minister of Natural Resources shall further create a Congress Secretariat to provide support to the Organizing Committee as well as perform such related functions as may be assigned by the said Committee. The members of the Secretariat are hereby authorized to draw additional compensation in the form of honorarium, and the reimbursement of travel expenses, per diem and the cost of clothing appropriate for the occasion, chargeable against funds allocated to the Congress subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

The Organizing Committee shall submit a full Report of the Congress proceeding including recommendations.

This Order takes effect immediately.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Manila, May 16, 1983

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library