Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 705

REQUIRING ALL PRIMARY UNITS TO STRICTLY OBSERVE THE RULES ON THE USE OF THE DAILY ATTENDANCE BLOTTER TO ENSURE THAT IT IS PROPERLY ACCOMPLISHED AND SUBMITTED ON TIME.

Under Memorandum Order No. 639, series of 1979, each head of primary unit was directed to assign a responsible official, not lower than a section chief, to take charge of overseeing the registering of employee’s attendance on the prescribed daily attendance blotter and to submit the same, properly accomplished, to the Administrative Office every first hour of the succeeding working day.

It has been observed, however, that it takes weeks and even months for some units to submit their daily attendance blotter, and in some cases, the blotters submitted are improperly accomplished in the sense that some employees appear to have failed to register their time. It has been reported, too, that some of those assigned to look after the blotter have been tolerating the irregular practice of certain employees who reflect their daily attendance other than the actual time of their arrival in the blotter, thus perpetrating dishonesty in the recording of time.

In view thereof, all heads of primary units are hereby required to submit to the Administrative Office not later than November 21, 1980, the names of the officials whom they have designated to take charge of the preparation and submission of the daily attendance blotter. These timekeepers shall be held responsible for the strict enforcement of the herein prescribed rules and shall be taken to account for any irregularity which may be committed in the registration of attendance in their respective units.

Duly accomplished daily attendance blotter shall be submitted by the timekeepers to the Administrative Office first hour on Monday of every week, in lieu of the first hour of each working day as required under Memorandum Order No. 639, series of 1979, The Administrative Office shall see to it that timely submission of blotter as herein required is strictly observed by the officials concerned. Those who renege on his/her assigned responsibility shall be immediately reported to the undersigned so that proper administrative action can be taken.

Employees or officials who are on special mission out of town or abroad under an approved special order, must report the matter to their respective timekeepers before they leave, otherwise they shall be marked absent.

All timekeepers shall draw a red line on the blotter immediately below the name of the employee appearing last in the list at exactly seven thirty in the morning for those whose office hours are from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; at eight o’clock, for those reporting from 8:00 a.m. to 5;00 p.m.; and at nine o’clock, for those working from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00p.m., so that those who may arrive to register their time after such red line has been drawn shall be considered late. Blotter without the required red line must be returned to the unit concerned for proper compliance.

Strict compliance herewith is enjoined.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 19, 1980

Source: Malacañang Records Office