Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 463

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO UNDERTAKE STUDIES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL ESTATE IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BACNOTAN, LA UNION

There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee to undertake preliminary studies and recommend concrete measures leading to the establishment of an industrial estate in the municipality of Bacnotan, La Union. The Committee shall be composed of the following members:

The Development Management Staff shall act as the Coordinating Secretariat for the Committee. The Committee shall be charged with the following functions and responsibilities.

1. To Conduct preliminary engineering tests and surveys to determine the feasibility of locating an industrial estate in Bacnotan, La Union;

2. To determine infrastructure a requirements and cost of providing such infrastructures;

3. To formulate a preliminary program for the physical development of the estate;

4. To identify potential industries that me be located in this estate;

5. To conduct such other related investigations and initiate such action as may be necessary to ensure the successful implementation of the project.

Costs incurred for the various-.tests and surveys to be undertaken, as well as miscellaneous expenses of the Committee, shall be charged against the Preliminary Engineering Fund under the NEDA. The Committee shall thus estimate the expenses for these tests and surveys and its own operations and shall thus request the NEDA and the Budget Commission for the release of these funds, which funds shall be administered by the Coordinating Secretariat. Ordinary expenses of the Committee members incurred in the performance of their duties under this Memorandum Order, to cover travel expenses and per diems, should as much as possible be charged against their mother agencies.

The Committee is empowered to set up sub-committees to handle specific aspects of the functions described above. For this purpose, it is also empowered to call upon any department, bureau and instrumentality of the Government for assistance in terms of technical expertise, information and such other matters as may ensure the successful implementation of its assigned duties.

The Committee shall submit its report and recommendations not later than 31 December 1974.

This Order shall take effect immediately

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, 10 October 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff