TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 544

CREATING IN INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE REHABILITATION OF THE DISPLACED POPULATION OF PANTABANGAN, NUEVA ECIJA.

For the purpose of ensuring better coordination of the efforts of the various agencies participating in the rehabilitation of the displaced population of Pantabannan, Nueva Ecija, there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee for the Pantabangan Resettlement Project composed of the heads of the following agencies or their duly authorized representatives:

The Committee shall have the following functions and objectives:

1. To formulate and adopt a work plan for the development of the resettlement sites for the residents displaced by reservoir inundation of the Pantabangan Dam to be submitted to the Office of the President within one month from the date of the Memorandum Order.

2. To set up the support activities, like personnel and administrative services, by pooling the manpower and financial resources of the committee members’ respective agencies.

3. To formulate policies and rules and regulations for scheduling of projects and for the disposition of funds that may be made available.

4. To call on the resources of each member depending on the commitments established for implementing the projects defined in the approved development plan.

5. To establish as it may deem necessary, a project management and monitoring group to supervise the implementation of the projects and to coordinate such activities according to established priorities, as well as to monitor the progress of project implementation on the basis of the over-all development plan.

6. To meet at least once a month to assess the implementation of the projects and adopt whatever ways and means may be necessary to overcome problems/difficulties that may arise.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions and the attainment of its objectives.

The Committee shall continue to exist until dissolved or superseded.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, 3 November 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff