MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 408

CREATING A STEERING COMMITTEE FOR THE FORMULATION OF AN IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR CENTRAL LUZON AND OTHER BASINS

The National Irrigation Administration (NIA) is presently engaged in the formulation of an Irrigation Development Plan for Central Luzon as an offshoot of Presidential Decree No. 35 which embodied, among others, the authority for NIA to undertake studies to extend the benefits of the Upper Pampanga River Project to the Provinces of Pangasinan, Tarlac, Pampanga and Bulacan.

In addition to the Central Luzon exercise, the NIA intends to formulate similar plans on other basins in line with the program for accelerated irrigation development.

To effectively execute such studies, a Steering Committee composed of representatives of agencies concerned with water and land resources development, is deemed necessary to oversee that the Central Luzon Irrigation Development Plan and other regional or basin plans to be drafted shall be compatible with various agency plans for the areas under study and in consonance with national policy objectives for development.

NOW, therefore, a Steering Committee, attached to the NIA, is hereby created with the following functions and duties:

1. To ensure the proper integration of related water and land resources development plans of the different agencies in the formulation of irrigation development plans for Central Luzon and for other basins, and for such multiple purpose projects that may be initiated by the NIA.

2. To reconcile the competitive demands for and conflicting uses of water and land resources with the end in view of achieving the most beneficial use of available water and land resources in the areas under study.

3. To provide general coordination in the planning activities for water and land resources development of the different agencies in the light of the irrigation development plans.

The composition of the Steering Committee shall be the duly designated representatives of the following agencies:

The NIA shall provide the Steering Committee with a working staff and logistical support.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 20th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and Seventy-four.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff