Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 803

ADOPTING CERTAIN MEASURES IN THIS OFFICE IN COMPLIANCE WITH LETTER OF IMPLEMENTATION NO. 146 IN ORDER TO GENERATE SAVINGS FOR CY 1984

In compliance with Letter of Implementation No. 146, all retrenchment measures and instructions embodied in various issuances and orders previously issued are hereby reiterated for strict implementation.

The Records Office is hereby instructed to reissue copies of all pertinent orders and issuances (Memorandum Orders, Memorandum Circulars, P.Ds, LOIs) to all offices and primary units in this Office bearing on retrenchment and economy measures.

The following specific economy and savings-generating measures are hereby prescribed for implementation.

1. Adoption of one uniform office hours for all offices and primary units – There shall be only one schedule of office-hours for all officials and employees of this Office which shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.. Only those who are on 24-hour duty and those who are required to render overtime service may stay in the office beyond 5:00 p.m..

2. Energy conservation measures –

a. All lights shall be turned off after 5:00 p.m., except in some selected areas of the corridor. Those rendering overtime service may use only such number of lights as may be necessary.

b. Leaking faucets and busted pipes shall be immediately fixed or replaced to conserve water.

c. Use of air-conditioning units shall be strictly controlled.

3. Filling of vacancies – The Personnel Office is hereby directed to submit a complete list of vacant positions, both regular and those paid from lump-sum, indicating therein those which shall be filled by promotion on the basis of necessity, those which shall be frozen to generate savings and those which shall be abolished. The PMS is likewise required to submit similar report.

4 . Re-cycling of certain office supplies – No used coupon bond and mimeographing papers shall be thrown away if their reverse sides are still clean to be used in the preparation of rough drafts proposed for action.

To reduce consumption of paper clips, staple wires shall be used instead of paper clips, in securing together official papers being transmitted to other units. Paper clips shall be used only in putting together papers which are still under process in a unit. Once ready for transmittal, all papers shall be stapled together.

The Supply and Property Section, Finance Office, is hereby directed to institute effective control and management of supplies. Distribution of, or approval of requisition for, supplies shall always be based on the actual needs of the units concerned.

The Finance Office is likewise instructed to conduct a thorough inventory of service vehicles, office equipment, furnitures and fixtures to determine which of those can still be repaired and which can be disposed of.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, March 12, 1984

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library