TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 629

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON COMPUTER AIDED TECHNOLOGY

In order to bridge the technological gaps between developed developing countries and the Philippines and improve product design reliability, efficiency of the country’s capital infrastructures such as bridges, highways, dams, large buildings, ships, aircrafts and other related government projects which are critical elements to our economic development, an Inter-Agency Committee is hereby created to study and make recommendations on the technical and economic feasibility of establishing a Computer Aided Design/Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAD/CAM) Center in the Philippines.

The Committee shall be initially composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

1. Prepare a report on the technical and economic feasibility of a CAD/CAM Center in the Philippines;

2. Assess the needs, benefits and problems related to the introduction of CAD/CAM technology in the country;

3. Mediate and resolve all questions that may arise in the establishment and implementation of a CAD/CAM Center;

4. Maintain liaison with other national and international organizations involved in similar undertakings; and

5. Submit a periodic report on its findings and recommendations to the Presidential Assistant for Economic Development.

The Committee may increase or decrease its membership as the exigencies of the task warrants.

The Committee may call on any member of the offices represented and other government agencies as the need for them arises in the detailed work to be done.

The Committee shall be technically assisted by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).

The Committee shall be financed from supplementary appropriations of the National Computer Center.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon all government ministries, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations and the private sector for such assistance and cooperation as may be required to successfully discharge its functions.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 6, 1978

Source: Presidential Management Staff Library