Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 300

PROVIDING FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF SABOTAGE BY EXPLOSIVES OR BY ARSON WITHIN AREA II, MALACAÑANG COMPOUND.

1. GENERAL

a. Purpose . This is a guide for all officials and employees and other persons inside Area II, Malacañang Compound in the prevention and control of sabotage by explosives or by arson. The security of Areas I, III and IV are covered by the Security Plans of PGB and PSC.

b. Common Targets of Sabotage . The most common targets of sabotage are:

(1) Vital government offices and installations;

(2) Public utilities (water works, pumping stations, water pipe lines, electric generating plants, and transmission lines);

(3) Communications (railways, bridges, docks, telephone equipment and lines’, radio stations, airport facilities, and ships);

(4) Financial institutions (banks, insurance companies, credit unions, and other lending institutions); and

(5) Miscellaneous (food-processing plants, clothing industries, and hospitals);

c. The Saboteurs . Saboteurs may include, among others:

(1) Military corps of trained subversives for sabotaging activities;

(2) Radical youth-worker-peasant activists with communistic orientations;

(3) Underworld characters hired by subversives for monetary considerations; and

(4) Persons who want to destroy the evidence of crimes they have committed.

d. Modus Operandi . There are several methods of establishing sabotage opportunities in destroying vital offices/facilities/installations, but the most common ones which are currently being used by the present crop of saboteurs are:

(1) Hurling explosive bombs into the premises;

(2) Implanting time bombs at concealed places inside an office/installation;

(3) Leaving time bombs contained in hand bags attache cases, cardboard boxes, and other containers in open spaces within the premises of an office/building;

(4) Starting fires in nearby premises with the hope that they spread to the vital office/installation;

(5) Short-circuiting electrical installations to start a fire; and

(6) Setting off delayed fires either with the use of incendiary explosive devices or chemical reagents.

e. Types of Explosives . Explosives may be classified as:

(1) High Explosives – These are the types that act very quickly; and

(2) Low Explosives – Those that act relatively slowly.

An example of “low explosive” is black powder, and of a “high “explosive”, nitroglycerine. A typical bomb of black powder type may be devised out of an iron pipe capped at both ends with añfuse inserted through one of the caps. Upon actuation, the powder burns, expands, and explodes, causing damage and injury to persons and property.

Professional saboteurs are more likely to make use of high explosives such as dynamite. “High explosives” have a shocking effect which by itself is destructive. Dynamite is generally actuated by the use of blasting caps. It may be set off with the use of either a fuse or an electrical device. By using a delayed action device, an inoffensive-looking package may be made to explode hours or days after it has been implanted by the saboteurs.

f. Types of Bombs . Bombs may be classified according the ways they are actuated:

(1) Weight-Type Trigger Bomb – This is actuated by any normal act of a person finding it. For instance, the bottom of a package may have an opening through which a string is inserted and attached to a weight. If the package is lifted, the weight will trigger the explosive charge and cause the bomb to explode.

(2) Chemical-Mechanisms Bomb – This kind of bomb is made in such a manner that after placement  and removal of a simple arming pin, any tilting or upsetting of the package will start a chemical action that detonates the bomb.

(3) Electrically-Actuated Bomb – This type of bomb is exploded with the use of an electrical device. An example would be a package placed in a dark room with an electrical cord plugged into a socket. When the switch is turned on, the electric current detonates the bomb.

(4) Time Bomb – This bomb may be actuated either electrically, or by fuse. The actuating mechanism may be a clock-type device. It is pre-set at a determined time such that when that time comes the mechanism actuates and explodes the bomb. This kind of bombs can be easily detected by the ticking sounds characteristic of the type.

(5) Match-Book-and-Cigarette-Actuated Bomb – This is a novel type of bomb. It is so simple and yet very effective. A package of book match is folded so that the cover is on the inside of the match, instead of on the outside. A lighted cigarette is placed with the unlighted end inserted between the cover and the match heads. A short fuse is used to connect a miniature blasting cap with the match-heads. When the cigarette burns down to the match-heads, it ignites the fuse which in turn actuates the blasting cap and explodes the bomb.

(6) Other Military-Type Bombs – These types of bombs include those designed for use in warfare, such as grenades, rockets, etc.

(7) Improvised Bombs – These types are those which are crudely made out of easily obtainable materials like gasoline and gun-powder. An example of these types are the Molotiv cocktail bombs, and pillbox bombs which are commonly used by agitators during violent demonstrations. They can inflict serious injury to persons and in some cases death.

2. PREVENTIVE MEASURES .

a. The Provost Officer. – The Provost Officer shall ^ undertake the following measures:

(1) Divide Area II of the Malacañang Compound into sensitive and non-sensitive areas. For the total protection of the sensitive-areas, all packages/bags/containers must first be unpacked and examined in a non-sensitive area before they are allowed to be brought inside any sensitive area.

(2) Detail a patrol whose duty is to take notes of the following information on vehicles parked within Area II, except those official cars which are being used by Malacañang Officials –

(a) Make of vehicles (Chevrolet, Ford, Opel, etc );

(b) Type (Sedan, coupe station wagon, convertible, etc.);

(c) Colors (Blue body, white top, blue wheels, etc);

(d) Identification data (License plate number, letter on decal or plate and other markings on the body, rear window and bumper);

(e) Outstanding features (Flag on aerial, dents., luggage on top, etc.); and

(f) Identity of the driver (For suspected vehicles only).

(3) Detail guards at all lobby entrances of the Administration Building to detect suspicious acting persons who may be carrying boxes, packages, porfolios, attache cases, or wrapped containers.

When they see one, they shall point such suspected person to the Metrocom .guards who are also detailed with them at the lobbies, and the latter shall immediately place the suspected person under surveillance wherever he goes within Area II.

(4) Issue clearance to any repairman (PLDT, MWSS, MERALCO, private carpenter, mason, etc) before said person can do any repair job in any office/building. The recommendation for the issuance of such clearance shall be initiated by the Chief, Engineering Division.

(5) Prohibit any person from catering food inside the premises of Area II without any clearance from his office.

(6) Be ready to react to any call regarding the presence of suspicious package in any area with to dispose of it immediately in accordance with prescribed safety standard operating procedures.

(7) Take custody of any apprehended person(s) for investigation and/or disposition.

b. Metrocom  – The Metrocom Commander billeted in Area shall:

(1) Provide a one-man walking patrol along each corridor of the Administration Building during day time. His duties are:

(a) To be on the look-out for any suspicious acting person carrying any type of package bag/attache case and place him under surveillance;

(b) Detect any package, bag, box, attache case or any wrapped container abandoned along the corridor; and

(c) Be ready to assist any security officer of any Office on call.

(2) Support the Provost Officer on request.

(3) Post a guard detail at all lobby entrances of the Administration Building at night time.

c. Chiefs of Office – The Chiefs of Office shall:

(1) Detail a Security Officer for each separate Division/Section under their control, direction and supervision. The duties of the Security Officer are –

(a) To inspect the premises of his office immediately after his arrival to detect any suspicious looking object lying around within the premises;

(b) To be on the 1o0k-out for any suspicious acting-person entering the office carrying any type of package, and to watch closely all his movement until he leaves the office;

(c) To inform all personnel in his Office about the presence of any abandoned package suspected to contain bomb/explosive. This shall be done in a manner that will not create panic among the employees. He shall direct the orderly evacuation of the place and thereafter notifies the Provost Officer about the abandoned package, who, in turn shall immediately take steps for its inspection and/or disposal;

(d) To detect any faulty electrical device and report the same to the Engineering Division; and

(e) To prevent any repairman (PLDT, MERALCO, MWSS, private carpenter, etc) from making any repair work inside his Office without clearance from the Provost Officer.

(2) Develop security consciousness among all his employees. Since security is everybody’s business, each employee should be trained on observation so that each can assist the Security Officer in the detection of suspicious acting persons and/or abandoned packages.

(3) Procure- appropriate fire-fighting equipment for putting out any fire that may be caused by incendiary bomb or arson.

(4) Conduct periodic security inspection of his office to include the separate Divisions/Sections under his control, direction and supervision.

(5) Familiarize his employees on the mechanics of the fire-fighting and evacuation plans.

d. Chief, Engineering Division – The Chief, Engineering Division shall undertake the following activities:

(1) Direct all janitors to be on the look out for any: abandoned package along corridors, offices and toilets.

(2) Designate an employee who shall conduct an inspection of the elevators as often as necessary for hidden bombs/explosives.

(3) Have all electrical facilities within Area II inspected periodically to detect any deliberate tampering of such facilities.

(4) Recommend to the Provost Officer the issuance of clearance to any repairman (PLDT, MERALCO, MWSS , private carpenter, etc) before he is allowed to start any repair work.

e. Supervising Security Officers – The Supervising Security-Officers mentioned in Memorandum Order No. 267 dated December. 29, 1971 shall:

(1) Exercise supervision over the Security Officers designated for each Office/Division/Unit.

(2) Assist them in the orderly evacuation of a threatened area.

(3) Coordinate with the patrol detail of Metrocom along the corridor.

3. HANDLING OF A PACKAGE OR AN OBJECT SUSPECTED OF BEING A BOMB .

a. The first consideration is the safety of the personnel and preservation of property. Any employee who discovers an abandoned package or object suspected to contain a bomb explosive shall immediately alert the Security Officer who, in turn, notifies the Chief of Office and the Provost Officer about the suspicious object. The Provost Officer shall, in turn, notifies the bomb disposal expert who shall inspect and/or dispose of the package or object. Simultaneously all the personnel in the vicinity must be warned to clear the area.

b. No attempt shall be made to move and/or dispose of the suspected bomb by anyone other than a bomb expert, except when a bomb expert is not available and there is a reason to believe that an extreme emergency exists.

c. Unless there is an imminent danger to personnel in the immediate area, pulling the fuse should not be attempted. If it is decided that the risk of losing an individual’s life is justified, the fuse may be cut. Do not stamp it with the foot. It a knife or a pair of scissors is not available for cutting it, pull the same with speed and firmness and immediately throw it to a safe place to avoid injuries from the cap detector that may be attached to it.

d. If there is no time to pull the fuse, drop flat on the flood, seek cover behind any furniture and at the same time shield the head and eyes.

3. Pouring water on any package emitting smoke should not be attempted. If the bomb is electrically actuated, it will hasten its explosion.

4. PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN CASE OF AN EXPLOSION .

a. The most dangerous period during an explosion within a building is the first few seconds. Always strive to keep calm and avoid panic. The best thing to do is to seek cover or refuge under strong furniture.

b. When directed to proceed to the safe area outside the building, i.e., the open space in front of the Administration Building, use the stairways keeping to the right side in going down. Never use the elevator. Do not listen to rumors. Receive instructions from your Chief of Office only.

c. Cabinets must be locked before leaving the rooms.

5. INVESTIGATIONS .

a. In case of an actual arrest made based on the principle of citizens arrest, the suspected saboteur should be turned over to the Provost Officer for investigation.

b. Arresting officers or persons should see to it that the suspect is disarmed of any deadly weapons or explosives prior to turn-over to the Provost Officer.

6. REFERENCE .

a. SOP No. 4 (Emergency Control Measures and Guidance of Malacañang Employees) Office of the Provost Officer dated October 4, 19 71.

b. SOP No. 1 (Fire-Fighting Procedures) Office of the Provost Officer dated May 1, 1971.

c. Memorandum Order No. 3 (Requiring the Designation of a Security Officer for every Division and Primary Unit in the Office of the President) dated October 8, 1962.

d. Memorandum Order No. 267 (Designating Supervising Security Officers in the Executive Office) Office of the President dated December 29, 1972.

7. CHANGES .

Chief office and units implementing this publication are encouraged to submit recommended changes or comments to improve its contents.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, September 15, 1972

Source : Malacañang Records Office