Office of the President of the Philippines

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 204

REQUIRING OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT TO WEAR NAMEPLATES.

As a means of identification, all officials and employees in the Office of the President who are assigned to and actually working in the offices and units within the Malacañang Compound, including those on detail from other government agencies, are hereby required to wear the revised nameplates which shall be in different colors, each color representing a primary unit or group of units, bearing the inscription “EXECUTIVE OFFICE,” the employee’s name and photograph, the division or unit where he is assigned, and the signature of the Assistant Executive Secretary. The nameplate shall be pinned or clipped conspicuously over the left breast and worn at all times the employee is on official duty during or outside of the regular office hours within the premises of the Malacañang Compound, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.

The nameplate may not be taken by the employee outside of the premises. Whenever he goes out of the premises of the Malacañang Compound he shall leave it with the employee designated to take custody thereof either in the Malacañang Information Center counter or in his division or unit, wherever it is convenient for him. Each chief of division or unit shall designate an employee for the purpose in his division or unit. The employees so designated shall adopt a simple receipting system for the nameplates received and issued by them.

Employees shall be accountable for the nameplates issued to them and in case of loss they shall immediately submit, through the Division Chief concerned, written report, giving the circumstances of its loss, to the Administrative Division which shall provide a replacement at the expense of the employee concerned.

The Administrative Division shall take charge of the procurement of the nameplates and the issuance thereof to the employees concerned. Employees shall surrender their nameplates to the Administrative Division upon separation from the service of the Office of the President.

Strict compliance with the provisions of this Order is enjoined, violation of which shall be sufficient ground for administrative action.

This Order shall take effect not later than five (5) days from the date hereof.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, November 12, 1970

Source: Malacañang Records Office