Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 517

CREATING INTER-AGENCY STUDY GROUPS TO FORMULATE PLANS FOR THE CONVERSION OF U.S. MILITARY BASES IN THE PHILIPPINES INTO REVENUE-GENERATING AREAS

There are hereby created three Inter-Agency Study Groups charged with the task of drawing up plans for the conversion of U.S. military bases in the Philippines into revenue-generating complexes in order to develop the full commercial potentials of these areas.

There will be one committee each., divided into a government and a private sector group, to study three major military installations – Subic Naval Base, Clark Air Base and Camp John Hay – to be composed as follows:

I. Subic Naval Base

Coordinator

1. Mr. Victor M. Taylor Executive Office

Government Sector

Private Sector Group

II. Clark Air Base

Coordinator

1. Col. Luis Mirasol, Jr. Executive Office

Government Group

Private Sector Group

III. Camp John Hay

Coordinator

1. Mr. J. Roberto L. Abling Executive Office

Government Sector

Private Sector Group

These Study Groups are charged with the following:

1. Make an inventory of existing resources and’ facilities in the above-mentioned Bases as well as in the surrounding communities;

2. Design a Master Plan for the full development of the revenue-and employment-generating potentials of these areas;

3. Formulate an Operation Plan for the implementation of the Master Design, identifying among other things a realistic time-phasing of activities, probable facilities to be retained in the Bases and resource inputs required;

4. Determine the economic feasibility of the plans formulated;

5. Draw-up programs for the mobilization of resources required;

6. Recommend the organizational structure and legislative requirements to effect these Plans;

7. Study possible dislocations in the labor force and recommend stop-gap labor-generating

measures during slack transitional periods; and

8. Study the linkages of the envisioned complexes with existing and proposed political, industrial, agricultural and economic centers in the country.

The Study Groups shall at the earliest possible time identify the financial requirements for undertaking these studies. Funds shall be drawn from the Preliminary-Engineering Fund.

The Study Groups are authorized to form such working teams as may be necessary and to call on any agency of Government, including Government-owned or-controlled corporations, as well as local government units for any assistance that may be needed.

For immediate compliance.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, 16 June 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff