TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 706

REQUIRING STRICT OBSERVANCE OF ALL EXISTING, SECURITY MEASURES AND INSTITUTING ADDITIONAL SECURITY REGULATIONS.

In line with the current intensified campaign for the strict enforcement of security measures in all public places, it is hereby directed that all officials and employees of the Office of the President and of the Ministry of the Budget and of other offices concerned familiarize themselves with, implement and observe strictly, all the security measures that have so far been adopted and disseminated through various issuances. For this purpose, all heads of units are hereby furnished compilations of all such issuances.

More particularly, the following requirements shall be strictly enforced and observed by all concerned, violation of which shall subject the offenders to strict administrative disciplinary action:

I. ON PERSONNEL SECURITY

A. Renewal of clearances . – All officials and employee are hereby required to accomplish the prescribed NISA clearance forms. These forms shall be distributed by, or may be obtained from, the Administrative Office. Once accomplished, these forms shall be submitted to the Administrative Office not later than December 7, 1980.

B. Display of nameplates . – All officials and employees shall always wear the prescribed nameplates (not the pocket identification cards), upon entering the Malacañang compound and while within their office premises.

C. Personnel working overtime – Officials and employees rendering overtime service after 6:00 o’clock in the afternoon and on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall secure written authorization either from the undersigned, Presidential Executive Assistant Jacobo C. Clave or Presidential Finance Assistant Cesar Dumlao. The PGB Provost Office and the Administrative Office shall be furnished a copy each of this authorization.

II. ON VISITOR’S SECURITY

A. Visitor’s tap – Visitors shall always display their visitor’s tags provided by the guards at Gate 4. No one shall attend to, nor transact official business with, visitors who are not wearing visitor’s tags. If necessary, visitors without such tags may be referred to the Security Officers

B. Comfort rooms . – Visitors shall not be allowed to use comfort rooms located inside offices. They may be allowed to use only the public CR’s.

All janitors shall always keep themselves in the vicinity of CR’s designated for the public they are assigned to clean, be on the lookout for any suspicious-looking individuals, and report anyone they may notice.

C. Designated areas for visitors. – All heads of offices and units must provide, space permitting, visitor’s waiting area. Visitors shall not be allowed to stay within the working areas.

D. Guarding against suspicious-looking persons , -all officials and employees are enjoined to be always on the lookout for any suspicious-looking persons. Should anyone spot such kind of a person within the office premises, he or she shall report this matter immediately to the Provost Office located behind the MSLA Office, or call up the office of Lt. Col. Fortunato Lopez over Telephone No. 59-22-77 (Direct Line) or Local 6539 (GTS) or Local 561 (PLDT).

III. ON FIRE EARTHQUAKE AND OTHER EMERGENCIES

A. Fire plan . – The office fire plan shall be strictly observed in the event of occurrence of fire, earthquake, or other emergencies. Fire drills shall be conducted periodically by the Malacañang Fire Station, assisted by the administrative Office and the Engineer’s Office. For this purpose, all officials and employees shall be given the necessary instructions, including the manner of using fire extinguishers, so that they may know what to do in case of fire, earthquake or other emergency.

B. Fire hazards . – All fire hazards, as may be indicated by the Malacañang Fire Station shall be removed immediately. Cooking and smoking inside offices are strictly prohibited. For this reason, cooking equipment shall be removed from offices. The Malacañang Fire Station shall enforce this strictly.

C. Fire alarm . – A fire alarm system shall be installed. In case of fire, the Malacañang Fire Station located near the Malacañang Garage at San Miguel may be called over Telephone No. 269 (PLDT, Local) or 6437 (GTS Local).

IV. ON PHYSICAL SECURITY

A. Building physical defects . – The Engineer’s Office shall always be on the lookout for building physical defects and shall undertake immediate repairs of said defects and shall undertake immediate repairs of said defects.

B. Human traffic inside the Administration Building. – The main lobby of the Administration Building shall be provided with appropriate dividers to properly control the entry and exit of human traffic.

The backdoor facing Pasig River shall be closed for normal human traffic ‘except to those authorized to pass through it.

V. ON DOCUMENT SECURITY

All concerned are hereby enjoined to observe strictly the provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 78, series of 1964, as amended, relative to the security, custody and disposition of classified matters.

All heads of primary units and offices shall instruct all personnel of their respective units to formulate, in coordination with the Malacañang Fire Station, fire/emergency priority plan so that they will always be guided on what records, pieces of equipment and materials have to be evacuated first in case of emergency,

VI. O N VEHICULAR CONTROL

Only officials whose cars are included in the list submitted to the security officers may enter the Malacañang Compound through Gate 4, and park at appropriate spaces provided for the purpose.

Other employees with cars can use the portion of Mendiola Street within the control point for parking, or San Rafael Street as shown in the diagram accompanying the office memorandum of November 13, 1980, relative to re-routing of vehicular traffic in the vicinity of Malacañang.

Those whose cars are authorized to enter Malacañang Compound shall unload their passengers, if any, before entering Gate 4. If their passengers happen to be employees of this Office, these passengers need not get off the cars provided they are wearing their nameplates.

VII. ON INFORMATION CAMPAIGN ON SECURITY

All heads of offices shall see to it that appropriate seminars on security are conducted in their respective units. If they cannot conduct this seminar themselves, they may enlist the assistance of the Training Staff of the Administrative Office.

Strict compliance herewith is earnestly enjoined.

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Senior Presidential Assistant

Manila, November 24, 1980

Source : Presidential Management Staff