Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 139

FURTHER AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 1, DATED JANUARY 7, 1958, AS AMENDED, IN SO FAR AS ITS PROVISIONS GOVERNING THE PREPARATION OF CORRESPONDENCE FOR SIGNATURE ARE CONCERNED.

Pending the contemplated reorganization of the Executive Office and for expediency, papers on the following subject matters shall be prepared for the signature of the officials as hereunder indicated:

A. The President

1. Communications to heads of foreign governments;

2. Messages to the Congress of the Philippines;

3. Executive orders, administrative orders and proclamations;

4. Appointments, designations and commissions of Presidential appointees;

5. Suspension and removal of Presidential appointees;

6. Pardons, reprieves and commutations of sentence;

7. Deportation orders of undesirable aliens;

8. Extradition of fugitives from justice;

9. Patents for grant of public lands exceeding 144 hectares; and

10. Matters involving important decisions, rulings and policies.

B. The Executive Secretary

To be signed “By Order of the President.”

1. Appointments or designations to local elective offices;

2. Designations to temporary vacancies in the National Government filled by Presidential appointments; and

3. P lacing or withdrawing of local police forces under PG control .

To be signed “By authority of the President.”

1. Directives issued and decisions reached by the President upon recommendation of the Cabinet;

2. Appointments of officials and employee in the Office of the President;

3. Appointments of officials and employees of bureaus and offices under the Office of the President with salary of ₱4404 per annum or above;

4. Acceptance of resignations of high government officials;

5. Authority for the temporary detail of officials with the rank of chief of division or equivalent or higher rank from one office to another;

6. Retirement and acceptance of resignation of Presidential appointees;

7. Government purchases of cars costing more than ₱8,000.00;

8. Official travel abroad, including per diem and clothing allowance of officials going abroad on special assignment;

9. Decisions on appealed cases from the General Auditing Office and the Department of Finance involving auditing, accounting and financial matters;

10. Decisions on appeals from the Auditor General, the different heads of Departments, and other offices;

11. Confirmation of disapproval of decisions in court-martial cases and cases from selection boards;

12. Contracts and conveyances in which the National Government is a party;

13. Decision on conflicts of duties between local officials;

14. Opening and closing of amusement places and gaming centers;

15. Authority to examine income tax returns filed in the Bureau of Internal Revenue;

16. Authority for members of the investigation staff of the National Bureau of Investigation to have access to records of private parties and concerns;

17. Decision in deportation cases where the respondents are not deported, and denial of petitions for reconsideration of deportation orders;

18. Preventive suspension of elective provincial and city officials and Presidential appointees;

19. Authority for payment of salaries during suspension of Presidential appointees and elective city officials;

20. Acquisition of big landed estates for resale to occupants (to be submitted thru the Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs);

21. Authority to institute condemnation proceedings by national and municipal governments;

22. Exchange or transfer of properties from one political subdivision to another;

23. Approval of applications for leave of absence of Presidential appointees in the National Government;

24. Memorandum orders, circulars and special orders;

25. Assignment and retirement of personnel of the Office of the President (to be submitted thru the Assistant Executive Secretary for Administrative Affairs);

26. Detail or assignment of officials and employees to and from the Office of the President (to be submitted thru the Assistant Executive Secretary for Administrative Affairs);

27. Proposed appointments in the National Government and government-owned or controlled corporations involving positions with salaries over ₱6,000.00 per annum, including authority to fill such high positions ;

28. Declaration of positions in the national government as highly technical, primarily confidential or policy-determining in nature; and

29. Reinstatement in the service of previously retired employees.

C. Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs

1. Approval of the disposition or assignment of alien properties and military reservations;

2. Disposal of former enemy alien properties;

3. Acquisition of public lands;

4. Tax waiver and exemption;

5. Board examinations, rules and regulations, and administrative cases against professionals;

6. Disposition of official records;

7. Proposed appointments in the National Government and government-owned or controlled corporations involving positions with salaries of ₱6,000.00 per annum or below, including authority to fill such positions ;

8. Technical studies and policy decisions on economic and financial matters;

9. Ad hoc economic matters;

10. Special budgets;

11. Release and disbursement of funds and establishment of revolving funds;

12. Claims for additional compensation or meal allowance for overtime service;

13. Relief from settled liability to the government of not less than ₱10,000.00;

14. Use of savings for the commutation of leave, compensation or gratuity, deficits or other purposes authorized under the Appropriation Act;

15. Transfer of property, budget estimates, requisitions and vouchers of the offices and bureaus under the Office of the President as a Department;

16. Procurement of Office of the President supplies, materials and equipment;

17. Annual inventory of properties in the Office of the President; and

18. Accounting reports, allotments and collection of debts due the Office of the President.

D. Assistant Executive Secretary for Administrative Affairs

1. Administrative action by the Games and Amusement Board in the exercise of its supervisory power over basque pelote games, professional boxing and wrestling, and horse racing;

2. Leave and other benefits of personnel of Office of the President;

3. Authority to appoint persons 57 years old or over;

4. Detail to and from outside of officials and employees below the rank of division chief or below head of Provincial Offices, such as Provincial Health Officers, District Engineers, etc.;

5. Retirement, inlcuding change of appointment status from temporary to permanent for retirement purposes;

6. Public works projects, housing and resettlement programs and public school building programs;

7. Claims for retirement gratuity, pension, backpay, unpaid salaries and wages, injury and disability benefits and similar claims;

8. Permission to teach, practice profession or engage in business outside of office hours;

9. Historical markers, toll roads and bridges, use of AFP bands, public buildings, office quarters, public sanitation and classification of roads;

10. Statement of assets and liabilities of government officials and employees;

11. Authority for government personnel or organizations to solicit contributions;

12. Allotments, financial aids, donations, gifts from the contingent fund, charity fund of PCSO, or other similar special funds;

13. State ceremonials, presentation of Credentials by foreign ambassadors and ministers, and Presidential awards or decorations;

14. National or international celebrations and social functions attended or given by the President or the First Lady;

15. Relative rankings of Philippine and foreign officials in state functions;

16. Awards, citations and decorations, heraldry, official seals, coats of arms, medals, badges, insignias, commemorative stamps, and use of display of flags;

17. Education matters; and

18. Requests for employment.

E. Assistan t Executive Secretary for Local Government Affairs

1. Action on appeals from decisions of provincial boards on cases against elective municipal officials;

2. Conveyances of real property by the province ;

3. Sites for provincial, city of municipal plazas, markets, and other public improvements;

4. Approval of application for leave of absence of Provincial Governors and City Mayors;

5. Classification of political subdivisions, boundary disputes, and distribution of assets and liabilities between old and new political subdivisions;

6. Loans of local governments, acquisition of lands, increase of percentage allowable from income for salaries and wages in city governments, disposal of unserviceable property and withdrawal from public servitude of streets, plazas, etc.;

7. Standardizaiton of salaries of provincial, city and municipal officials and employees not otherwise fixed by law;

8. Local trips of city and municipal officials outside their respective cities and municipalities ;

9. Allowances, per diems and overtime pay of load officials and employees;

10. Commutation of leaves;

11. Claims for gratuity, injury and disability benefits and similar claims;

12. Authority to fill positions in local governments, appointments payable from local discretionary funds of special policemen in private or semi-government institutions;

13. Statement of assets and liabilities of local officials;

14. Declaration of positions in the local government as highly technical, primarily confidential or policy-determining;

15. Appointment or reinstatement to the service in the local governments of applicants who are over 57 years of age;

16. Preliminary actions on all matters relating to the placing or the withdrawal of local police forces under Constabulary control; and

17. Creation of new departments, offices, or divisions in the City Goverments.

F. Presidential Assistant (Dr. Guillermo de Vega)

1. Allocation of reserved car plate numbers;

2. Malacañang buildings and grounds, transport service, general utility and maintenance; and

3. Medical, dental and nursing service to personnel of the Office of the President and the general public.

For purposes of this Order, the following designations are hereby

1. Hon. Flores A. Bayot as Assistant Executive Secretary for General Affairs and Assistant Executive Secretary for Local Government Affairs;

2. Hon. Gilberto M. Duavit as Assistant Executive Secretary for Administrative Affairs;

3. Hon. Ponciano G. A. Mathat as Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affaris; and

4. Mr. Cesar Dumlao as Officer-in-Charge of the Office of the Assistant Executive Secretary for Finance and Economic Affairs.

All correspondence prepared by the Legal Office for the signature of the Executive Secretary, shall, however, be course through the Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs.

In case of doubt as to who has the authority over certain matters, or in eases which do not appear to be j specifically covered by this Order, the same shall be referred to the Executive Secretary for resolution.

All Assistant Executive Secretaries and other officials concerned are hereby enjoined to freely consult with each other as well as with the Executive Secretary on matters they consider sensitive,

All memorandum orders, office orders, or other orders or parts thereof inconsistent with this Memorandum Order are hereby revoked or amended accordingly,

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By the authority of the President: (Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Manila, August 26, 1969

Source : Malacañang Records Office