TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 473

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT PLANNING.

For the purpose of achieving coordination in transport planning, there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Technical Committee composed of the following:

The Head of the Planning Service/Unit of each of the following government offices:

The Committee shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Formulate and recommend to the NEDA comprehensive and integrated transport plans;

b. Formulate, standards and guidelines for the preparation of agency plan’s for transport development;

c. Develop a transport information system that shall serve the information needs of all transport planning and other relevant agencies;

d. Coordinate the conduct of studies and researches and gathering of data on various aspects of the transport sector;

e. formulate areas of cooperation and coordination among the various agencies and instrumentalities of the government involved in transport programs and projects to avoid duplication of efforts;

f. Provide the NEDA Board with up-to-date information needed in the review and evaluation of transport plans and projects; and

g. Serve as a forum for the resolution of operational problems of transport agencies.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and, for the purpose of discharging its function, may-create sub-committees as may be necessary.

The Infrastructure Staff of the NEDA shall provide the necessary secretariat services to the Committee.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the government are hereby requested to extend full cooperation and assistance to the Committee to ensure the accomplishment of its tasks.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately and shall supersede Memorandum Circular No. 753 dated July 29, 1974 of this Office.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, December 5, 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff