Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 89

IMPLEMENTATION AND INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF THE NATIONAL ANTI­-DRUG PLAN OF ACTION

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 9165, otherwise known as the “Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002,” mandates the Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB), to develop and adopt a comprehensive, unified, integrated and balanced national drug abuse and prevention control strategy;

WHEREAS, the DDB formulated the National Anti-Drug Plan of Action (NADPA) which outlines the efforts of the government to strengthen its campaign against drugs and contribute to international efforts to counter the world drug problem;

WHEREAS, the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs provides that the Member States of the United Nations are fully aware that the drug problem remains a common and shared responsibility that requires effective and increased international cooperation; and

WHEREAS, in the Philippines, the drug problem is not merely a security or health issue, but also encompasses social, economic, psychological and economic interests, requiring the unified involvement of various government agencies.

NOW, THEREFORE, the concerned agencies are directed as follows:

Section 1. Implementing Agencies. All government offices, departments, bureaus, agencies, offices and government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), shall implement the NADPA. The DDB shall serve as the lead agency in its implementation.

Section 2. Formulation of the Implementing Plan and Operations Plan for the NADPA. The NADPA shall be implemented for a period of five (5) years. All government offices are required to formulate and submit their respective Five (5) Year Implementing and Operational Plans for the NADPA to the DDB within sixty (60) days after the effectivity of this Circular.

Section 3. Review. The DDB shall continuously improve and upgrade the implementation of the NADPA, until the vision of a drug-resistant and eventually a drug-free country has been achieved and consistently sustained. In consultation with the implementing government offices, the DDB shall develop a performance standard measure to determine the accomplishment status of the implementation of the NADPA.

In order to evaluate the NADPA, the DDB, with the assistance of the Philippine Statistical Authority (PSA), shall conduct a nationwide survey of drug prevalence in the country every three (3) years, the results of which shall be utilized for policy formulation on drug prevention and control.

Section 4. Implementation of a Drug-Free Workplace Program and Authorized Drug Testing. All government offices shall formulate and adopt their own drug-free workplace programs and conduct authorized drug testing among officials and personnel pursuant to DDB Resolution No. 2 (s. 2004) and Civil Service Commission Memorandum Circular No. 13 (s. 2010). The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) shall ensure the implementation of drug free-workplace policy and programs in the private sector, pursuant to DOLE Department Order No. 53 (s. 2003).

Section 5. Submission of Reports and Reviews to the DDB. To assist the DDB in its review of the NADPA within the five (5) year target implementation, all government offices shall submit the following reports to the DDB, relative to their respective accomplishments in relation to their NADPA tasks, undertakings, programs and projects:

a. Annual reports, to be submitted in the month of February of the succeeding year being reported;

b. Final review, to be submitted in the month of February on the fifth year of the five (5) year target implementation.

All submissions by government offices shall include an evaluation in relation to the performance standard measure, as mentioned in Section 3 of this Circular.

Section 6. Role of Local Government Units (LGUs). In the implementation of their respective anti-drug programs, LGUs are enjoined to actively assist in the implementation and institutionalization of the NADPA by ensuring that their programs are parallel or in support of the programs of implementing agencies.

Section 7. Role of the Private Sector. Non-government organizations, civil society organizations and private institutions are enjoined to actively participate in the implementation and institutionalization of the NADPA, by conducting programs with the end of achieving a drug free workplace in the private sector.

Section 8. Funding. All implementing agencies are authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Circular, subject to the applicable laws and budgetary, accounting, and auditing rules and regulations. For succeeding years, all agencies are directed to program such amounts, as may be necessary for the implementation of the NADPA or any other similar plan of action, in their respective budgets.

Section 9. Repeal. All orders, issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Circular, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 10. Separability. If any provision of this Circular is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Section 11. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 17th day of December, in the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Fifteen.

By Authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary