Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 65

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO OVERSEE ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS OF DISTRIBUTION UTILITIES IN THE PHILIPPINES

There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee (IAC) to oversee the electrification programs and projects involving distribution utilities in the country. The IAC shall be composed of representatives from the following agencies:

For electrification within their respective areas, the Mindanao Development Authority (MinDA) and Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) shall likewise serve as ad-hoc members of the IAC.

The duly authorized representatives of the member-agencies of the IAC should be senior officials with rank not lower than Assistant Secretary or its equivalent. Further, member agencies shall designate an alternate member who should have the same qualifications.

The IAC, supported by a Secretariat to be organized by the DOE, may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, local government units, non-government organizations, and the private sector for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require.

The IAC shall have the following responsibilities:

a. Assess the electrification programs and projects of distribution utilities and identify bottlenecks, difficulties, and issues arising therefrom;

b. Develop a plan to ensure that the electrification programs and projects of distribution utilities are sustainable and secure;

c. Review and recommend relevant plans and courses of action to the Office of the President and such other offices, such as the National Electrification Administration, to ensure that the electrification programs and projects of distribution utilities are sustainable and secure; and

d. Review and recommend to the Office of the President policy and operational options to resolve electrification concerns, including the exercise of the power of the State to temporarily take-over or direct the operation of any privately-owned public utility, if so warranted.

The member-agencies of the IAC are authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Circular, subject to budgetary, accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Additional funds and possible fund sources as may be necessary for the implementation of this Circular shall be identified and provided for by the Department of Budget and Management. Subsequent funding requirements shall be incorporated in the annual budget proposals of the respective member-agencies through the General Appropriations Act.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

By Authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, Philippines 30 June 2014