Office of the President of the Philippines Malaca ñang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 79

CONDUCT OF A SYNCHRONIZED METRO-WIDE EARTHQUAKE DRILL

WHEREAS, Section 2 (d) of Republic Act (RA) No. 10121 or the “Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010” provides that it is the policy of the state to adopt and implement a coherent, comprehensive, integrated, efficient and responsive disaster risk reduction program incorporated in the development plan at various levels of government adhering to the principles of good governance;

WHEREAS, Section 3 (g) of RA No. 7924 or “An Act Creating the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA), Defining Its Powers and Function, Providing Funds Therefor and Other Purposes” provides that services relating to public safety in Metro Manila which includes the formulation and implementation of programs and policies and procedures to achieve public safety, especially preparedness for preventive or rescue operations during times of calamities and disasters such as earthquakes, shall be under the jurisdiction of the MMDA.

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 137 (s.1999) declared the month of July of every year as National Disaster Consciousness Month and institutionalized the Civil Defense Deputization Program to provide national government agencies and local government units (LGU) ample time to implement their disaster awareness campaigns and programs;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology represents that the 100-kilometer West Valley Fault Line, which traverses cities and towns in Metro Manila, is considered to be ripe for movement, and that the said cities and towns may experience earthquakes with magnitude up to 7.2 which may cause significant damages and fatalities.

NOW, THEREFORE, the following are hereby ordered:

SECTION 1. Earthquake Drill. There shall be a synchornized Earthquake Drill in Metro Manila on 30 July 2015.

SECTION 2. Participation of Government Agencies and Instrumentalities. All heads of government departments, bureaus and offices, including Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations, and LGUs, are enjoined to authorize and encourage their respective officials and employees to participate in the synchronized Metro Manila wide earthquake drill. Further, they are accorded discretion to exempt their officials and employees, who are part of such effort, from observing regular office hours and/or from performing their duties, without prejudice to the regular and efficient delivery of government services, subject to applicable laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 3. Implementing Agency. The Metro Manila Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council as chaired by the Chairperson of the MMDA, and in coordination with the National Disaster Risk Reduction And Management Council, shall lead in the implementation of this Circular and shall perform the following functions:

SECTION 4. Private Sector Participation. The private sector, including volunteer and civic organizations, is hereby encouraged to participate and assist in the implementation of the MC as the exigencies and circumstances may require.

SECTION 5. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules, and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Circular are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Separability. If any provision of this Circular is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24th day of July, in the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Fifteen.

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary