MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 3

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE MEDIUM-TERM PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN (MTPDP) AND THE MEDIUM-TERM PUBLIC INVESTMENT PROGRAM (MTPIP) FOR 2010-2016

Section 9, Article XII of the 1987 Constitution mandates that the economic and planning agency of the Government shall implement continuing integrated and coordinated programs and policies for national development after consultations with appropriate public agencies, various private sectors, and local government units.

Accordingly, and in order to translate the “Social Contract with the Filipino People” into consistent policies and programs, and considering the need to specify the resource allocation of the national government to ensure efficiency in public spending and implement effective government policies, programs and projects, the following are hereby directed:

1. The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) shall coordinate the preparation of the MTPDP and MTPIP for 2010-2016 to be jointly formulated by the executive and legislative branches of the government in a participative process involving the other sectors of the Philippine society— the marginalized sectors and communities, and private organizations.

2. All government departments, offices and instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations, shall formulate their respective medium-term development plans and action programs. These plans and programs shall have results-oriented focus on national development goals.

3. The MTPDP shall contain at least the following basic elements:

a. Development goals and objectives;

b. Strategic policy framework to attain such goals and objectives; and

c. Strategy planning matrix, a list of result-based priority sectoral activities, and the necessary supportive legislations.

4. The MTPDP shall be submitted to the NEDA Board and Legislative Executive Advisory Council (LEDAC) by December 2010.

5. All departments, offices and instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations, shall draw inputs from their respective regional offices. The regional development concerns of the various departments, offices and instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations, must be consistent with the regional development plan.

6. All plans of the local government units shall be consistent with the regional development strategies, physical framework, and local needs.

7. All sectors of society, public or private, shall be consulted to the fullest to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related thereto.

8. The planning guidelines to be followed in the formulation of the plans and programs shall be issued by the NEDA Secretariat and shall be made an integral part of this Circular.

9. The Department of Budget and Management shall provide the funds necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Circular, subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

This Memorandum Circular shall take immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2 nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary