Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 53

ENJOINING ALL DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES, AND INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS (LGUs) TO ACTIVELY SUPPORT THE FULL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TASK FORCE PABLO REHABILITATION PLANS AND PROGRAMS

WHEREAS, Typhoon Pablo caused numerous casualties and severe damage to property, infrastructure, and agriculture in Visayas and Mindanao, especially in the worst-hit provinces of Compostela Valley and Davao Oriental;

WHEREAS, in response to the widespread destruction caused by Typhoon Pablo, the National Government has been providing assistance to its victims to restore to normalcy the living conditions of the affected communities at the earliest possible time;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the directive of the President, the Task Force Pablo (herein referred to as the Task Force) was created to develop the comprehensive Pablo Rehabilitation Plan (PRP) which aims to rationalize, harmonize, streamline, simplify, integrate, and unify the efforts of government agencies mandated to rehabilitate the affected areas and address the needs of the affected population; and,

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure full support to and cooperation with the Task Force for the successful completion of its tasks and functions.

NOW, THEREFORE, all officials and employees of government agencies and instrumentalities, including Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) and LGUs, are hereby enjoined to fully support and cooperate with the Task Force in the full implementation of the comprehensive plans for the Typhoon Pablo affected areas.

The Office of the Cabinet Secretary (OCS) is hereby designated as Chair of the Task Force to ensure proper implementation, management, monitoring, evaluation and integration of the social services, infrastructure, resettlement, and livelihood rehabilitation plans, policies, and programs. The Task Force is directed to work with all concerned stakeholders, including the LGUs with jurisdiction over Compostela Valley and Davao Oriental, in the full implementation of the PRP, and to regularly submit reports to the Office of the President.

Subject to the approval of the President, and as reviewed and recommended by the Task Force and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) in accordance with the relevant guidelines of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) whenever applicable, the member-agencies of the Task Force and the Clusters are hereby authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order. Budgetary requirements of the Task Force shall be subject to the usual government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Additional funds as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order shall be identified and released by the DBM, in accordance with the approved PRP.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 30th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Thirteen.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary