Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 66

DIRECTING THE FORMATION OF TASK FORCE SENTENARYO FOR THE IGLESIA NI CRISTO CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY

WHEREAS, pursuant to Republic Act No. 9645, it is declared a policy of the State to observe the founding anniversary of the Iglesia ni Cristo (INC) every 27 th of July in recognition of its exemplary feat of leading its members towards spiritual enlightenment and good citizenry;

WHEREAS, the INC will celebrate the 100 th anniversary of its founding (INC Centennial Celebration) on 27 July 2014 at the Philippine Arena, Bocaue, Bulacan;

WHEREAS, the massive scale of the event is indicative of its great significance to a large number of Filipinos who are members of the INC, and who will be gathering from all over the world to take part in the INC Centennial Celebration; and

WHEREAS, Section 5, Article II of the 1987 Constitution provides that “the maintenance of peace and order, the protection of life, liberty, and property, and promotion of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings of democracy.”

NOW, THEREFORE, there is hereby created an Interagency Group to be known as Task Force Sentenaryo.

The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

The Task Force shall take charge of government actions and responses in connection with the INC Centennial Celebration, ensure smooth coordination among public and private sectors, maintain peace and order, ensure the safety of participants, and prepare a traffic management plan for the efficient and smooth transport of persons and goods during the INC Centennial Celebration.

The Task Force Head is hereby vested with full executive authority within the law to guarantee the efficient performance by the member-agencies and other government offices of their functions.

The Task Force Head may give direct operational instructions to any of the member agencies in the pursuit of their functions.

The Task Force Head, should necessity require, may designate representatives from the private sector as members of the Task Force for the effective performance of its functions.

Task Force Sentenaryo, supported by a Secretariat organized by the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority, may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, local government units, non-government organizations, and the private sector for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately and shall be declared functus officio upon the conclusion of the INC Centennial Celebration.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of July , in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand Fourteen.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary