MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 2

AMENDING MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1, SERIES 2010.

1. In the exigency of the service and to ensure continuity of government operations, official processes and transactions as well as the delivery of services to the people, Paragraphs 2 and 3 of Memorandum Circular No. 1 are hereby amended to read as follows:

“2. All non-Career Executive Service Officials (non-CESO) occupying Career Executive Service (CES) positions in all agencies of the Executive Branch shall remain in office and continue to perform their duties and discharge their responsibilities until October 31, 2010 or until their resignations have been accepted and/or until their respective replacements have been appointed or designated, whichever comes first, unless they are re-appointed in the meantime.

3. In cases where the head of agency or office has resigned and whose resignation has been accepted or is deemed separated on June 30, 2010 and no replacement has been appointed or designated, the next-in-rank and most senior official of the agency of a senior official of the Department to which said agency is attached, shall be designated by the Department Secretary concerned as Officer-in-Charge, to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the position until October 31, 2010 or until a replacement has been appointed or designated, whichever comes first, unless his designation is extended in the meantime.”

2. Any official whose service has been terminated or whose resignation has been accepted and/or before July 31, 2010, but whose replacement has not yet been appointed or designated shall be deemed separated from the service as of the date of termination or acceptance of resignation.

3. Any provision of Memorandum Circular No. 1, Series 2010 and its Implementing Guidelines dated 16, July 2010, inconsistent herewith is hereby deemed repealed or modified accordingly. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately. Done in the City of Manila this 29th day of July 2010.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary