Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the United States Chamber, United States – Association of Southeast Asian Nations Business Council, and OPIC Meeting

[Delivered in Washington, D.C., September 18, 1986]

WE MEAN BUSINESS

With democracy restored, the Philippines has created the environment for dynamic private sector business growth. Still, one depends on the other. The nation now needs economic growth to support democracy. This is an invitation to the American business community to invest in the Philippines.

I spoke this morning to the joint houses of Congress, now, I join you to address you, the other audience, American business. Together these two speeches represent the twin working levels of this trip.

I have come to say thank you to the American friends of the Philippines and to make new friends. But I have also come to reinforce the political and economic links between our countries.

We have restored democracy and thereby created the environment for dynamic private sector business growth. Yet, one depends on the other. We now need economic growth to support our democracy. We must reverse the decline in living standards of our people, end the poverty, and put our people back to work. So when we say I am here on an official working visit, I am here not just because I mean business in my dealings with the administration, but because I mean it also in my discussions with you.

Just as we have created a partnership in the Philippines between political reform and economic growth so, here in the United States, I look for cooperation and partnership, not just from the administration and congress, but also from the private sector.

So I stand before you now to say I mean business. We have begun the long process of rebuilding our nation: creating an environment of political stability and economic opportunity. Let me first outline those political changes.

Today, we are a people who believe that our freedom and our prosperity rest on protecting and strengthening our new democracy.

Democracy, at its worst, may be a long, slow, exasperating and uncertain path to progress, but it is infinitely better than dictatorship’s shortcut to disaster. We now have a government that is founded on the belief that no one knows better than the people what they want and what they are prepared to pay for.

So this new government also aims to be a lean government.

We judge that this option follows from its democratic character. If a people want self-rule, they must be self-reliant. They should seek no more government than is absolutely necessary to correct the inequities of a free market in an imperfect world. The thrust therefore of my government will be to wean the people away from the idea that they must depend on the government. This should not be hard considering how little government has done for them these 20 past years. What is needed is to make them confident that they have the strength, which they have always had, to go it alone. After the resilience and determination the Filipinos showed at the ballot boxes and in the streets earlier this year, we have all the optimism and confidence to do it.

There are no more cronies with their hands in the till. Rather, government is redirecting its attention and energies to areas that are the proper concerns of free governments: bringing about social justice, building infrastructure, safeguarding the peace and order of communities and the nation’s security.

To correct the people’s deep and widespread cynicism about government’s inability to render even-handed justice, we have recreated a new Supreme Court staffed by judges of the highest integrity and competence, beholden to no one but justice itself. A revamp of the rest of the judicial system is also well under way.

Next, the Constitutional Commission is almost through with its draft constitution. This draft will be submitted to a plebiscite in December for ratification. Its main features, even at this stage, should be familiar to you, for they are the enduring forms of democratic government that are the same everywhere.

Within the first quarter of next year, we shall have elected a new Congress and local officials, so that, at all levels, government will be in the hands of elected representatives, responsive to the needs of their constituents and accountable to them.

We have a new armed forces, restored to the people’s trust by its noble part in the renewal of democracy. Together with my defense chiefs, I am overseeing a thorough military reform. A strong army is a vital part of the defense of our new freedom.

After six months, our political framework is in place. Additions, such as those to be made by a new constitution and elections, will only flesh out its democratic character. We can now bend greater efforts to the task of economic recovery and growth in a climate of freedom.

The broad outlines of this second task have also been drawn. We have agreed with the IMF to an increase in liquidity and to a larger budget deficit as a percentage of GNP. This greater latitude might allow my government to begin rural public works which will stimulate the economy at its grassroots. We have finished our talks with the IMF and the World Bank. Tomorrow, I move on to New York to meet with the creditor banks. The negotiations with these institutions will complete the elements of a new debt package.

The country’s new financial indicators have improved. The foreign exchange rate has held steady for the last seven months. Interest rates are much lower than they have been in the last three years. Foreign exchange reserves exceed three months’ import requirements. Non-tariff barriers to imports are being removed in phases. There is virtually no inflation. But part of the reason for this, unfortunately, is continuing low demand. The economy needs a fresh infusion of capital to get it really moving. And we prefer to have it come, to the extent it is wise and possible, from the private sector.

The Filipino people face the future confidently. American business should look long and carefully at our investment possibilities. I advise it to look as well at the great potential of the region in which we are located. Asia, according to the latest world economic projections, has the largest growth potential of any area in the world.

There are opportunities to be found in established businesses, mismanaged by the previous government and its friends, that are ready to be restarted with fresh capital and new management. There are also sound enterprises, well and frugally managed, that need fresh captital to improve productivity and product quality. And there remain many new areas of investments, some that will complement our major concern in developing our agriculture.

Capital will find in our shores a labor force that is hardworking, eminently-skilled, and cost efficient. It would cost the U.S. Navy six or seven times more to hire elsewhere the skills found in the Filipino. What is good enough to keep the arsenal of American democracy in good repair, should be good enough to assure American profit.

However, I should make it clear that we do not hold out to any investor, Filipino or foreign, profit opportunities by exploiting a meek labor force, prevented by police forces from asserting their basic rights. We invite you to consider investing in the Philippines not only because our labor is cost efficient, but because it is productive, and will more than earn its pay. We have given labor back its motivation. If after 14 years of martial law, labor relations looked temporarily strained as we restored free.collective bargaining, that was a honeymoon we deserved.

The Filipino worker knows he has to earn his way in the world. And he has the will and commitment to do so. Now in partnership with our business leadership, our workforce is settling down to the long hard haul of winning back old markets and building new ones.

We are also simplifying the rules and procedures for foreign investment and, in general, for doing business in the Philippines. This is part of our program to deregulate the economy.

Finally, we are fully aware that foreign investment seeks, first and foremost, stability of laws and regulations. Your assurance of this lies in our democratic government, where legislation is the fruit of open debate and government decisions must meet the requirements of due process. There should be no surprises in a democracy.

And that is how it is in my country today. No fears and no favors. Only the pledge of a people that experienced both to a tragic degree that it will never be that way again.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].