Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Philippine Military Academy Testimonial

Taking Up the Sword

Sa paglipas ng mga taon, ang Pilipinas ay nakaharap sa maraming pagsubok na sumukat sa katatagan ng ating bansa at sa diwa ng ating mga mamamayan. Mula sa mga pananakop ng iba't ibang bansa hanggang sa mga natural na sakuna at mga hamon sa ating ekonomiya, patuloy tayong bumabangon at nagpupunyagi upang makamit ang isang mas magandang kinabukasan. These trials have shaped our national identity and instilled in us a deep sense of resilience.

Ngayon, muli tayong nahaharap sa isang bagong hamon – ang paglaban sa terorismo at ekstremismo. Ang mga grupong terorista ay naglalayong wasakin ang ating mga komunidad, sirain ang ating mga institusyon, at paghasain ang ating mga puso ng takot. They seek to undermine the very foundations of our democracy and the peaceful way of life that we cherish.

Bilang mga Pilipino, hindi tayo papayag na magwagi ang karahasan at kawalan ng pag-asa. We will not allow fear to dictate our actions or compromise our values. Tayo ay magkakaisa, magtutulungan, at maglalaban para sa kapayapaan, katarungan, at kalayaan. We will defend our nation with courage, determination, and unwavering faith.

Ang paglaban sa terorismo ay hindi lamang tungkulin ng ating mga sundalo at pulis. Ito ay responsibilidad ng bawat isa sa atin. We must all be vigilant, report any suspicious activities, and work together to prevent the spread of extremist ideologies. Kailangan nating palakasin ang ating mga komunidad, itaguyod ang edukasyon, at bigyan ng pagkakataon ang ating mga kababayan upang makamit ang kanilang mga pangarap. By addressing the root causes of conflict and promoting inclusive growth, we can create a more peaceful and prosperous society for all.

Kaya't, itaas natin ang ating mga bandila, palakasin ang ating mga puso, at humarap sa hamon nang may tapang at determinasyon. Let us take up the sword of peace, justice, and freedom, and defend our beloved Philippines. Sama-sama, tayo ay magtatagumpay!

President Aquino addresses the Philippine Military Academy (PMA) after it was bombed, after soldiers were ambushed by insurgents in Quezon, and after another policeman was shot dead. She vows immediate police and military actions against these acts of terrorism, measures which, however, must be exercised with care to ensure minimum damage to civilians. She is confident that the Armed Forces can do this even without help from outside.

Enough words have been said. It is time for results. So let me be brief. In the space of 3 days I read about the terrorist bomb attack on the PMA, with 4 dead so far and 40 plus wounded. Terrible wounds were inflicted, not the least on the physical integrity of a military camp, the Armed Forces premier school at that, and on the Armed Forces’ reputation as an effective shield and protection for the Republic. As if to underscore this, I read in the papers that 19 of our men were killed in an ambush in Quezon. Always the same province.

And, just in case we have missed the point, another policeman is shot in the head. What is the death count now? 10?

These are terrorist acts. The insurgency of the Communists and the treachery of the Right, loyalists and others, may have deep rooted causes that may take a long time to remove. Economic development will probably cure both sicknesses. Government efficiency in the delivery of basic services, particularly speedy justice, should speed the cure. But the answer to the terrorism of the Left and the Right need not wait on total solutions. To a terrorist act the immediate answer is not social and economic reforms but police and military action. I told you when we were discussing the peace initiatives that when they fail, as we feared they would, and when it becomes necessary to take up the sword of war, that I want a string of honorable military victories to follow my proclamation of war. Victories of which we can all be proud. Clean victories, aimed straight at the core of the enemy, be it Left or Right, with a minimum of collateral damage to the civilians we are supposed to protect and avenge.

I want these victories. I want justice for the PMA, justice for GMA, an end to these ambushes, and victories in the field as proof positive to our people that you and I, Commander-in-Chief and Armed Forces, can protect them.

I have asked our military ally for the hardware to achieve these objectives. They have given us advice instead. So let us not hold our breaths. Help will come when it will come. In the meantime I know that we can more than hold our own. I am convinced, and you have told me that I am right in this conviction, that we can beat these threats to national security with what we have. And also with what we are: the army of the people, in whom they have, rightly, the greatest trust and confidence.

Gentlemen, let us enjoy the rest of this occasion. But tomorrow it is down to business. Carry on.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].