Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On using Asian Virtues to Reach Economic Goals

[Delivered at the Fil-Chinese Chamber Federation Bldg., Muelle de Binondo, March 6, 1987]

USING ASIAN VIRTUES TO REACH ECONOMIC GOALS

Addressing the largest grouping of trade and industrial associations in the country, President Aquino enumerates her administration’s efforts to effect economic recovery. She says that the success of economic recovery lies in the willingness of the people to work for its attainment. In this, she asks the Filipino-Chinese community to help with their characteristic virtues of strength and resiliency, and values of thrift and hard work. She promises to ease government restrictions on business and in return, asks businessmen to abandon their wait-and-see attitude.

An invitation to join this gathering is like an invitation to a homecoming. As many of you may know, the Cojuangcos of Tarlac came originally from Fukien. But less known is the fact that the first Cojuangco who emigrated to this country 125 years ago made his first home in this same district of Binondo. Today I, a fourth generation Cojuangco, come to you in the hope that I will be received in the same spirit of hospitality that welcomed my ancestor to this country.

A year ago, in another forum, I spoke of the urgency of the need to rebuild our country from the ruins into which it had fallen under the Marcos dictatorship. Then, as now, I had no illusions as to the difficulty of the task. Among the things we inherited from that unlamented regime were an economy that had contracted more than 10 percent in the previous two years; a foreign debt in excess of $26 billion, a huge budget deficit; and an unemployment problem of near crisis proportions.

Ranged against these problems was a government that did not even have a concrete economic blueprint when it assumed power by a revolution. Once in power, we had to move quickly to arrest the deadly deteriorating of the economy.

We therefore made an inventory of past economic policies, reviewed economic performance, and came up with a policy agenda for recovery and growth. This document became the basis for the Six-Year Development Plan that we began to implement this year.

But even as we set the economic growth targets and started the policy reforms and initiatives to support these targets, we never lost sight of the fact that, in the last analysis, it is willingness of the people – in government, in the private sector, and throughout the country – to work with firm determination towards these goals that would determine our success.

I have said a number of times that we are launched on the road to recovery, and we should be on the growth track starting this year. Last year marked the first time we were able to post a positive economic growth after two straight years of contraction. While this economic performance gives us reason for confidence, it also points up the great deal that remains to be done.

Last year, our economy grew by 0.13 percent in terms of Gross National Product. 0.13 percent is not much to crow about, but consider the context in which it was achieved: a sudden change of government, counter-revolutionary attempts to throw us back into dictatorship, the debt burden, and sluggish investment, among other things. Consider also that economic recovery did not get off the ground until the second half of last year. But, while there’s reason to congratulate ourselves, there’s more reason to look harder at the areas where we can and have to do better.

In particular, a source of disappointment has been our investment picture. We did not actually expect investments to grow last year, but we had hoped to hold down the decline to something around three and a half percent. We now know that investment actually fell 15 percent in 1986. This was apparently caused by the business community’s wait and see attitude.

I don’t have the figures with me, but my economic ministers tell me that this attitude of sitting on their hands did not characterize the Chinese business community during this period, and even the worse period preceding it. For a group that has, not only survived but even prospered under far more adverse conditions, it wouldn’t have been in character for this community to have waited until things got better. The history of the Chinese community in the Philippines bears this out.

Chinese were trading in the Philippines long before the Spaniards came. They had come here to escape the turmoil of changing dynasties and the ravages of natural calamities.

Today, the Chinese community here is still the smallest in the ASEAN region. But the numerical size of a Chinese community has never been an accurate measure of its economic importance. Why this has always been so is a tribute to the strength and resiliency, and the values of thrift and hard work of the Chinese immigrant — attributes that we hope will be brought to bear on the common effort towards recovery and growth. Especially when you consider the discriminatory attitude of Philippine governments to this ethnic group, beginning with the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1902 which the United States extended to its new Philippine territory.

Similar measures followed which kept the Chinese community to 1 percent of the country’s population, and yet, increasingly, Chinese took over a greater share of the Philippine retail and wholesale trade.

To every measure to restrict Chinese participation in one sector of the economy, the Chinese responded creatively by diversifying into other sectors, such as manufacturing, commerce, finance and interisland shipping.

The past is past, and I hope it will be forgotten in the larger sense of renewed pride that all Filipinos, regardless of racial ancestry, now share. All Filipinos have suffered, at the hands of outsiders and at each other’s hands. And yet it is from a Filipino Chinese and his wife, Doming and Evelyn Lee, that Ninoy and I received the most heartening encouragement and support during Ninoy’s incarceration. It is time now to think of what we can all do, together, to make this free country good for all of us. Our diversity is the wealth of our culture and the potential great strength of our nation.

I am aware that the Federation is the largest grouping of trade and industrial associations in the country today, just as I am aware of the collective influence it represents.

I now call on the Federation to exert its moral influence on the Filipino-Chinese community and urge it to give all-out support to our economic growth objectives.

I pledged to get the Government off the backs of businessmen, and I meant it to apply to all Filipino businessmen, whatever name he or she sports, be it Malay, Chinese, Spanish or whatever. Citizenship is in the heart, not in the name.

We aim for recovery and growth, and we are pledged that it shall be led by the private sector.

We have set in place the necessary policy reforms and initiatives to help this recovery and growth. We are a democracy again, where rights are respected, and the State acts as protector and not persecutor, guarantor and not thief of the entrepreneur’s and worker’s rightful share of the fruits of their labors. We have removed the stumbling blocks to vigorous enterprise, and we hope we have eliminated some of the excuses why business apparently continues to hesitate. I use the word “apparently” advisedly because I understand that business has not been that bad, but it is best to keep quiet about this in a year where we will have two elections.

I urge the business community to abandon this wait-and-see attitude, because it is an attitude that can only perpetuate itself. Recovery will come when you make the effort to recover. It won’t happen by itself. And I would like to express the wish that this community will once more take the lead. Where angels fear to tread, there the true businessman will make this profits.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].