Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Recalling Ninoy Aquino’s Supreme Sacrifice

RECALLING NINOY AQUINO’S SUPREME SACRIFICE

Three years after the assassination of her husband Ninoy Aquino, addressing the throng at Sto. Domingo Church once more, the President recalls the momentous events that shook the country: the millions who poured into the streets to pay tribute to Ninoy, the strengthening of the Opposition, the Presidential election campaign of 1986, the countless who said NO to the Marcos dictatorship, and the heroism of Namfrel volunteers and those who gave up their lives for freedom, like Evelio Javier.

It is hard to believe that it was only three years ago that we first gathered here for Ninoy’s funeral Mass. We set off from here on the procession to his last resting place, some three million of us, marching in the heat and then in thunderstorm, in that moving tribute to his courage and martyrdom. I had sat in this church with a weight like a stone in my heart. The man who had given his family the strength even to bear his sufferings lay there, the flag draped over the coffin. But, as the march progressed, I felt that weight lifted from me by the millions of hands that Ninoy’s spirit had infused with courage. He had not failed us even in death.

It was from this church, too, that we set forth for Liwasang Bonifacio for the “kick off of our seemingly quixotic campaign to beat the dictator in his own game of a Snap Election. And it was here, also, that we assembled again, the Sunday after he stole the elections, to thank God for our victory. For we were victorious. Victorious in the renewal of a nation rededicated to the ideals of freedom, justice, and democracy that had attended its birth. Victorious in the moral courage shown by the natural leaders of the people that emerged from the Church and the Opposition. Victorious, above all, in the raw physical courage of the ordinary people who, in the millions, staked their lives, with the abandon of seasoned warriors or the simplicity of faith, for just the hope of democracy. In all this, Ninoy’s spirit was clearly at work. God in his mercy had finally granted Ninoy’s incessant prayer to be one with a race that had rediscovered its pride.

Almost every homily preached after Ninoy’s death gave voice to the conviction of our faith that new life rises from a martyr’s death. The Gospel speaks of the seed that must fall to the ground and die to bring forth an abundant harvest. Ninoy himself, citing Gandhi, had called the willing sacrifice of the innocent “the most powerful answer to insolent tyranny that has yet been conceived by God and man.” And as Ninoy rose to go with the military escort that had come for him and read his death in their eyes, he knew that it had fallen to his lot to give flesh and blood to these words: his flesh and his blood.

The days and months which came after August 21, 1983, revealed the truth of these beliefs. They made manifest another belief that Ninoy held: that courage is not so much instilled by preachment as caught by the contagion of example. The days and months in the three years that followed revealed still another truth: that courage is fortified by practice and sustained by faith and prayers.

During the days of the campaign, and the time of the elections, I saw the truth of these beliefs verified in the millions who had found the courage to say, “No more!” to the dictatorship. I saw it in the thousands of NAMFREL workers who labored tirelessly and at grave risk to bring out this message of rejection in all its shattering truth. I saw it in the sacrifice of Evelio Javier and in the millions who offered to make the same sacrifice, with their children in their arms, when they threw themselves around the camps at EDSA. I saw the truth of these beliefs in a multitude of acts of faith and courage that are now a part of the theology of our faith, and that must remain the vital force of our new democracy.

One man sprawled on the tarmac; one seed fallen to the ground, watered with blood. Tyranny had sowed a bullet and reaped a revolution. One man had worked the reluctant field of his people, finally threw in his life, and brought us home a harvest of freedom.

I accept with deep gratitude these gifts of medicine from the Spanish government and people. They are among the things we need most urgently to bind up the wounds of my people, wounds inflicted by long neglect and conflict. I shall cause these medicines to be distributed to the Ministries of National Defense, Health and Social Services.

The relationship between Spain and the Philippines is not one of those contrived and self-conscious relationships based on mutual self-interest. But of two old friends who don’t really have to depend on each other. But the other one is always there in a time of need, without need for calling, as is the way with friends. We will not forget your unsolicited and unstinting support for the cause of Philippine democracy. And now these gifts. I won’t say more; the best feelings are left unspoken between eternal friends.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].