Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the dinner with the Generals

[Released on August 15, 1986]

OFFERING THE INSURGENTS THE OLIVE BRANCH

President Aquino reiterates that offering the communists the branch of peace is not a sign of weakness on the part of the government: It is an essential part of unifying the nation once again so it can withstand the common enemy, in or out of the social mainstream. Her foreign visits to ASEAN and then to the United States will demonstrate where the country’s past is rooted, and where the country’s future belongs.

We seem to be seeing a lot of each other. My staff tease me that I seem most at ease in the company of priests and soldiers. Certainly, I am an unapologetic demander of professional excellence and dedication. And these are two vocations that, at their best, require most of these qualities.

You have shown patience and fortitude as we, your political leaders, have sought to bring the insurgents to the negotiating table. This is not an easy process and may well not be a successful one in its conclusions. But it must be tried. This chance for peace was what our people voted for in February. Offering the communists an olive branch is no sign of weakness. Rather it is an essential part of binding our nation together again so that we can withstand the common enemy, be he within or outside our society.

Another part of this political renewal are my foreign visits, first to ASEAN and then to the United States. The first demonstrates to our regional partners that we know where our past is rooted and where our future belongs. The second allows me to strengthen the bond with our oldest ally. I think the administration in Washington understands that more than a government changed here in February: We regained our national pride.

Whatever our economic difficulties, I will not be approaching Washington as a supplicant but as an ally and an equal.

The visit will, I believe, dramatically demonstrate to our friends abroad, and perhaps to opponents at home, how complete a new leaf has been turned over in Philippine national life. Just a year ago to imagine the Philippine President would be invited to address the Joint Houses of Congress would have been unthinkable.

Now we can all hold our heads high in the world, conferring as much honor as we receive on occasions like those. Our armed forces can hold their heads high also. You have played a loyal, and many of you, a heroic part, in the months of our national rebirth.

May I also say that a professional armed forces cannot run on commitment and honor alone. I think you all know how seriously my government is examining how, even with the present austerity, the pay and conditions of our troops can be improved. I am committed to this.

Does one congratulate a new general? I think so. To all of you the prayers of myself and our people. May you hold up the honor and integrity of our nation and help me bring peace to our land.

Some say peace is not possible. They must be the same ones who said that Cory will never be President and democracy will never come back. If you told me that peace is impossible, I would say to you what Bonaparte told one of his generals: “You write to me that it’s impossible; the word is not French.” I would say to you, “The word is not Filipino,” as our joint efforts showed early this year.

The French prescription for victory is: “Audace, audace, toujours audace.” And Patton, taking off from that, said that with audacity nothing is impossible in war And so in peace, nothing is impossible either if we have the courage to dare. At the same time as I ask you to renew your pledge to give peace a chance, let me assure you that I have no intention of allowing the enemy to make a peace table out of the corpse of our Christian republic.

To all of you, to my new generals, and to our great nation, that you have dedicated your lives to defending, I hold up my glass.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].