Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the Zamboangeños

TOWARD RECONCILIATION IN THE CITY OF FLOWERS

Addressing soldiers and civilians in Zamboanga City, “the flower of the South,” President Aquino recalls the city’s commitment to democracy and those Zamboangeños who died for freedom, like Cesar Climaco. She declares that the people of Mindanao, whether Christian or Muslim, are brave, strong, and fiercely jealous of their rights. Thus, no side should dictate on the other. Only when Filipinos are united as one people can Philippine progress be achieved.

Your city has been known as the flower of the South, the thriving center of Southern industry and entrepreneurship for nearly four centuries, and the model of Muslim and Christian community. It is also a shining example of commitment to democracy. Last February, the opposition won overwhelmingly in this city. You threw your great numbers and courage behind the effort to oust the dictatorship and reestablish democracy in our country. You have given generously of your brave children, among them Cesar Climaco, to the cause of Filipino freedom. Although you are far from its political center, you are close to the democratic spirit of the Republic, and closer to my heart for the bravery and commitment you have shown.

I am here to bring the national government to you, the democratic government you helped install, on the pledge of its leadership to govern in consultation with the people. No one can presume to tell you your needs for in the end it is you who will bear the burden of meeting them. The policies of government are paid by the people, so let the people say what those policies should be. I am here to initiate a round of consultations with the political and civic leaders of Region 9.1 met with some of them in Manila last night. I flew South this morning to meet with the rest. Earlier today I met with Nur Misuari. With that we complete the circle of leadership on whose support and cooperation depends the future peace and progress of Mindanao.

I said to some of your leaders last night that there can be peace and therefore progress in Mindanao only on the basis of mutual respect and support for the various aspirations of the several sectors of this island, Christian and Muslim. We cannot build to the full potential of this great and promising island on the shattered dreams and betrayed hopes of any one of these sectors. That is a weak foundation for a durable peace. There is no way out. The people of Mindanao, be they Christian or Muslim, are too brave and strong and fiercely jealous of their rights to accept any infringement of one by the other of their dignity and autonomy. We shall either progress as one united people or perish as warring factions. Unity is the price we must pay for progress. But why must we consider it a price and not a gift? Look at the freedom and pride we gained by being united. Is there anything our great people cannot achieve in unity? There is little we can achieve divided. We waste our energies and, tragically, our lives fighting for the goal of peace we all desire.

Our country was made poor by tyranny; its riches were wasted, even its future was mortgaged. We have a great deal to do to make up for the years of Philippine progress that might have been if we had not lost our freedom. But even before we launch our country again on the path of progress. There is a triumph that already lies within our reach: the religious and cultural reconciliation of our nation. Let us show the world that Muslims and Christians can live together, not just in the spirit of tolerance, but with the fervor of common patriotism and in a joint endeavor to achieve the progress we all deserve as Filipinos.

I have gone to the South three times since I became President. My first trip outside Manila as President was to Mindanao. My first trip abroad was to our ASEAN neighbors in the South. I reach down South time and again to the well-spring of our race and culture, the fountain of its native courage, to renew my strength, my resolve and my faith in the mission of my Presidency and the vision of our future for which you and I staked our lives and fortunes in the Revolution.

To you, my soldiers in this far-flung frontier of the Republic, I come to see with my eyes the battle-tested honor and valor of our race, and the fidelity of the Filipino to the vision of one united country. When Filipinos, from faction or ignorance, forgot that vision and turned on one another in a conflict that threatened to rend our country apart, you, soldiers of the Republic, stood fast by your thankless duty to keep our country intact. Hated by many, suspected by most, you stood by the flag ready to lay down your lives to stop anyone from ripping the Southern star from its field. Your sacrifices were not in vain nor will they ever be. The peace we seek will be the crowning glory, and not a betrayal, of the unity for which you fought and that I am pledged to preserve.

I have read the record of your bravery and, leaving behind this portion of the Republic, I know I leave it in good hands. I shall work earnestly for the peace the soldier longs for most. He has known so little of it. I shall pray and work that it shall come swiftly so that he can be reunited with his family. But it must come honorably. For honor is the soldier’s life and the first virtue of our Republic. In the time before a lasting and honorable peace is achieved, my soldiers, keep watch over our people, protect their lives and properties, their dignity and freedom. I leave you with the noble and mournful duty to preserve them for the peace that may come, even if it means that you yourselves may never see it. That is the fate of the soldier. He reads it in the flag he defends: The blue of peace rests upon the red of sacrifice.

Long live the Filipino!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].