Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Filipinas working in Hong Kong

A TRIBUTE TO HARDWORK AND SACRIFICE

President Aquino addresses the Filipinas working in Hong Kong — the nation’s living manifestation of hardwork and sacrifice. The President urges the Filipinas to continue the good work they’re doing which garners honor for the country. She also tells the women not to forget their culture and promises that the Philippines will be worth their sacrifice.

My beloved countrymen, it is a great pleasure for me to be with you today – you whom I recognize as heroes of our country's economy.

You, Filipino workers abroad who endured sadness and sacrificed being far from your loved ones, were the ones who greatly helped to revive and uplift our country when we were still under a dictator. Now, this sacrifice continues in rebuilding our country.

Like many of you, I am also a wife and a mother, and I also know that you would rather, if possible, always be by your family. I also know, and have experienced, the pain of being separated from one's homeland.

2.5 million Filipinos are unemployed. Had you not taken the hard decision to leave our homeland, you could have been a part of that statistic.

It is very easy to talk and act smart about the dignity, pride, and honor of our country, but the truth is we must face that we need to live in a way that we can.

As your President, let me say to you once again: you have every reason to proudly hold your heads high regarding your work. Whatever your job, no matter how humble it may seem in the eyes of others, remember that all livelihoods are noble. Also remember that it is not only your spouses, children, and relatives who will be grateful for the sacrifices you are making, but the entire Filipino nation.

You can be assured that your government will do everything for your well-being. This is why we temporarily suspended the deployment of domestic helpers abroad – to study measures that will benefit and protect you. I would like to inform you that the ban on the deployment of domestic helpers to Hong Kong has been lifted, as well as to Canada, after proper discussions with the labor officials of the two countries. Perhaps some of you, like many of our countrymen, disagree with the decision to stop the deployment of domestic helpers abroad. But it is my duty to protect every Filipino.

From you, I ask only one thing: do your work with excellence and honesty. The excellence and diligence of Filipinos are recognized throughout the world – uphold this reputation.

While you are far from your homeland, I hope you will not forget our beautiful Filipino customs and traditions.

I promise you all a Philippines that you will be proud of.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].