Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Command and General Staff College Graduation Rites

[Delivered in Fort Bonifacio, June 5, 1987]

A CITIZEN ARMY IN THE MAKING

Addressing the graduates of the Command and General Staff College in Fort Bonifacio, President Aquino announces the abolition of the Civilian Home Defense Forces and other paramilitary units as called for by the Constitution. These forces have made more enemies than friends, more Communists than loyal citizens. The Constitution suggests, however, the integration of the CHDF into the regular force or the creation of a citizen armed force to take up the slack after the CHDF is abolished.

May I first congratulate the Class of ’87 on its graduation. You are the first graduating class of the College in this year of full democracy. The past year has given you a sense of the new dimensions that the restoration of freedom and civil rights has opened up in the theory and practice of military leadership. The middle of this year will see the opening of Congress and the final division of the powers of Government among its three counter-balancing branches. Although the Armed Forces remains the special constituency of the President and Commander-in-Chief, the separation of powers adds new responsibilities and duties to all of us in the military. In the meanwhile, the problems that are specifically our concern remain with us, largely unresolved.

The repeated affirmations of our people of their iron commitment to democracy proves that the emotional and intellectual attractions of Communism have greatly weakened among our people. We must not, however, become complacent. Many structural reforms are needed to make our country proof against Communism. Moreover, Communism’s terrorist grip remains something to reckon with.

It is a truism in counter-insurgency strategy that we must continuously deny the countryside to the insurgent. A continuous Government presence must be felt in rural communities. Armies come and go in their periodic sweeps, but the communist terrorist, often operating alone, remains. The Armed Forces has neither the numbers, nor the duty, to provide a constant presence to offset the pervasive climate of insurgent terrorism.

In the past, that requirement was met by the Civilian Home Defense Forces. But these forces made us more enemies than friends, more Communists than loyal citizens of democracy. Predictably, when the Constitutional Commission convened, it called for the abolition of these and other paramilitary units. Congress and I are sworn to defend the Constitution and achieve its promises. I intend to perform. So will Congress, I am sure. The CHDF will be abolished and its place will not be taken by other paramilitary units under a different name. But I also pledged that I will not compromise the security of our people; I will not relent in my determination to destroy all threats to democracy from the Left and the Right in five years, and I will take all measures necessary to achieve this aim so help me God. I said before the Mindanao representatives last year that the security presently afforded by the paramilitary units will continue to be provided, even if we have to enlarge the military establishment. Communism will not win in the Philippines by default. It will not win, period.

The Constitution supports me in this. For the very article that abolishes the CHDF, suggests its integration into the regular force or any measure that will preserve and enhance our capability to discover and destroy the enemies of freedom.

The Constitution that mandates the abolition of the CHDF has wisely provided a way to take up its responsibility to secure our communities.

Section 4, Article XVI of the Constitution provides that ‘The Armed Forces of the Philippines shall be composed of a citizen armed forces which shall undergo military training and service as may be provided by law. It shall keep a regular force necessary for the security of the State.”

This is a recognition that people power is the backbone of effective national defense and that, in a democracy, the sword must be wielded not primarily by a military caste but by the nation in arms.

The Secretary of Defense, the Chief of Staff and other Department Secretaries have been involved in earnest consultations on how to effect both the abolition of the CHDF and the creation of a citizen armed force to take up the slack that will be created. The expansion of the regular military establishment will entail an additional half to three-quarters of a billion pesos more in military expenditures. We need to husband our limited resources for the economic measures that will dry up the roots of insurgency over the long run, even if we recognize the need for a sufficient military capability in the short run to buy time for our socioeconomic initiatives to bear fruit.

We shall therefore proceed to implement the existing law on the creation of a citizen army, specifically the National Defense Act. Following the organization of these forces, they shall be called into active duty by me, as Commander-in-Chief, in areas of heavy insurgent activities to assist the regular armed forces. These units shall be recruited from the communities that need to be protected, from among the best of its able-bodied citizens. Present CHDF members shall be processed to test their qualification to join these new units and a social program will be devised to facilitate the reentry of others into regular civilian life. These citizen armed forces shall be organized in the pattern of regular AFP formations, and shall be subject to military justice and discipline. To the regular virtues and qualities of the soldier, we shall add to our fighting capabilities the home loyalties of our local citizen armed forces and their special knowledge of the terrain and the communities they are defending.

We shall prove that the introduction of the democratic element, even in the rigid occupation of the soldier, will result in an addition to the power, rather than in a reduction in the effectiveness, of our national defense effort.

Even as you graduate, a new factor has been added to the national defense equation: People Power. Study it well. We live in fluid times; times of challenge and, yes, times of risk — but also times of great opportunities for even greater achievements than those for which our nation is already renowned.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].