Banquet Speech of Her Excellency Corazon Aquino President of the Philippines In Beijing

[Delivered on April 15, 1988]

A TRULY INDEPENDENT CHINA

The affiliation of the Chinese and the Filipinos goes back to the times of our ancestors. Through the years, we have managed to keep the spirit of friendship burning and in this another milestone, the President expresses her hope that this may be another ace in the relationship.

We are honored and grateful for this invitation to visit the People’s Republic of China, more so at such an auspicious time. It is indeed a privilege to be the first foreign head of government to visit China after the milestone First Session of the 7th National People’s Congress, where China’s new course is being set by her great people and wise leaders. I take this occasion also to congratulate the new President on his election.

My party and I have received a most warm welcome from the Chinese people. The hospitality we have enjoyed rightly symbolizes the cordiality and strong friendship that have long existed between our two peoples. As head of a new government of a country that is trying to remold itself in the image of justice and progress, it is fitting that we visit here at this juncture in China’s history when a reaffirmation of its own vision of justice and progress is being made.

A strong, proud and truly independent China emerged from her great revolutionary struggle against oppression. National strength, pride and independence were also our goals when we made a revolution two years ago. The scale of China’s struggle, given her circumstances, obviously far exceeds my people’s own struggle for those same goals of genuine independence through national strength. But the elements of courage and persevering faith are the same for our two peoples.

So too have been the problems that beset our respective courses: a severely damaged economy and political system, and, in the midst of a national resolve to overcome seemingly insurmountable obstacles to material progress and social justice, the presence of recalcitrant elements that seek to return us to the injustices, the weakness, and the humiliations of the past. China is well on the road to that strength that will assure the permanence of its vision. We have only started. And we look to China to give us the moral support to achieve our own special aims, in our own unique way.

We look confidently to China for such encouragement because of the ancient ties between our two peoples. While colonialism and the Cold War had strained and severed those ties, yet the centuries of cultural exchange, trade relations and racial mixture must obliterate that tragic period from our hearts, more especially now that we have reaffirmed and broadened those ties by wider trade relations and diplomatic exchanges.

The new course of greater economic progress and political reforms that China and the Philippines have set themselves these recent years promises even greater harmony and more meaningful cooperation between them. This is especially true of our common efforts to achieve stability, peace and progress in the world. On many of the great issues of international politics and economics, China and the Philippines stand on common ground.

We seek true independence through national strength but in a world of mutual trust and assistance. And we hope that every nation, super or small, shall respect in others the same desire for national independence and security that it seeks for itself.

We seek justice in the economic relations of rich and poor countries and share the same faith that the progress of each nation need not be purchased with the impoverishment of others.

We accept that there will always be differences between nations, yet continue to hope and work that these divisions shall not be covered over by the rubble of war, or obliterated along with the human race in a nuclear war. We are impatient in our hope and oftentimes disappointed in our labors to achieve peace and understanding in the world, yet accept that the work must proceed slowly, in step with all other nations, for peace and understanding cannot be imposed. In the way of lasting friendships, it must grow from within each of us by the habit of mutual respect. In that regard, the Asia of today has shown the way.

There is the friendship among the ASEAN states, and the amicable relations of those states with the premier Asian state of China Those relations are marked by the greatest mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, and way of life, and by the determination, when differences arise on these matters, to resolve them always with justice and reason and unwavering commitment to keep the peace.

From this, in my country’s particular regard, has flowed our One-China policy, recognizing the Government of the People’s Republic of China as the sole legal government of China and denying itself any pretention to influence the final configuration of China’s geographical identity. That policy is not only a counsel of respect, but an admission that no force external to China can influence the destiny of a people whose struggle for national liberation shook the world.

From this also has flowed the Chinese assurance that, for all of China’s size and power, it will not interfere in the internal affairs of her neighbors. And from that resolve to do justice, to act with reason, and to keep the peace among us has come the commitment we share to encourage the same justice, reason and the ways of peace in the settlement of disputes in the rest of the world. And so we stand together in seeking an end to conflict and insecurity in Kampuchea, in Afghanistan, and in South Africa, even as we look with hope to the measures, recently adopted by the Soviet Union and the United States, to reduce the threat of world destruction by nuclear war.

In talks earlier in the day with the President, and in discussions with Premier Li Peng, we reviewed our bilateral relations and agreed to strengthen those relations in ways that will contribute significantly to the economic upliftment of our two peoples. For only upon the material foundation of their common progress can one hope to set their long-lasting friendship. Here, in Beijing, the center of the Chinese universe, from where the Lord of Ten Thousand Years maintained the equilibrium, prosperity and harmony of the realm, a start has been made in that direction by China and the Philippines.

I thank you again, on behalf of all Filipinos, for the noble reception and warm hospitality you have given their government and for the honor you have done to my country.

Tsu-shi, tsong-li, keh-wei, tong-tse ni-sheh-men wo ching ta tsiya sien-tsai tong wo chan-chi-lai (stand up), tsu fu di chi-chieh ren-tai-huway deh chung-kong, tsu-fu chong-kwoh ren-ming, tsi-shi-fa-iyang kwang ta tsu-fu ling taw chong kwoh, Jo-xiang xian-tai-hua deh wei-ta ling-shou-menh kan tsu-fu women Chung-Fei liang-kwo yong-djo de yo-ee tsai women kong tang tsu-pay siye-siye keh huway! Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast ─

To the success of the Seventh Congress and the continuing triumph of the Chinese people, to the great leader who set China upon her new course, and to the eternal friendship of our two peoples.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].