Luncheon Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At St. John’s Institute

[Released on October 16, 1986]

NEGROS MUST CHANGE

The sugar industry is finished, not only here but in many parts of the world. Thus, Negros must no longer depend solely on sugar, and should develop substitutes or alternative sources of income. On the government’s policy to rationalize the sugar industry, the President says no hasty decisions will be made on closing down sugar mills and refineries. Another immediate concern is to clarify the Philippine National Bank’s financing policy for the present and coming crop years.

I understand that we have here, in the audience, people representing the sugar industry, Negros commerce and industry, and civic and church leaders. To you I say we have essentially the same task and that is to dismantle the heritage of the past and build essentially from scratch. I had to remove many of the institutions that could serve only the purposes of tyranny and in the process I have upset even the people who would clearly benefit from my actions. From the dismantling of monopolies, the abrogation of privileges in the form of easy borrowing, the removal of control on information, I have heard the same basic complaint about the sense of a lack of direction this created in the affected sectors. I have had constantly to remind them that our Revolution essentially had to do with giving the initiative back to people along with their liberties, and this means the uncomfortable need to make your own way in the world, in the direction that common sense dictates. Relating this immediately to Negros, this means, at least, clearly getting out of the island’s age-old and singular dependence on sugar.

Those to whom I have appealed for support in our national reconstruction effort have clearly stipulated, almost as a condition, the radical transformation of the agriculture of Negros, a near complete turning away from sugar. The industry is finished, not only here but in many parts of the world. There is just too much being produced for a market that has enough substitutes or alternative sources for it. They were so convinced of this that I got the feeling they were prepared to see Negros suffer continuing deprivation just to drive home the point that Negros must change. And these were people in whose genuine concern for the development of the Philippines, and for the lot of the Negros people, I have reason to believe. But just as strongly as I believed in their sincerity, I told them to share my faith in the intelligence of the people of Negros. They know the score. A total change is necessary. But the way things are in Negros, we need time to effect the transformation; time to learn new agricultures and implement what we have learned; time during which the people must eat. And so I must tell you that such moves as the friends of Philippine democracy have made to alleviate the plight of the sugar industry in Negros, have been made with much reluctance and lack of conviction, and largely as a gesture of support during my U.S. visit.

The U.S. Senate approved in the last week of September 11, two bills, one of which would give most favored nation treatment to the Philippines, that effectively increased the Philippine share of U.S. sugar imports for 1987 from 13.5% to 34%. Both bills are due to be taken up in a conference committee with representatives from both Houses of Congress. And last October 2, the Senate vote to override the veto of the South Africa Sanctions Bill effectively added 23,000 tons for the Philippines if the most favored nation bill passes. There is some opposition to this. But, in the meanwhile, we are making the effort, through the Sugar Regulatory Administration, to get the balance of South Africa’s 1986 sugar quota for the Philippines.

I hope these efforts abroad bear fruit, and soon. But I have always said that the main effort of our recovery must be and will be ours, or it won’t happen. And so, in that spirit, I turn to our domestic efforts.

One of the main issues of great concern to you, is the threat of foreclosure of mills and refineries with high arrearages to government banks. The thrust of this government is the rationalization of the sugar industry, and this should include the closure of several sugar mills and refineries. But rest assured that no hasty decisions will be made. We are aware that the matter is not just one of reducing the mills to the number the industry can support in theory. There are other considerations that have been pointed out to me, such as the irreplaceable role that an excess mill in the general scheme nonetheless plays in sustaining the viability of the farms around it.

Another immediate concern, is the need to clarify the PNB’s financing policy for the present and coming crop years. Starting crop year 1987-88, the PNB will extend loans to sugar planters based on their sugar quedans for 1986-87. This PNB special financing scheme will also involve waiving penalty charges incurred by the planters during the crop year 1984-85 and lowering the interest to a rate approximating the handling charges.

But these, along with those measures abroad I mentioned, are stop-gap measures, ways to buy us time to turn Negros away from sugar. Another such measure is one that I shall tell the Cabinet to give serious thought to, which is the development of the ethanol program. But I know none of these measures will lull you into thinking that there is a way to avoid a radical change in the ways of Negros agriculture. There is no help for it. Upon the timely transformation of Negros depends the lasting solution of the insurgency problem.

I will conclude my remarks with a restatement of my government’s policy regarding the insurgency. I have said that I shall explore the path of negotiation with the rebels to the utmost, but I have equally stressed the efforts of the government to prepare for the eventuality that our offer of peace is spurned. I have made it clear, I shall use any means to protect our Christian values, our democratic institutions, our dream of a free and prosperous Philippines against any who seek to subvert and destroy them. I will not accept any configuration of Philippine destiny other than that which accommodates its basic democracy and its commitment to God. We do not negotiate out of fear, neither do we fear to negotiate. We speak to the enemy because we believe that he shares our human concern for the hurt that this insurgency continues to inflict on our nation. With every death on either side, our country dies a little. We hope we are right for our sake and theirs. But, rest assured, we are prepared for the event that this belief turns out wrong. We must use whatever means lies at hand to bring our estranged brothers and sisters down from the hills to share the blessings of our new democracy.

The friends of the deposed dictatorship accuse Governor Lacson and Bishop Fortich of using foreign assistance funds to attract the rebels back into the fold of the law, to join our national recovery effort. Well, if the accusation is true, Governor Lacson and the good Bishop are even smarter than I thought. I commend their efforts highly. This is the kind of energy and initiative I look to for the early attainment of our goal of national reconciliation and recovery.

The consultations I have attended already show a brighter future for Negros. The work has clearly begun, in the only way it will be essentially completed: by our own efforts.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].