Revised Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the celebration of the 40th International Human Rights Day

[Delivered at the Philippine Training Trade Center (PTTC), December 10, 1988]

STANDING AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATION

With the celebration of the 40th International Human Rights Days came the declaration of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. There is no better example of respecting human rights than the EDSA Revolution where people stood up unarmed for their human rights and for the human rights of the soldiers who opposed them. The President says that respect for human rights is the core value of our bloodless revolution and the single most important reason for the survival of democracy.

This celebration of the 40th International Human Rights Day pays tribute to the common bond of decency that proclaims all men as brothers. That bond is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

We call it universal because all men, by their humanity, declare an unwavering commitment to respect those rights. The preamble of the Declaration is clear on this:

“The General Assembly of the United Nations proclaims this Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and nations,

“to the end that every individual and every organ of society shall strive

“by teaching and education

“to promote respect for these rights and freedoms

“and by progressive measures

“to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance.”

I have quoted the preamble at length because we must return to the root for the true meaning and spirit of the commitment that the world made to itself after history’s most terrible conflict.

Wars had never been like this. It was not a war for economic advantage and military glory only, but one aimed at the annihilation of whole peoples simply for being who they were.

The war was a crime against humanity, for the aggressors denied the humanity of all who did not belong to their race and follow their creed.

It was a war where signal acts of human endurance were overwhelmed by shocking acts of inhuman cruelty. Acts committed by individuals against individuals – in military prisons, in concentration camps, in the charnel houses of the great dictatorships.

It is not surprising therefore that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights marks out the individual, and not just governments, as carrying a special obligation to promote, by teaching and education, respect for human rights; and by progressive measures, secure their universal and effective recognition and observance. Thus:

By specific order of the Human Rights Commission, detainees are accorded liberal visitation rights and their persons are secured against mental or bodily abuse.

By executive order, an extensive education and information campaign has been conducted to spread awareness and respect for human rights.

And finally, by living example, we, the Filipino people, taught the world how to respect human rights.

There at EDSA a people stood up unarmed for their human rights and for the human rights of the soldiers who opposed them.

There at EDSA an army responded with equal respect for human rights by not firing on the unarmed multitude. No army in the Western world would have shown such forbearance. What might have been the tragedy of Kent State became the miracle of EDSA.

There are those who question the human rights commitment of this nation and this government. I want them to prove their accusations. I, and everyone else concerned about the safety of democracy, have a stake in punishing the human rights violators in the military. The hand that can abuse a prisoner will have the mind to plot a coup d’etat. Such violations show an indiscipline and inclination to anarchy that a democracy cannot tolerate in its armed forces.

Until that time, I must say what the facts proclaim: That this new government has never adopted, by neglect or design, a policy or pattern of human rights violations for any purpose.

That there are sporadic violations of human rights in this country, I must acknowledge. We are only in the third year of regained democracy. The inhumanity of people obsessed by power or possessed by dogma, whether in the uniform of the regular army or in the casual wear of the insurgency, will be with us for some time yet.

But for as long as Filipinos have a democracy, human rights violations will never become the pattern and policy of government in this country.

Sadly, I cannot speak for all Filipinos. I cannot speak for those who refuse to adopt peaceful means to express their rejection of democracy. If there is a pattern of human rights violations, if there is a conscious policy of terrorism in this country, you will find it among them.

The government does not shoot traffic policemen to secure the fearful respect and cooperation of the people.

The government does not demand ransom from individuals as the price of their lives.

And we do not execute our fellow workers for their mistakes.

As every individual must respect the human rights of everyone, so must his human rights be respected by all.

“Everyone has the right of life, liberty and security of person.

“No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”

“Everyone,” says the Declaration, “is entitled to all the rights and freedoms” set forth therein.

That includes the policeman who falls to the pavement with a shattered head.

That includes the poor farmer whose children are killed or horribly disfigured because their homesteads have been chosen as the battleground of an ideology.

That includes the insurgent who is executed because he gave a second thought to democracy.

And that includes the leftists and labor leaders who were tortured and assassinated by the rightwing elements in the military.

Yet the same obligation to respect human rights that binds governments binds the killers of these people as well.

I cannot allow any accusation against the human rights commitment of this country and this government to go unchallenged – or uninvestigated and unpunished.

It is not a matter of pride, but of memory. It is a matter of self-preservation.

Those of us who lived in the shadow of violence under the dictatorship, will not allow it again to darken the door to human rights and freedom that we have opened for our people.

That there are violations, the Lupao massacre proves. That they will occur again is inevitable in any country riven by a rebellion led by fanatics.

I have made it clear that I intend to win the war against the insurgency. There will be no substitute for the permanent victory of democracy.

I have given the order for the vigorous prosecution of the war so that its early end will shorten the agony of this nation and hasten the recovery of its former strength and status in this region.

Yet, I will not accept the heat of battle as an excuse for brutality – towards the people we are pledged to protect, and even towards our enemies. Democracy needs force, but this government will not stoop to terrorism to survive.

I welcome the continuing concern of human rights groups, both here and from abroad, about the human rights situation in the Philippines. We need all the eyes that can be spared to uncover the abuses that still occur, even as we need every pair of hands to bind the wounds and bring the perpetrators to justice. I welcome most specially the recent vigilance of Congress, particularly the Senate.

Yesterday I met with some members of FIND (Families of Victims of Involuntary Disappearance). They were accompanied by Senator Wigberto Tanada. Also present at the meeting were: Executive Secretary Macaraig, Justice Secretary Ordonez, Chairperson Mary Concepcion Bautista of the Human Rights Commission, AFP Chief of Staff Renato de Villa, Brig. Gen. Rodolfo Biazon, Brig. Gen. Aguirre, Defense Undersecretary Quisumbing, and Special Presidential Counsel Azcuna.

Secretary Ordonez proposed and I approved the designation of city and provincial state prosecutors as “human rights coordinators”, whose immediate task will be to help relatives search for their missing kin in military camps and detention centers.

I shall set up a committee, to be chaired by a representative of the Department of Justice, which shall have as members representatives from the Office of the President, the Human Rights Commission, the Department of National Defense. There will be two representatives from private sector human rights groups. If Congress so desires, both houses shall also be represented in the committee. I shall take this matter up with the Congress at the earliest opportunity. This committee shall monitor the human rights situation so it can advise me on the proper measures to be taken.

This is a matter of the greatest urgency. What is at stake here is the life of democracy. We must be on our guard against the emergence of a pattern of human rights violation, against any systematic abuse of the people, because these are the harbingers of dictatorship. Martial Law in 1972 was preceded by systematic and widespread violence. The same violence may be the signal for another assault on our freedom. If only out of self-preservation, we cannot relax our vigilance.

Respect for human rights is the core value of our bloodless revolution. It is the single most important reason for the survival of the democracy we installed. Without it, we lose the meaning of our struggle against all who seek to destroy our freedom – whether fascist or communist. We shall be no better than our enemies; no better than the murderers of our husbands and children.

That will not happen.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].