Revised Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On ILO

LIBERTY IS NON-NEGOTIABLE

The conference themes on human rights, labor relations and debt make this an appropriate forum to convey the message of the Filipino people. The Philippine revolution reaffirmed the principle that the protection of human rights is the first duty of government Liberty cannot be traded for progress and social justice.

It is with great satisfaction that I received the invitation to speak before the annual conference of the International Labour Organization.

First, because it concerns human rights. But also because of the generous attitude that Europe has shown during the historical struggle for human rights presented by the February Revolution in the Philippines.

European ambassadors were the first to recognize, first tacitly, then openly, my right to assume the Presidency, after the Filipino people were deceived regarding my electoral victory.

Other governments, on the other hand, waited to see if right would prevail over the forces of evil and only changed their attitude after it became clear that no government other than mine would be authorized by the boiling Philippine masses to assume the leadership of the country.

The Europeans acted with their conscience. Undoubtedly, two millennia after conflicts stemming from selfish aims had somewhat dulled Europe’s idealistic aspirations. But it was different with the liberation struggle of the Philippines. Old Europe, which had seen so much, rediscovering its idealism, lent its support to the rebirth of freedom in the Philippines.

I want to thank Director Blanchard for inviting me to address the 75th sitting of the International Labor Conference here in Geneva, and for the opportunity to express my people’s appreciation of the support that Europe gave to their struggle.

The various themes of the Conference: human rights, labor relations, and debt: make this a very appropriate forum to convey their message. After all, our nonviolent Revolution was one of the most celebrated victories of human rights in one country and a triumph for its cause throughout the world. While the burden of debt weighs so heavily on the developing nations that it threatens to end all prospect of their recovery and growth, and equally threatens to create the anarchy and despotism where human rights are the first victims.

The Revolution reaffirmed the principle that the protection of human rights is the first duty of government, and that the deliberate and systematic violation of those rights by their governments imposes on the people the sacred obligation to overthrow them. Equally, the Revolution revealed new depths of faith and courage, and a new strategy and hope for democratic victories.

It is that hope for oppressed peoples everywhere that I must defend against the criticism that the heroism of the people came to nothing in the Philippines.

The Revolution was the work of people of the ordinary men and women of the working classes: priests and nuns who work with their hands to care for the poor, clerks, factory workers, school teachers, secretaries, managers, professionals, and their families. The involvement of the rich in the Revolution was widely noted, not because they were many but because it was unexpected that many would appear.

The Revolution offers hope, the national experience that provoked it taught a bitter lesson: liberty is non-negotiable, it cannot be traded for progress or social justice.

This truth is self-evident to men and women who respect themselves as persons. Yet many still ignored it only to learn too late that foregoing freedom for progress or social justice merely added torture and indignities to worsening poverty and underdevelopment.

It is a strange but incontestable fact that countries regarded as too poor to afford the luxury of democracy are precisely the countries that cannot do without it. The reason is this: nothing can resist the greed of the few except the power of the people freely exercising their rights and liberties. “Poverty increases insofar as freedom retreats throughout the world,” Camus observed. “If this cruel century has taught us anything at all, it has taught that the economic revolution must be free just as liberation must include the economic.”

As the Revolution was their work, it was only right that the order it established should express, in its laws, institutions, policies and leadership, a preferential option for the people — a bias towards their immediate relief and economic improvement, without exacting the price of their virtual slavery in the workplace.

The policies of the government which the Revolution brought to power have consistently expressed that option and bias.

Thus, immediately after the flight of the dictator, we moved to heal the divisions of our society and establish the framework, institutions and laws essential to the security of their rights, the permanence of their freedoms, and aimed at the improvement of their material well-being and national recovery and progress.

We released all political prisoners, giving special attention to the immediate release of the chief Communist Party ideologue, Jose Maria Sison, against the strong objections of the military faction that had helped in the ouster of the dictatorship.

Again, against the strong objections of that faction, we signalled the insurgency that we were prepared to negotiate a peace. That effort ultimately failed, yet, in retrospect, it had to be made to establish a moral basis for the resumption of war. Equally, the failure of our peace initiative definitively fixed the predominantly military character of the insurgent challenge, and the military necessity of the appropriate response.

Yet again, we made sure that the renewed hostilities would be conducted, at least by our side, in a manner consistent with the values we are defending against the insurgency. I therefore signed Protocol Two, which accords to the enemy in civil conflicts the protection of the Geneva Conventions.

We drafted a Constitution that would provide a pro-people framework for the policies we were preparing: policies that would upset established patterns of property relations and expectations, and therefore required a mandate across the spectrum of economic classes. That Constitution, which was ratified by a near unanimity of the voting population, provides in its Declaration of Principles and State Policies:

“The State shall promote a just and dynamic social order that will ensure the prosperity and independence of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies that provide adequate social services, promote full employment, a rising standard of living, and an improved quality of life for all.”

Further:

“The State shall promote social justice in all phrases of national development.”

“The State values the dignity of every human person and guarantees full respect for human rights.

“The State affirms labor as a primary social economic force. It shall protect the rights of workers and promote their welfare.”

In this declaration are summed up the primary concerns which the Revolution sought to address, and the lesson which dictatorship had seared in our minds: that we will not accept progress at the expense of the workers or by exacting the price of their liberty.

So that these promises will not remain words on paper, the Constitution empowers the Supreme Court to promulgate rules for the protection and enforcement of constitutional rights.

I shall forthwith take the necessary steps to secure the approval by the Court of the rules for a new Philippine writ of amparo , a special constitutional remedy to enforce human social, and economic rights through a speedy and inexpensive procedure.

To the security given by the Constitution, we have added the protection of international conventions.

I have directed the dissemination of the Universal Declaration of Human Riglits throughout the Philippines, translated into the national language and the major dialects.

I have ratified the ILO Convention on Tripartism and the ILO Convention on the Rehabilitation of the Disabled, and have submitted them to our Senate for concurrence, along with the Amendments to the ILO Constitution which will widen Third World representation in your governing council.

As mandated by the Constitution, human rights have been included in the curricula of all schools.

To answer fears that democracy has proved inadequate in protecting human rights in the Philippines, I have strengthened the Philippine Commission on Human Rights by providing for the permanence of the tenure of its members and by giving them sufficient powers to bring violators to justice. The Commission recently issued guidelines to the military to safeguard the rights of arrested persons, including the right of visitation.

We have appointed to the Congress men and women from the underprivileged sectors: labor, farmers, the poor, the disabled, women, and youth, selecting those who have distinguished themselves despite great disadvantages.

We launched an emergency employment program to alleviate the unemployment problem, especially in the countryside. Admittedly, the program was modest given the size of the unemployed force.

A few days ago, after over a year of bitter debates, I signed into law a Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program that will redistribute agricultural land to the landless tillers, and, more importantly, give them the support services that will make Philippine agriculture productive again. Agrarian reform is not justice, if all it achieves is the subdivision of the present miseries on the land. What the Program aims for is the liberation of the economic potential of the countryside, the increase in its standard of living and the creation of the market that will support the industrial progress we likewise seek.

This is only the start. More good might have been accomplished, if so much evil did not have to be undone. And we shall go on.

Violations of human rights still happen even in democratic states most determined to protect them. The attraction of democracy is also its weakness, for it must accord the same constitutional safeguards to the perpetrators as to the victims of human rights abuse. And in the free spaces created by democracy, evil goes about its work, sometimes more efficiently than good.

It behooves us then to narrow the scope of evil. This must be done by more democracy, not less. As much by removing the present restraints on human freedom imposed by poverty and underdevelopment, as by wider grants of rights and liberties. The next liberation must be economic. This includes a fair resolution of the Debt problem. For the tightening grip of its austerities threatens to strangle the life out of the new democracies of the Third World, even as it threatens to upset the stability of the international economic order. The linkage of debt, development and democracy is undeniable and is the most pressing issue this body must address.

The first duty of democratic institutions, like the ILO, is the protection of human rights. Chronic underdevelopment is the most systematic abuse of human rights. I put before the ILO the challenge of finding a resolution to this threefold issue in the just, sober, and democratic fashion that alone can win the consensus and cooperation of everyone involved. A resolution reflecting the spirit of the ancient lawgiver:

“I establish this law in the language of the land . . . for the welfare of the people . . . to cause justice to prevail and to destroy the wicked and the evil. . . that the strong might not oppress the weak . . . to rise like the sun over the people and to light up the land.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].