Revised Vin D’honneur Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the value of nationalism

[Released on June 12, 1988]

THE VALUE OF NATIONALISM

Today’s celebration marks the start of a 10-year effort to inculcate in our people the primary value of nationalism. It is a nationalism that looks to the progress we must attain because we trusted others to do that which we alone will do: take care of our country.

Today we celebrate the 90th anniversary of the declaration of Philippine independence. This year we begin the decade of nationalism in hopes that we may celebrate June 12, 1998, the centennial, truly free at last.

We thus inaugurate today a 10-year effort to inculcate in our people the primary value of nationalism.

By nationalism we mean thinking directed to the growth of national power, to the enhancement of this nation’s ability to control its fate in the world, and to be respected as an equal by any foreign power that seeks its friendship and cooperation or dares its enmity.

We shall foster national pride only after, not before, we build for our people a country they can be proud of because it takes care of them, because it can help them realize their full potential as human beings, and a country respected abroad.

The February Revolution was a good start. No other people won their freedom by the individual courage of a mass. Every man, woman and child made a personal decision to stand their ground for freedom. In that stirring event, no one helped the Filipino who stood alone until it was clear he had won.

This is the nationalism we mean. A nationalism not of bitter recriminations and fault-finding but of a forward ambition to be strong. A nationalism that looks to the progress we must attain, and not to the backwardness and abuses we have suffered because we allowed ourselves to be weak, because we trusted others to do that which we alone will do: take care of our country.

Let us make a start in true nationalism. I ask this Government and our people to join us in this long-delayed task of finally creating a genuinely independent Filipino nation by the progress of its economy, the justice of its laws, the well-being and prosperity of its people, the effectiveness of its arms, and the independence and wisdom of its policies.

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me now in a toast:

To the next ten years, and the Filipinos’ shared and unflagging commitment to build a strong and therefore truly independent Philippines;

To the peace and mutual respect among the nations of the world.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].