Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On claiming God’s promise

[Delivered at Martha’s Vineyard, August 5, 1986]

CLAIMING GOD’S PROMISE

There are many miracles; God-sent beyond question. But they all happen through the work of men.

I have often likened our journey to freedom to the flight of the Jews from the land of Pharoah. Indeed, like the people of Moses, we were blessed by God with a series of miracles. And our Pharoah, against his wishes, and despite his power, was forced to let us go.

But we who study the Bible know that there are many more chapters after the deliverance of the Jews. As they marched into the unknown, seeing their destiny only by Faith, they faltered. When the land of milk and honey did not materialize over the horizon, they grew impatient and grumbled. When their supplies ran low and the way grew harder, they complained against Moses and yearned to return to the easy, if shameful, life of servitude. They had witnessed great miracles, but when challenges and difficulties confronted them, they recoiled, forgetting the power of their God.

We too are not long into our journey to seek a better, more prosperous land for ourselves and our children. But already there are those beset by doubt as to how we shall get there, or whether we shall get there at all. Like the Jews in the desert, hardships have dimmed our memories and shaken our faith.

I too can become prone to such moments: to times when the problems of our country seem beyond solution. Yet I wake and step forward each day, strengthened by Christ’s promise: “Seek and you shall find, knock and the doors shall be opened, ask and you shall receive.” For it is said in Matthew that we are no less than children of God. And when a child asks his father for bread, no parent would give him a stone instead. For if fathers on earth can be generous and trustworthy, what more of our Father in heaven?

Moses did not despair in his journey, though it lasted 40 years. But I can understand the despair of his people. For God had led them forth out of the house of bondage by His hand, which they could see. And so, when He withdrew His hand, they became unsure of themselves and afraid. It was not they who conquered the hostile tribes, but God who conquered and who all but carried them over the endless miles. But I cannot understand the despair of a people whose deliverance was worked by God through the work of their own hands, as those hands were made strong by the power of their Faith. For that is what happened here. There were many miracles; God-sent beyond question. But they all happened through the work of men.

When we prayed in our bondage for the miracle of deliverance, what did we say? We prayed that our people would one day find the courage and the strength to strike the shackles from our wrists and rise up against the tyrant. Did we not keep telling ourselves, when will the Filipinos rise? It was a strange prayer since it was the Filipinos themselves who were saying it. But God understood. And so, when He answered, He did not send plagues to strike fear into the heart of Pharoah and a pillar of fire to lead our people to freedom. Instead He put the courage to break their bonds into the hearts of our people and the Faith to persevere for the right into their breasts, even as He put, at the fateful moment, compassion and understanding into the hosts of their oppressor. As a result, when the moment of truth came, our people stood their ground on Faith and love, and the hosts of Pharoah that were sent against them responded in the end with sympathy and compassion.

By working the miracle of our deliverance through us, God conferred on us a greater honor than if He had carried us out to freedom on His hand. He treated us no longer like a child snatched from the brink by his nurse but like mature men to demonstrate his wit, and like the angels that Thomas More said God created to reflect his glory. But more than honor, God gave us the permanent assurance that we can achieve what right we set out to do. If He had worked external miracles, then we should always feel unsure of ourselves and afraid for our future. But God revealed the secret of achievement. It lies in a will ready at hand to whoever has Faith.

Although God worked the miracle of deliverance largely through the efforts of ordinary men and women of faith, His hand was as surely there as if we had seen it. As God’s spirit moves us from within, His hand, cleared the way for us from without. It was that hand that put the words into the mouth of Marcos when he called for his doom through Snap Elections. It was that hand that prevented bloodshed at EDSA, parrying the Pharoah’s heavy hand with the hand that revealed itself before an astonished world in the faith-charged multitudes of People’s Power. In those fateful months of our Exodus, People’s Power was the manifestation, liberty and democracy the consequence. But always, Faith was the active principle.

May I ask you today to pray for the strengthening of our Faith. Pray that we may not forget the witness of the past years, when in our need we sought God’s kingdom and righteousness, and in answer all these blessings were added unto us. Please pray that in the midst of our quest for national peace and recovery, we may not become discouraged, peevish, rebellious and unchristian. May we cling to the first battlecry of our revolution: that it is better to light a candle than to curse the darkness. May we always be sensitive to that voice within us that urges us to act, but always in love. And when we pray for these things, may we do so with utmost Faith.

In the letter of James to the tribes of Israel, he says: “Consider it pure joy, my brothers, whenever you face trials of many kinds: because you know that the testing of your Faith develops perseverance. Perseverance must finish its work so that you may be mature and complete, not lacking in anything.”

A faith tempered by trials accepts that God has dignified us to be the instruments of His will, not just the passive receivers of His grace. We must have Faith in praying to him for further miracles and other redemptions, but also certain knowledge that the response is in us already. When you lift up your hands to implore another miracle, look at your hands for it is from thence that the answer will come.

May I close with a final passage that I hope might inspire you when you ponder the fate of our country and government. In Saint Paul’s letter to Timothy, he writes: “I urge then, first of all, that requests, prayers, intercession and thanksgiving be made for everyone — for kings and for all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives.”

If you pray and claim this promise with faith, and if we lend ourselves as instruments for its fulfillment, then we are already destined for times of quiet and peace.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].