Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 40th anniversary of the Far East Broadcasting Company

[Held at the Kalayaan Hall, June 3, 1988]

A COMMITMENT TO RECONCILIATION

The President appreciates the partnership of Christian Organizations like the Far East Broadcasting Company in the promotion of peace, understanding and true spirituality. She states that its emphasis on reconciliation with God and men is vital in bringing about peace and stability in the country.

I wish, at the outset, to congratulate Far East Broadcasting Company on its 40th year of broadcasting the Good News of Jesus Christ all over Asia in more than 70 languages.

I am happy to note that the theme of your celebration is “Committed to the Ministry of Reconciliation.” When Ninoy decided to come back to the Philippines, he was committed to make peace, to do the work of reconciliation. I believe that reconciliation between man and man can best be effected if there is first reconciliation between God and man.

The Filipino people are grateful to the men and women of Far East Broadcasting Company for their holistic approach to radio programming in that they try to meet, not only the physical and social needs of men, but also their spiritual needs. We are also appreciative of the partnership of Christian organizations like Far East Broadcasting Company in the promotion of peace, understanding and true spirituality. Your emphasis on reconciliation with God and among men is vital in promoting international understanding and in bringing about internal peace and stability in our nation.

I have been told that during the EDSA revolution, FEBC used all its domestic and international facilities to broadcast the events as they happened to keep the nation and the world informed of what was going on. But more importantly, you used your facilities to mobilize people to pray so that the conflict could be resolved peacefully and with a minimum of bloodshed. As we all know, the Lord answered our prayers.

Because of the immense reservoir of faith and peace that FEBC is generating, I am convinced that gospel broadcasting should be encouraged by the government. Accordingly, I have issued Proclamation No. 262 declaring the first week of June of every year as National Gospel Broadcast Week, to be celebrated under the auspices of FEBC and other cooperating agencies.

May God continue to bless Far East Broadcasting Company as it pursues its unique ministry through gospel broadcasting.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].