HARNESSING THE YOUTH’S PRODUCTIVE ENERGIES

The President commends the Rotary International District 381 on the occasion of its Annual District Conference and in sponsoring the academic scholarships and vocational training skills programs as well as youth development campaigns and its major components and asks for their continued support and involvement in PSYP.

Three years ago, we were in the process of settling down to the business of organizing and running a government that was to be truly democratic and free. Today, we can look back with pride and satisfaction on our accomplishments even as we are aware that more needs to be done.

The private sector is the major partner of the government in nation-building. For all the growth that the nation achieved in the past year, the grit and the will to bring about the needed gains belonged to the private sector. The significant growth of the past year vindicates our faith that while the government must do its part to create the stability and continuity needed to support enterprise, it is to the private sector that we must look to for the risks and the entrepreneurial daring to push our democracy toward a better quality of life.

On the other hand, the gains so far bear out the renewed confidence and optimism of our people. These gains do not mean a slackening of efforts but point to the necessity for an expanded partnership between you and your government.

I am very pleased that the Rotary International District 381 on the occasion of its Annual District Conference shall tackle the theme of nation-building. It goes without saying that each and every Filipino must be involved and must do his share.

But for today, I should like all of us to focus our attention on our youth.

I am aware that the Rotary International is currently undertaking significant programs for youth development. In particular, I would like to commend the academic scholarship and vocational skills training programs as well as the youth development campaigns being sponsored by the various Rotary International Districts in the country.

The country’s youth played a key role in the installation of this government, not only during the crucial confrontations at EDSA but throughout the long, hard struggle for freedom. And lest we forget, it was often young Filipinos who had to make the ultimate sacrifice for their country.

Only a few days ago, we marked the Third Anniversary of EDSA. As in the two previous celebrations, we marked it with that odd mixture of solemnity and revelry often described as uniquely Filipino. And again, it was the youth in the forefront of things.

To be sure some quarters are quite critical of the manner by which we celebrate the historic event. The sight of young men and women dancing in the streets is seemingly incongruous, at first glance, with commemorating the heroism of the Filipino people and the serious business of rebuilding a nation.

However, there is a time for everything. A time for celebration and festivity and a time to roll up our sleeves and buckle down to work. As starkly illustrated at EDSA three years ago, youthful exuberance and daring need not be synonymous with mindless frivolity and folly. That the Filipino youth have time and again willingly laid their lives on the line is proof that they are an integral factor in Philippine national life.

But in our preoccupation with our own everyday concerns, national and business affairs are often judged as matters too serious to involve the young. With summer almost upon us, this misconception will doubtless be reinforced. For this season of the year is almost always associated with youthful energies being expended on frivolous pursuits or dangerous mischief.

This need not be so. Our youth have amply demonstrated that not only are they concerned about the future of this country but that they are willing to do something about it.

Thus let me announce today the launching of the PSYP program. PSYP stands for the President’s Summer Youth Program, one which will give young Filipinos a chance to utilize their youthful zest and idealism in the development struggle and nation-building.

The focus of the PSYP will be youth involvement in productive endeavors. The program will not be used for political ends nor will it be used to build personality cults around certain individuals.

The PSYP will involve high school, college and vocational school students as well as out-of-school youth. Both the government and the private sector will be tapped to provide the means and the venue for youth involvement in this program. It is thus that I appeal to members of Rotary International and to other organizations to support and get involved with any or all of the PSYP components.

The PSYP has five major components: 1. summer work appreciation for students; 2. government internship program; 3. immersion and service outreach work; 4. summer camp and travel programs; and 5. culture and sports programs.

THE SUMMER WORK APPRECIATION PROGRAM FOR STUDENTS

This program will make available to the youth opportunities for exposure to actual work situation during summer and for them to develop the values of work appreciation and ethics. Likewise, a stipend equivalent to 50% to 75% of the prevailing minimum wage will be provided by the sponsoring company to the student participants who have entered into a training agreement for the duration of the summer period.

It will be launched nationwide by DOLE and it is expected to benefit a conservative target of 5,000 youths during the summer period.

The proposed guidelines for the program were drawn up together with the Employer Confederation of the Philippines (ECOP) and the Personnel Management Association of the Philippines (PMAP).

As businessmen, you are in an ideal position to support this program. Aside from giving our young people a chance to be productive, your own respective organizations will most likely benefit from the injection of fresh and idealistic energy and talent.

GOVERNMENT INTERNSHIP PROGRAM

Government will likewise offer a counterpart program. Internship programs in various government agencies, including government owned and controlled corporations, will be made available to the youth this summer. The program will give them a chance to be actively involved with the bureaucracy and public service. It is hoped that through their participation in government work, they shall be acquainted with the programs and projects of the government and thereby support and get more involved in the national effort to achieve stability and progress.

The Civil Service Commission (CSC) will be the lead agency for this PSYP component. As envisioned, students will be recruited on the basis of their field of study to work with the various agencies. For example, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources plans to recruit natural science students to participate in conservation programs while social science and journalism students will work on the information campaigns on the river revival and anti-pollution campaigns. On the other hand, out-of-school youths will be tapped for the Department’s seedling production and anti-illegal logging programs. The Department of Public Works and Highways plans to recruit engineering and architecture students to serve as draftsmen while High School and vocational students will undergo apprenticeship in carpentry, plumbing, automotive mechanics, electricity and the like. The Department of Social Welfare and Development will recruit apprentices in its Day Care Centers as well as in its various welfare institutions. The Department of Education, Culture and Sports will recruit students to participate in its literacy campaign.

OTHER PROGRAM COMPONENTS

The immersion and service outreach component shall see students going out to the grass roots to render various basic services. The Department of Health, for example, is negotiating with the Association of Philippine Medical Colleges (APMC) so that student volunteers can render community health services and assist in the delivery of primary health care programs.

The summer camp and travel programs shall be handled mainly by the Department of Tourism (DOT) with the assistance of private travel companies. The intention is to package tours for students so that their appreciation of the country’s history and culture will go beyond what they read in their school textbooks.

To round out the summer activities, the various public and private schools as well as the various local governments will be tapped for the promotion of sports and cultural programs on the municipal or even barangay levels.

The various agencies are now drawing up the detailed mechanics of the program and its various components. Neither is this concept radically new. It has been tried before in other countries with very good results. What we make of it here is entirely up to us.

I have designated the Office of the President Youth Affairs Secretariat (OP-YAS) to be the agency-coordinator and secretariat for the PSYP. They shall be linking with various non-government youth organizations and youth-serving institutions for the success of the PSYP. They shall also consult with these youth organizations and institutions, as well as the local private sector on possible new activities which can be included in the program. Together with the Cabinet Secretary, they shall monitor the progress of these programs, and ensure the full and active involvement of the youth. The OP-YAS shall submit, by the third quarter, a preliminary assessment of the program, and their recommendations to me. We want to see this modest program grow, hence I have instructed the OP-YAS to develop and recommend a comprehensive youth development program, in coordination with the concerned agencies, with the results of the PSYP as a start-up point. This shall be the government’s response to our youth’s development needs.

On the private sector’s role, I should like to reiterate my appeal, not only for your support, but for your active participation in any or all of the program’s components. Without your support and participation, I am afraid that this program will not have much chance of success. We owe it all to our youth to make it work.

And so I appeal first of all to Rotary International and to all the parents to support PSYP.

* * * * *

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].