The greater struggle lies ahead.

During a tense month filled with rumors about a coup, President Aquino reports on numerous important developments: There is no falling out between her and Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile; inefficient OICs will have to shape up or be shipped out; the International Monetary Fund is expected to approve our Standby Program; and she will soon fix a deadline to mark the end of our efforts to achieve peace with communist-led rebels through talks.

It was before you, the women of Sigma Delta Phi, that I announced the rebirth of Philippine democracy by declaring that I would challenge the dictator to the Presidency. It is only right therefore that every now and then I should stand before you to announce how this new democracy is faring.

You have heard many rumors the past few weeks. Rumors of a coup to be staged by Minister Enrile, rumors of counter-action taken by the government. The height was yesterday when, on the one hand, I was told I had ordered the arrest of Enrile and, on the other, Enrile had started his coup by calling on the service chiefs to declare their loyalties one way or the other. This together with a press conference he is alleged to have called, and where he strongly intimated his intentions.

Those of us who actually made a revolution, as opposed to those who merely talk a good coup or revolution, have nothing to gain by falling out with each other. We have, on the contrary, a lot to lose by doing so; mainly the meaning of the sacrifices we respectively made to return democracy to our country and the trust reposed on us by the millions of Filipinos who made the same sacrifices with us.

If we fall out with each other, the only gainers are the enemies of freedom: the Marcos loyalists and the die-hard communists who, by thus far ignoring our offer of peace and our people’s burning desire to see an end to killing and fear, increasingly reveal their real intentions for our people, the real character of their regard for our people’s well-being.

This is why there is no falling out between Minister Enrile and myself. We are not stupid. We did not sacrifice, and more important than that, we did not ask our people to offer the supreme sacrifice of their lives, just to create openings for their enemies to take control over their lives and their future in the differences that have arisen between us. From the start of our talk last night, this was clear. We are one in seeking the common good, in realizing the potential of our country to recover and to achieve progress and keep its precious freedoms.

Those present at the meeting, aside from Johnny and myself, were Doy Laurel, General Ramos, Joe Concepcion and Teddy Locsin. We spoke frankly about our special concerns, our respective ways of viewing the problems of the country and how to go about solving them. You may say this comes late in the day, but better late than never. It is understandable that we, who had not known each other, who had made our plans to restore democracy, should take some time to understand each other. But now we do. Many differences remain, but the common ground of patriotism is clearly shared by all. Our styles will continue to differ; we are different people, struck from different molds that were created out of radically different experiences. But we are first Filipinos and committed to democracy.

And those differences, as our discussions went on, were increasingly being resolved in a common impatience over the slow progress of some of our initiatives.

We swept the local political infrastructure clean to prepare the ground for responsible and truly representative local governments. We removed local government officials throughout the country in order to paralyze and hopefully dismantle the deposed dictatorship’s electoral machinery to prevent its return by the back door of local governments. Necessarily this meant appointing OICs in place. By and large, our appointments were good. But quite a few, as I pointed out in my speech in Panay where the common complaint was of absentee OICs, have fallen way below our expectations. These officials, who derive their mandate only indirectly from the people who put my Government in place, have betrayed the trust I reposed in them by a gross and inexcusable indifference to the efforts of the National Government to bring peace, democracy and social services to the people. A few of these OICs have the gall to act on the basis of what they say are their personal views of the public good. They were not put in office for their views, but for their assumed competence in carrying out the programs of this Government. When and if they receive a direct mandate from the people, then they will be entitled to their opinions. And in speaking of these particular OICs, let me say that they will never have the opportunity. For the government has set its face against them. Minister Pimentel and I will be going over the list of OICs for those soon to be discharged following on my warning delivered in Panay to shape up or be shipped out. For some of them, there will be no second chance to shape up. They are out.

I expect the fullest cooperation from the local governments temporarily in place in our drive to bring Peace to the countryside. The Peace and Order Councils are hereby instructed to move with more vigor and speed in setting up the structures of cooperation between local communities and the Armed Forces to contain the spread of insurgency and put a stop to the abuses of the rebels and their efforts to exploit the democratic space we have created in order to destroy the democracy our people restored.

Our patience has been worn thin. Our people now know who genuinely share the vision of democracy for which they fought. That vision has no place for the practice of graft and the indulgence of incompetence, nor for the imposition of a foreign ideology whose chief merit is the more efficient enslavement of the people.

As we prepare for more vigorous action in those areas that give our people grave concern, I ask the people, the communities throughout our land, to work out the ways by which they can contribute to the coming nationwide effort to bring peace throughout the land and progress to our country. We have worked silently, and therefore with little public recognition, to put in place many of the programs for national recovery. One of the most important is the debt structuring program.

The IMF Board is expected to approve our Standby Program which will provide $508 million dollars in additional financing during the next 18 months. Of this amount approximately $300 million dollars will be available for drawdown by October 31 or November 15. Upon the approval of our program, we will also be able to draw down the last tranche of $350 million dollars of the new money facility previously negotiated with our commercial bank lenders. The same program will pave the way for approval in December of a $300 million Economic Recovery Loan from the World Bank, plus a possible additional co-financing of the same program by the Japan Exim Bank amounting to another $300 million dollars. We will commence negotiations with our commercial bank lenders on October 27 in order to reschedule approximately $3.6 billion dollars in maturing loan amortizations from 1987 to 1992. We also hope to renegotiate the terms of our last, 1983-1986 rescheduling to obtain better terms and lower interest rates on approximately $5.7 billion of previously rescheduled loans.

I believe we have achieved the best arrangement in the circumstances. We might do better if we continue to discuss with our foreign creditors, but I think what the people want more than an incremental advantage is a clear picture of the way ahead. A clear idea of the investment climate in the coming years. A clear idea of the peace and order situation immediately. After democracy, we want certainty so we can play wisely. To this end, I must declare my intention to soon fix a deadline to mark the end of our efforts to achieve peace by talk and the earnest start of efforts to establish it by any means the situation calls for. Any attack on centers of government by the insurgents will merely accelerate the deadline. And here, let me offer this assurance. We have the situation well in hand. Our Armed Forces are ready to take on any challenge to the integrity of the State and the safety of our people. To our people, let me say. Do not be afraid. The government will protect you. But to them also I would like to appeal for cooperation, for the kind of support and courage that brought us freedom.

Again, even as I speak a comprehensive program for the imposition of peace through economic development, social justice, and military action is being fleshed out. We must proceed with the energy, the coordination, the unity of a single hand. Now open in the offer of peace, but soon to be clenched in a declaration of war.

Be steadfast my countrymen, be brave, for we fight for the right. Join with me in my struggle to bring us the country of our dreams. I need your strength and your prayers to bear the burden placed on my shoulders of fulfilling the destiny of God’s favored children. Reveal again the power of your faith, your resolve, your numbers. The power that brought us freedom, bring it now to bear on my effort to bring peace to our poor land. I said it right after the Victory, the Revolution has only begun. The greater struggle lies ahead. We have enjoyed to the full the heady brew of sudden freedom. Let us not spurn the cup of our responsibility as citizens of a free country, of our obligation to repay the Lord for the grace of our liberation. Let this day be the first day of another February that will never end until our nation fulfills its cherished dreams.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].