ARMY: THE PEOPLE IN UNIFORM

President Aquino pays tribute to the people in uniform whom she expects to gift the people a future of peace, amity and progress. She urges army and society to grow together and improve together to make a better country for ourselves and our children.

Today we celebrate the 92nd anniversary of the Philippine Army as a prelude to celebrating the 91st anniversary of our Independence. This is fitting and proper. For in celebrating Army Day we lay stress again on the martial virtues that make national independence meaningful and real.

It is not surprising that we are celebrating the creation of our country’s army before we celebrate the anniversary of its birth. For everything that is good can be born only after a struggle. And all struggles are won only by courage, by daring and hardiness, by feats of arms – in short, by the acts and virtues that make up an army.

The army that was created 92 years ago defeated one imperial power and lost only by the betrayal of a friend. Yet that army went on to fight the wars of that uncertain friend, and fought them with honor.

The Army fought in Bataan but did not fall with it. It carried on by guerrilla action to keep hope alive until the country’s Liberation. The Army’s battalion combat teams fought in Korea; its civic-action teams helped in Vietnam.

It has fought continuously perhaps longer than any other army in the world – for we have had a festering insurgency. Yet, where larger and better-stocked armies failed, it broke one Communist insurgency. And it is taking the initiative again against a second rebellion. Yes, the Army today has quite a tradition to live up to.

What is an army? you might ask. An army is the people in uniform, I will answer; as others before me have answered. This is an unchanging truth. The army is the image of the state, and the reflection of the society it defends.

The state that fields the Army today is a state dedicated entirely to the wellbeing of our people, to the material progress of our country, and to the increase of our influence for good abroad.

The society which that army defends, is not yet what we would wish it to be. But it is moving in the direction of being a society worthy of the sacrifices the Army daily makes in lives, in crippling wounds, in long absences from family, and in other hardships, as it crosses the length and breadth of our land to put down its enemies.

We look to the Army to show us the stern virtues that we need to reform our society and make our country strong: honor, duty, self-sacrifice, the willingness to give all for country.

As the people is the Army in uniform, the Army integrates itself back into the people through service. Service on every level affecting the security of our communities, and even, through civic-action, their material wellbeing.

Today we honor that service in the stirring example of Sgt. Francisco Granpil who is this day given the Medal of Valor. Sergeant Granpil is the sixteenth to receive this award for bravery in action over and beyond the call of duty and human expectation. His example shows that the Filipino is the equal to any challenge that arises, to any threat that can be thrown against his country and his people.

Army and society must grow together and improve together – welding might and good to make a better country for ourselves and our children.

After years of confusion under a corrupt dictatorship, the Army has found its bearings in unqualified loyalty to constitution and state, and ready obedience to the authority of the Commander-in-Chief. We have adopted the best strategy for an ever changing situation. “To advance is to win,” goes the military maxim. “When in doubt, attack!” That is what the new Army has done. We have taken the war back to the enemy.

In 1988 alone, the Army conducted 54,702 small unit combat patrols – almost 150 patrols a day. We must now make sure that the ratio of patrols to contacts, through efficient tactical intelligence, will bring us conclusive victories. But, unquestionably, this is an army on the move again.

Special Operations Teams dismantled the political infrastructure of the CPP in one year and won back the support of 845 communist-infested barangays.

Our camps are constantly moving, our troops are harassing the enemy, preventing him from massing and disrupting the work of rebuilding the country. Our equipment is worn and battered. Yet the Army fights on with whatever lies at hand.

Still, it must train harder. It must acquire in every part the qualities that make armies formidable: long habits of regularity, great exactness of discipline, and great confidence in competent commanders.

But, all in all, we can say that the fighting spirit is back, the combat skills are improving. We are building our strength not on defense but on the attack. As Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, I appeal to the Congress to give us the numbers and the logistics to carry the war to a swift and conclusive end. Even as we need audacious troops to sweep the enemy before us, we need militia to secure the communities we have liberated against the return of the communist foe.

Above the heat and din of battle, we feel the first fresh wind of peace. Our people want to turn their energies from war, their hearts from fear, and their thoughts from mere safety – to peace, to friendship, to community, and to progress.

The Army whose 92nd anniversary we celebrate today swears to give this future of peace, amity and progress as their gift to the people from which it comes. Every soldier swears it in the Code that rules his life:

“I am a Filipino soldier. I will fight all forces that would destroy the freedom and independence of the Filipino people.

“I am a Filipino soldier. I will uphold the supremacy of civilian authority over the military in war, or in peace.

“I am a Filipino soldier. I will live and die in the true Filipino tradition of valor and honor, duty and loyalty.

“To all these I pledge my life, my treasure and my sacred honor.”

Long live the Philippine Army!

Long live the Filipino!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].