NO SUBSTITUTE FOR FIGHTING

Go and live by your commitment: security for every man and the destruction of all who challenge the authority of the government, stability of our society, honor of our country. The supreme ability to lead your men and fight alongside them and the willing sacrifice of your lives in the pursuit of that aim. Nothing else is asked of you, nothing more can be asked of any man.

My message will be brief and clear.

You have been graduated to be officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. That is what you must be: officers – which is to say leaders of men, in the most ancient and honorable calling of soldiering.

Your profession is like no other. Its ethics is the most austere and demanding.

Its aim, the most exalted.

You are expected to do your duty, even unto death – acting always with honor, facing danger always with courage. That is not asked of any other profession or occupation in our society.

Your aims are twofold:

No less than the security of every man, woman and child who puts his or her person and human rights under the protection of our laws,

And the destruction of all who challenge the authority of our government, the stability of our society, and the honor of our country.

To achieve this aim, two things in turn are required of you:

The supreme ability to lead your men and fight alongside them;

And the willing sacrifice of your lives in the pursuit of that aim.

Nothing else is asked of you. Nothing more can be asked of any man.

Policy is the business of the civilian authority – the President and the Congress. Fighting the enemies marked out by that policy is your business. So long as that distinction is kept in mind, there will be no misunderstanding.

The civilian authority knows that the problems of right-wing terrorism and Communist insurgency stem both from ambition and the socio-economic conditions in our country today.

Insofar as the problems are rooted in the ambition of certain individuals or groups to dominate our society, the solution is simple to formulate: military action. I know that is easier said than done. But just the same, the only way to defeat ambition is to crush it. As we did, again and again with the criminal ambitions of the Right – and as we continue to do with the totalitarian ambitions of the Left.

Insofar as the problems arise or draw strength from socio-economic conditions, that is the exclusive concern of the civilian departments of government. Let us not confuse these roles, because then we cannot pin the proper blame for failure, or render due praise for success.

Let me stress again that your role is to fight, your duty to fight well.

Your four years at this Academy is supposed to have prepared you for this duty by giving you mastery of combat skills and the ability to lead your men in a fight. We accept you into the Officer Corps on the assumption that you have acquired that mastery and leadership, for on those two things alone shall you be judged – by the nation that supported your training for the past four years and by your Commander-in-Chief.

When you graduate, you will bear the rank of Second Lieutenant or Ensign. You will be the lowest officer in rank but the highest in importance. For it is you who will lead the squads and platoons in the small actions that add up to the real war.

The insurgency war will not be fought in the Cabinet, in the Congress or in GHQ, but in the field. And that is where it will be defeated militarily. The insurgency war cannot be fought by programs and speeches, nor by commissions and committees. It must be fought, and it will be won, only by you and the men you will lead. It is your numerous small victories in the field that will add up to a final victory in the war, even as our economic initiatives and social reforms should abolish its roots forever.

That is where the military burden of counter-insurgency will lie: on your personal valor and group leadership, and on the fighting qualities of the fire teams that you will lead.

We have forgotten that soldiering is about fighting, first and last. We intend to correct that oversight.

I direct the Secretary of Defense and the Chief of Staff to review the emphasis of the Academy and re-focus it on combat abilities and small-unit combat leadership. Staff work is all well and good, but by itself all it can achieve is the efficient administration of impotence and defeat. There is no substitute for fighting. I don’t want soldiers pushing papers. I want them pushing the enemy around.

Henceforth, the first crack at military honors and promotions will go to officers and men with distinguished combat records based on the unassailable testimonies of their comrades or on the unimpeachable evidence of their wounds. Such decorations shall be worn on the left side, over hearts that do not faint at the sight of danger.

The change must start here, with this graduating class, whose idealism and valor cry out for testing in the field.

A noble example precedes you: young Lieutenant Felix Brawner III showed the way. I am told that he repeatedly asked for dangerous assignments, believing rightly, as a man trained to fight, that he must be where the fighting is.

I too have felt a death in the family. Let General Brawner, a fighting general, take comfort in the thought that the son was true to the father and to the ideals of the Officer Corps. Let me conclude with a few words of advice, from the leader of the nation to leaders of men:

You cannot order men to fight, you can only lead them into the fight.

Impose no hardships on your men, expose them to no dangers, that you will not share with them.

Put the honor of the Corps and allegiance to the Constitution above your deference to superiors or friendship for your peers. The dishonesty, disloyalty and cowardice of any officer diminish you all.

Do not allow your men to be misused by anyone, politicians or fellow officers. Soldiers will be put in your charge in order that you may fulfill together your common mission: to fight and win the wars of the Republic.

There are those who say the Filipino soldier cannot fight well. I know he can. Provided he has the right leadership, and sees in his officers the courage and daring that are equal to his own. Be worthy of your soldiers.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].