Speech of Her Excellency Corazon Aquino President of the Philippines On Voter’s Registration

[ Released on December 8, 1986 ]

GO OUT AND REGISTER!

1987 will be a crucial year. The draft Constitution will be submitted to the Filipino people for ratification, followed by national and local elections. The President urges the people to go out and register, because the old voters’ list cannot serve the purpose of democratic elections. At this time, registration is the highest act of patriotism.

The whole point of the recent heroic and triumphant struggle of the Filipino people was to restore democracy. And the whole point of a democracy is to give effective expression to the voice of the People, the Sovereign Will. That voice finds its most important means of expression in the ballot. The people have a host of other rights and liberties to make their influence felt in the government of their country. There is the freedom of expression, the right to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances. But all these rights and liberties come to a head in the right to vote for the officials of their choice. The ballot is the most powerful instrument of the Sovereign Will to dictate the future of the nation. This is why I have taken great pains to restore to the highest effectiveness to these instruments for the expression of the popular will. We have revamped the Commission on Elections and appointed to its positions men of the highest rectitude and patriotism. Now we are calling for a new registration of voters. The old voters lists are hopelessly tainted. You have read about ghost registrations, ghost precincts, double-triple registrations. The old voters’ list cannot serve the purpose of democratic elections. Least of all can they serve the august purpose of ratifying the new Constitution of the Filipino people, the document that provides the framework for the exercise of our democratic rights. I have therefore ordered a new registration of voters to be held on four dates:

December 6, December 7, December 13 and December 14.

It is crucial to your role as a citizen of a free republic to register yourselves on any of these dates. If you fail, you will be disenfranchised, you will not be able to vote, on issues or for public officials in the referendum for the ratification of the Constitution or in the coming local and national elections. In fact, until another registration is called, you will not be able to vote perhaps for the next six years.

I urge you therefore to go out and register, so that your citizenship in this Republic whose freedom you helped restore can be truly meaningful. I urge you also to go out and urge your friends and neighbors to do likewise. This coming registration is more important to you than any election. It is higher than partisan politics, for it determines how much of the nation will have the right to take part in partisan politics. All Filipinos should desire and work for as complete and accurate a registration of voters as possible, regardless of their political beliefs and preferences. The only ones who will not be interested in it will be those who do not believe that the fate of our nation should be decided by the people but rather by force. I know we are united against such people and their designs.

More than the coming elections, and in a sense more than the coming referendum, it is important that you go out and register, and urge and help others to register also. As in the past election, monitor the process. The best guarantee of the integrity of the voters’ list in your area is your vigilance during the registration to make sure that those who do not belong to that list are excluded. Everyone should share in this vigilance, even, and especially, the youth. To the youth, I say, tell your parents to register. And we parents must show that we care enough for our children to want to have a hand in shaping it. And we can do this by registering ourselves as voters.

People Power restored democracy in our land. People Power remains our surest guarantee of enduring freedom and the primacy of the popular will. I have heard people say that there must be a way to make this power of the people a permanent part of our political life. Here is the means to do it. The accurate and complete registration of all Filipinos entitled under the Constitution to vote is the institutionalization of People Power. The voters’ list is the sacred text of the people’s will, from which, from time to time, in referenda and elections, we shall be able to read the direction that the Sovereign People wish their governments to take.

At this time, registration is the highest act and most signal proof of patriotism. Go out and register. Go out among your friends and neighbors and urge them to join you in registering and in assuring the integrity of the registration.

Once more, my people, the fate of the nation is in your hands.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library