Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 86th Founding Anniversary of the Western Police District

[ Delivered at Philamlife, February 9, 1987 ]

CHANGING THE IMAGE OF MEN IN UNIFORM

There are two battles waged by men in uniform, the one fought by the soldier against communism and the one fought by the policeman against crime and violence. Both battles will ultimately be won not by mere force but by the integrity, dedication and moral courage of the men who fight it.

Thus, on the 86th Foundation Anniversary of the Western Police District, President Aquino asks the members of the police force to review the principles of their profession, principles which are founded on the very ideals of society. She also exhorts them to live up to the people’s expectations of them, the expectations of keeping peace and order in the community, and of protecting the lives and properties of citizens.

Among the battles to preserve and protect our newly won democracy are two waged by men in uniform. These battles will ultimately be won not by mere force but by the integrity, dedication and moral courage of the men and women in public service who lead and fight them. Of the battles fought by our men in uniform, one is in the field against those who wage ideological, war against democracy. A truce now governs that war while the effort is made to negotiate a peaceful resolution of the issues that divide the State and the insurgency. The other battle is the ceaseless wax of order against anarchy, of law against crime, of harmony and productive community against the destructive violence of criminals. This other battle is fought by you, men and women of our police forces.

We call you, in particular, the men and women of the Western Police District, “Manila’s Finest.” Perhaps because in championing the cause of order and protecting the peace of our communities, you are expected to exemplify the ideals of our society.

We seek a society where peace and order reign. And we look to you to provide it. We want an environment free from corruption and abuse, and we need you to ensure it. We ask that our individual rights and liberties are constantly upheld, particularly our right to be secure in our persons and properties and free from the dangers that threaten them, and we depend on you to give us that guarantee. Your work is not less difficult than that of our soldiers in the field. The city can be a jungle as well. Other factors make your work equally arduous and dangerous.

Our modern police force evolved from what were once civilian patrol groups. And so, coming as you do from the civilian populace, and working among civilians, you are subject to the same problems and pressures that plague the communities where you live and work. You too must cope with low wages, high prices, steep rentals, and the most modest of living conditions. You too must struggle to make ends meet. The very same conditions that have driven weaker citizens to crime are the conditions in which you must work to fight crime. Indeed, for the average policeman, not much is given by our society in wages and incentives and yet much is asked in the way of sacrifice. That is still another reason why you are called upon to maintain. Given the exemplary roles you must play, the spartan conditions in which you must work, the dangers you daily face, I would say that policework can be no ordinary job. It must be regarded and adhered to as a calling.

And so, on this 86th Foundation Anniversary of the Western Police District, I ask each and every one of you to review the founding principles of your profession and the noble chapters and examples in your history. I ask you to face the year before us with new and firm resolve. I ask you to bear constantly in mind that your daily work, however routinary and humble and materially unrewarding, is not just your duty but the calling to which God has called you.

As I had promised during the last campaign, I as your Commander-in-Chief, am ready to make the necessary sacrifices and pursue reform no matter how difficult or elusive. We are now working to rebuild credibility and faith in the democratic system that once worked so well for us. We are laboring to kill the notion that public service is the easiest road to private gain, and to resurrect by practice the ideal of public service as a public trust. For in the past golden years of our democracy, that was how the government worker was perceived: hardworking, self-denying, steadfast and ready to serve. In this total overhauling of our bureaucratic system, I also look forward to an even more improved, responsive and responsible police force. One that boasts of men and women whose uniforms inspire respect, confidence and moral emulation in the public; who are seen as fitting symbols of the kind of society we seek to establish.

What I ask is not an ideal never reached but one that, time and again, you, Manila’s Finest, have achieved. I am reminded at this point of the true story of the young Col. Alfredo Lim recovering the stolen money of a Chinese woman and turning over the entire amount, to the last centavo, to her. I understand that he was sweating cold while the money was counted in front of her. If the robbers had spent any of it, he would be suspected of having pocketed it. This must explain his white hair. When the last centavo was counted, the woman fainted dead away: shocked that Manila’s Finest had lived up to its name.

While this story is a tribute to now General Lim, I hope we come to a time when no one will faint from surprise at the honesty of public servants, when people will cease to clamor that we police our own police.

Remember that a new, more helpful generation of Filipinos looks to you to set the example for integrity, courage, honesty and adherence to the law. The living of these ideals is a greater and more durable treasure than any we can leave our children. Let it be said that the men and women of the Western Police District may not be the best paid of working Filipinos, but they are certainly among the most honorable. In the meantime, I have instructed the National Housing Authority and other relevant agencies to prepare for me a housing plan for our police forces to correct, in some small measure, the disparity between your sacrifice and the public gratitude.

And so, on this 86th anniversary, may I thank you for your efforts to live up to your reputation as Manila’s Finest. May God walk with you as you patrol our streets; enforce laws; and bring peace to our families, harmony to our communities; and strength and progress to our nation.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library