Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the 1988 Palarong Pampaaralang Pambansa

[Delivered at Cagayan de Oro, March 13, 1988]

UNITY THROUGH SPORTS

The national sports event, Palarong Pampaaralang Pambansa was revived through the initiatives of the DECS. President Aquino notes the theme: “Sports for National Unity, Peace and Progress.” She said that it is on such occasions that regional boundaries and ethnic differences are overcome. Sports events also serve as avenues for discovering the athletic talent that will put our country in the world map of sports.

I am very pleased to see this gathering of young athletes considered to be among the best in the country.

I also congratulate the Department of Education, Culture and Sports for its initiative in reviving, after five years, this national sports event, the Palarong Pampaaralang Pambansa.

I note with gratification that the 1988 Palarong Pampaaralang Pambansa has for its theme, “Sports for National Unity, Peace and Progress.” I can see the usefulness of athletic competitions as means by which the competitive spirit of man might be channeled towards useful ends. The coming together of young people, their coaches, national and local government officials from all regions of the country, should foster national unity. It is on such occasions that regional boundaries and ethnic differences are overcome as you wade into the main events of each day. The values that are engendered such as sportsmanship, fairplay, honesty, cooperation, punctuality, and concern for others are themselves basic ingredients of a higher value, that of respect for human dignity. It is this deep sense of respect that we need to develop and internalize if we hope to succeed in fostering the unity we seek – that sense of nationhood that is essential to peace, stability, and progress.

Athletics and sports serve another useful purpose – that of discovering the athletic talent that will put our country in the world map of sports. I have given due recognition to those who have brought honor to us in sports. I encourage you who are here to do even better. The honor you bring to yourselves and to our country will enhance goodwill and mutual respect in our relationships with other countries of the world.

It is with these thoughts and in the spirit they engender that I now formally declare the 1988 Palarong Pampaaralang Pambansa officially open.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].