Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At a Plenary Session

[Delivered in Iloilo, October 17, 1986]

NEW DIRECTIONS FOR ILOILO

Iloilo, like Negros, must turn away from sugar and cultivate other areas. The private sector will play a big role in transforming the economy of the region. Government will do its part. It will increase rural employment and income through the community economic development program, and will strengthen the community-based health program, among other concerns.

I have listened to the various concerns of the sectors represented here and share your sense of urgency regarding them. While the various consultations have brought up specific issues and problems, and have proposed solutions which require further study, I have isolated a few basic concerns that I want to address now.

The first is the island’s worsening economic situation. To a great extent this has to do with the island’s singular dependence on sugar, but the general neglect of this island by its local leaders is equally to blame. For even those areas where sugar is not the dominant crop, poverty, hunger and disease are widespread.

This noon I addressed the business community and read to them the handwriting on the wall; sugar is finished. I have bought us some time to turn this region away from its bondage to sugar. But the work of transforming the economy of this region must start now. I said the work of transformation will be largely the responsibility of the private sector, in whose initiative and industry lies our country’s hope for recovery. But the government knows that the economy, especially here, needs a shot in the arm to get it moving. We are going to do our part. I need not tell you that we don’t have all the resources we would like, but with what we have, we hope to address some of our most pressing problems, particularly here in this region.

The community economic development program is an example of this. The project aims to increase rural employment and income. A total of 1,461 projects amounting to P227.9 million have been lined up by the CEDP for the region. Another program is the special financing program that involves an initial P500 million to finance small and medium scale industries.

Our best hope of revitalizing the rural economy is through infrastructure projects. Some P6.13 billion has been programmed for 1987 to 1992 for Region VI for the construction of schoolhouses, roads, wells, and ports. With specific regard to power availability and cost, a major project of the National Power Corp. in Region VI is the on-going construction of submarine cables between Panay and Negros which will transmit power from the Palimpinon Geothermal Plant. This should lower the power rate in the region.

Your health problems are an offshoot of the state of your economy, the plight of your unemployed and underemployed. The emergency employment we hope to generate should address some of these problems. There is a community-based health program that we hope to strengthen. But a lot can be done right now by the communities themselves practicing basic hygiene and sanitation in their surroundings. Government will try to provide the basic services; sewage, potable water, garbage collection. But the people themselves must respect how much of the urban blight can be removed without complicated systems as expensive services, just by the members of the communities themselves.

The last concern I shall discuss here is the peace and order situation. I shall pursue the path of negotiation to the utmost. My chief concern is to stop the killing. With every death of a Filipino, our country dies a little. But while that is my chief concern it is not my only duty. My primary duty is to protect the integrity of the Republic and its democratic institutions, assure the safety of my people and guaranty their enjoyment of the precious rights and liberties for which they fought. Let me make this clear, I shall use any means necessary to the discharge of my primary duty to protect our democracy and keep it a nation under God. I want peace. I believe that in the hearts of all Filipinos there is an intense desire for peace, for the peace in which we can work with singular dedication to the speedy reconstruction of our country. On that hope I base my effort to negotiate a peace, but on the continuing reform of our Armed Forces lies our assurance that peace is not bought at the price of honor or slavery.

Before I conclude, let me add one specific thing I have discovered.

The insurgency is not the only, nor perhaps the basic cause of the peace and order problem in this island. A lot of it has to do with the continued presence of gangsters in the hire of the stalwarts of the old regime, with the criminality that has not been addressed although attention has been repeatedly called to it, with failure of local officers to live up to our expectations and of the people that brought us to power. I say to them now, shape up, before you are shipped out. This particular problem will get my special attention.

Let me conclude by wishing you the best. I have learned much from these consultations. So long as we continue to help each other, we shall attain our goals.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].