TRIUMPH OF RESEARCH

Three significant events converged on the inauguration of a modest manufacturing plant to produce herbal medicines, namely: the plant is a triumph of Filipino research; it is also a continuing expression of our commitment to the National Drug Policy, and the plant is sited in Mindanao, a land that has symbolized the pioneering spirit of our people. The President adds that the event demonstrates our national will to grow and develop by our means.

In the past few weeks, I have been reviewing the devastation wrought by nature in some of the provinces affected by typhoons. While our government and people are responding well to relieve the pain and suffering of natural calamities, it pains me to see nature’s damage added to our already enormous difficulties. It is therefore a source of great comfort for me to attend an occasion when our people has harnessed the bounty of nature for our benefit.

What we are inaugurating here is a modest manufacturing plant to produce herbal medicines. I understand that this plant has a capacity of two million tablets per month or 24 million tablets per year, enough medicines to relieve fever and pain of about one million Filipinos. Viewed from the magnitude of our needs, this plant is a small contribution to national welfare.

But why am I here, calling on our people to celebrate and congratulate its birth? I am here to call attention to three significant developments that converged on today’s event.

This plant is, first of all, a product of Philippine research. Our nation’s capability to discover and develop medicines from plants has a long history dating back to the Spanish era. But except for a few products like the vitamin B complex preparation, the Tiki-Tiki extract, and the anti-malarial drug from the bark of the chinchova tree, totaquiva, our society has not benefitted greatly from these research activities. Well, this plant arose directly from the efforts of the National Integrated Research Program on medicinal plants, a program whose researchers were honored during the 88th anniversary of our Civil Service last September 19. This plant, therefore, is a symbol of our determination to generate national benefits from research and conversely to encourage science as an instrument of national welfare.

Apart from being a triumph of scientific research, this plant is also a continuing expression of our commitment to the National Drug Policy, a policy which I enunciated last year. Since then, we have been strengthening and upgrading the Bureau of Food and Drugs; we have caused the withdrawal of 120 drug preparations deemed of questionable safety and efficacy; we are currently conducting an intensified inspection program of drug establishment; we are revising drug registration policies and procedures; and above all, we have passed the Generics Act of 1988, a major step towards rational use of drugs. This plant is a clear step towards self-sufficiency in pharmaceutical production. This plant is one of four that we have established around the country. In addition to government’s own production effort, we are looking forward to the finalization of plans to further develop the Philippine pharmaceutical industry, plans that we are formulating with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization. Initial indications are that our country can viably move towards further development of capacity to produce a broad range of antibiotics. This plant should thus be seen as a vanguard of our national effort towards self-sufficiency in pharmaceuticals via local production of key active ingredients.

Finally, this plant is in Mindanao, a fact that should not escape our people’s notice. We are inaugurating a facility to produce medicines that we need, from plants that we cultivate, and in a land that has symbolized the pioneering spirit of our people. As we stand in the crossroads of national policy on development and autonomy, we shall always remember that in all our debates, the welfare of our people is a paramount goal, and our own capacity to work together to secure it is our major resource. This plant is yet another reminder that Mindanao can lead our national development in pharmaceuticals as well as in many other areas.

Let me pause a minute to contemplate the benefits of this plant’s production. I am told that this will produce four medicinal preparations from herbs in tablet form, namely: lagundi, a broncho-dilator and analgesic-antipyretic; sambong, a. diuretic; tsaang gubat, a product against intestinal hypermotility and yerba buena, an analgesic-antipyretic. All these are well known and well studied preparations coming from plants that are native to our country. Aside from being safe and effective, these drugs are also economical. Lagundi for example will be produced at a cost of P0.37 per tablet. The currently available commercial preparation that has the same effect as lagundi would cost about P1.94 or more than 80% more. From this plant, our people can obtain drugs from natural ingredients and locally produced that yield the same therapeutic benefit for a fraction of the cost of existing commercial products.

From these points of view, we mark an important event today, an event that demonstrates our national will to grow and develop by our own means, and an event that yields tangible, practical and welcome benefits for the ordinary citizen. That is why I am here today, to declare that “yes, we can!” And also to say, that our people will benefit in the process.

So congratulations on this achievement, and may this grow and flourish into a truly self-reliant national pharmaceutical industry.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].