Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On AFP Day

[Delivered at Camp Aguinaldo, March 22, 1988]

THE BEST PROPAGANDA

Local government officials should serve as examples of integrity, competence, and wholehearted devotion to public service and the public good. The best propaganda is that of actual deeds, of tangible achievements, of a real and caring government presence everywhere in our country. Where there is effective government, there can be no viable insurgency. She stresses the duties of the different powers against terrorism: power of military, power of the police, power of the local government and power of the state.

I have, laid the foundations of our strategy:

A double strike against the insurgency by demonstrating, with one hand, what government can do for the people,

And showing with the other, what government will do to those who challenge its authority and threaten the life of democracy.

At the PICC, early this month, I told the governors and mayors what the nation expects from them:

Security for all our people, encouragement to business and labor, and the prudent use of the increased resources will be given to them.

I said I expected them to care for the poor and the helpless in their communities, to encourage the thrift and industry of the farmer, the laborer and the businessmen, and to help government in the delivery of the basic services of health, education and infrastructure.

Above all, I expected them to lead by example; by the example of integrity, competence, and wholehearted devotion to public service and the public good. The renewed faith in government since the Revolution must be kept alive, and only leadership by the example will do it.

This is the best propaganda. The propaganda of actual deeds, of tangible achievements, of a real and caring government presence everywhere in our country.

Where there is effective government, there can be no viable insurgency. Acts of injustice and economic backwardness can give rise to insurgency but cannot sustain it over the long run. What keeps an insurgency alive and makes it grow is the absence of effective government – keeping order, doing justice, and taking care of the basic needs of its citizens.

Two weeks ago, I addressed the new crop of AFP officers graduating from the PMA. I made it as clear to the cadets as I did to the local executives what I and the nation expect from them: no more and no less than the unrelenting pursuit and destruction of fascist terrorists and Communist guerrillas in the cities and in the countryside, so we can end all credible threats to democracy by the end of my term.

Every one to his proper station, I said. The civilian departments shall help build a new country of progress, justice and prosperity on the land that the Armed Forces and police must clear of all elements that are hostile to that vision.

I want a clear-cut division of labor: civilian departments to civilian reconstruction, the military arm to military action.

Let there be no confusion of roles so there can be the strictest accountability for failure, as there will be due recognition of genuine achievement. I do not want one arm pointing at the other as the excuse for its failure.

Within the civilian side itself, responsibilities have been clearly defined and roles delineated. In the frontline of the civilian counter-insurgency campaign are health, social services, education, agriculture and public works. The entire civilian side of government is committed, but these are on the line.

The Armed Forces is being primed for the task assigned to it.

At the PMA, I laid down the essential spirit of the military effort we must mount: the spirit of the offensive, carried out with the skill and bravery we expect of Filipino officers and men. A spirit that seeks no substitute for engaging an armed enemy in combat.

I want the fat trimmed off the military. I want more men behind guns, less than behind desks.

I want the ratio of support to combat units reduced, given the basic character of our logistic support system anyway.

I have long noted the disturbing ratio of patrols to contact, a ratio that shows the urgent need to upgrade tactical intelligence capabilities.

I want the officers out in the field with their men, leading them into the fight – on food and less vulnerable to mines and ambushes.

I believe that only those who are actually out there know what is needed and what must be done. The Chief of Staff, General Rene de Villa shall therefore prepare for the abolition of the Regional Unified Command system, and of any other unnecessary intervening headquarters. He shall decentralize and devolve operational control of the Armed Forces to the tactical commanders in the field.

Fiscal authority and control shall be likewise decentralized to speed up the release of funds to commanders in charge of military operations.

We have taken two years to consolidate democracy in this country – after 15 years of dictatorship. That is no small achievement. At the same time that is no excuse for further delay.

Poverty, underdevelopment, and unjust social structures are the roots of insurgency and are a challenge to our conscience and our duties as government.

Regular company-size rebel units, united front organizations, infiltrated barrios, assassination squads, on the other hand, are the instrumentalities of insurgency, and as such are challenges to our power.

The indifference and ignorance of government and society feed the roots, but it is the absence of governmental power that gives range and effectiveness to the instruments of insurgency. It is that power we will now supply throughout the length and breadth of our land:

The power of an efficient military presence to face down the military challenge of the New People’s Army in field, forest, and city street where the Communist terror strikes.

The power of the police to secure our communities against anarchy and crime, and against the influence of Communist terrorism.

The power of local governments to meet the immediate needs and articulate the basic aspirations of their communities, and to serve as the link between the people and the national government. We hope to make it increasingly the main implementing arm of basic services to the people.

And first and last, the power of the State to guarantee the democratic character of government in this country for all time and in all seasons. In the season of hardship, and in the season of prosperity to come. In a time of troubles, as in the time of the just and lasting peace that we have vowed to give our people.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].