Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the BIR Anniversary

[Delivered on August 1, 1989]

THE NEW INTERNAL REVENUE

The achievement of BIR, when translated into roads, bridges, schoolhouses, hospitals, and jobs could speak well for renewed commitment to public service. However, President Aquino stresses that performance of public servants will only be as good as the public’s trust and confidence in them as it would be impossible to require honesty when those in the forefront of tax collection are dishonest and corrupt.

With much pleasure, I congratulate you, the men and women who are the main conduits of the lifeblood of national development. I am aware that the BIR is responsible for collecting over one-third of the annual budgetary requirements of government. Your yearly performance, therefore, is vital to our pursuit of our development goals.

On the 85th anniversary of the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), I am doubly glad to greet you now because of your excellent collection performance for the first half of this year. You not only exceeded last year’s collection by 24%, you have also surpassed your 6-month goal. Your additional figure of 1.7% may appear minimal in percentage. But surely, the P654 million you collected in excess of your targets will translate into many roads, bridges, schoolhouses, hospitals and jobs that will usher in better times for the nation. My heartfelt congratulations and thanks to Commissioner Ong and to all of you for the hard work you have done.

Your achievement speaks well of renewed vigor in your individual commitment to public service and your collective high morale in the bureau. For so long, the BIR suffered a tarnished image as Bigay Ikaw Regalo . I was informed that you are now on your way to being renamed Bagong Internal Revenue , and I am glad that you have made such a turn around.

I have made it clear on many occasions that a public servant’s performance will only be as good as the public’s trust and confidence in him. This is especially true for you who are in the forefront of tax collection. It would be impossible to require honesty from our taxpayers when tax enforcers are dishonest and corrupt. It is imperative that you be models of what you preach. That is the essence of leadership by example, the kind of leadership that this administration wants to instill in public service.

As you have shown trustworthiness, so has the public rewarded you with renewed faith. So I laud you for effectively demonstrating what this government means in exacting sincerity and integrity from the men and women in government service.

I also take note of the various innovations that you have put in place. I understand that your Commissioner’s provincial visits have greatly boosted the morale of our local tax collectors, many of whom had never seen a Commissioner before. Your door-to-door persuasion campaigns in Metro Manila to ensure that your tax targets are met have borne fruit, and I thank those who labored in this campaign.

Let me tell you that I do not allow good work to go unnoticed. I had previously requested your Commissioner to study the possibility of a scheme that would ensure that regions that meet tax targets will be prioritized in the release of allocations. I have also asked Commissioner Ong for a scheme of rewards, basically non-material, to recognize those who are outstanding in their work. I am directing the Commissioner to complete these studies soon.

Without dampening the accolades due you, let me point out that our increased collection is as much a reflection of the improved earning and thus tax-paying capability of our people, as it is a fine record of your achievements. As you all know, our economy perked up with a 6.7% GNP growth last year. For this and successive years, government needs to sustain the momentum that was started. In the same manner, it is important that you sustain the energy you showed when you exceeded your targets this year.

I had announced in my State of the Nation Address the measures we must take, among them, vigorous tax collection efforts to generate resources for domestic use. Also, I have very recently submitted to Congress our budget of P233 billion to support the projects and services we intend to complete next year. Expectedly, you will be tasked to collect more than this year’s goal.

However, I will not leave you to face your tough assignment unsupported. I will repeat what I said in the State of the Nation Address: we will not tolerate tax evasion. We will relentlessly pursue these economic saboteurs until they are placed behind bars. I stand four-square behind you in this drive to punish tax evaders.

When your Commissioner and I discussed tax collection some months ago in my radio program Magtanong sa Pangulo, he enriched my vocabulary with the BIR twist to the meanings of: PR , RP , and Package Deal . I was told that PR stands for public relations funds or the money that flows from the taxpayer straight to the tax collector’s pocket, that RP is what the tax payer is willing to pay as taxes to the government, and that Package Deal is the agreement that decides the shares for PR and RP . From your noteworthy performance this year, I would like to believe that more people now prefer to pay straight to RP .

So, as I commend you again for the excellent work, let me remind you that your tasks for the remaining months and for next year are the challenges that confront you. I ask you to be fortified by the thought that without your efforts, the wheels of progress will barely turn for the nation. Keep up the good work for RP , and let us do away completely with PRs and Package Deals in the future.

Thank you once more for the fine performance, and a very pleasant day to all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].