SO MUCH TO BE PROUD OF

The President recounts the reforms and measures she has instituted to insure the country s return to full democracy and economic recovery. While there appears to be a boom in the economy, she admits that there are faults that cannot be covered like the shortfall in tax collection, the glaring garbage problem, the shortcomings in the infrastructure and housing programs and the disappointing anti-smuggling effort.

She nonetheless looks back on the past 1,000 days and see much that we Filipinos can be proud of .

Today completes 1,000 days of the Aquino administration and 1,000 days of our regained Philippine democracy. This day is set aside as a time for taking stock and making judgments on the performance of this government, and the experience of democracy.

Judgment will be rendered on me, and on how well or badly the government has done.

But, equally, judgment must be rendered on the rest of us who pledged with me to serve our country.

Finally, there must be judgment on whether – and to what extent – those who opposed me succeeded or failed in frustrating my plans for our people. Both sides should note their failures and celebrate their victories.

Everyone must submit to judgment or this effort at stock-taking will be useless. If this government were a dictatorship, if no one else had a say in how things are run in this country, then only the government should be judged.

Those who campaigned for democracy along with those who raised the banner of revolt must all face the judgment of the common people who never failed then-country.

For myself, I knew what I had to do. The pledges I made during the Campaign were not just a candidate’s promises but the aspirations of a people. Not just a partisan platform, they were an integral part of my oath as the first President of the restored democracy.

The first of those aspirations was democracy. Not economic freedom and profits, but democracy – the Filipino’s birthright and racial identity.

None of the poor and striving masses that rallied to my standard asked for investment opportunities or tax incentives – only that I lead them to freedom. This is something to be truly proud of. No other people has shown such total commitment to so pure an ideal.

I was offered the support of the Marcos parliament, if I would keep it alive. If I accepted its modest terms, there would be stability immediately.

I refused the offer. I refused in justice to our people to whom that parliament had lied. I abolished parliament. I became, to put it bluntly, the legislator under the Freedom Constitution. It was essential that no one be able to obstruct me, for I meant to give our people democracy swiftly and to weaken their enemies permanently. With God’s help and the people’s continuing support, I succeeded in doing both.

With the same powers, I also laid the framework for other reforms – constitutional, administrative, economic, and military.

In adopting a new constitution, I had two choices: an elected convention or an appointed commission. Some of my advisers urged an elected constitutional convention; but a swift transition to democracy dictated the appointment of a commission. An elected convention would have represented only the residual money and machinery of the Marcos dictatorship.

In four months, on October 15, 1986, we had a draft constitution. Over 90 percent of all registered voters turned out, and over 70 percent voted for the 1987 Constitution.

On May 11, 1987, elections for the Congress were held. Again the turnout was record-breaking for any democracy in the world. In the last American elections, only 50 percent of the electorate voted.

On July 27, 1987, I divested myself of legislative power and inaugurated the Philippine Congress. On January 18, 1988, local elections were held and full democracy was in place. We had achieved it faster than in Spain, than anywhere else in the world or at any time in the experience of modern democracy.

I promised the people justice for the crimes committed by the dictatorship.

The government filed 39 civil cases against Marcos and 314 other defendants to recover what they stole from our people. The filing of criminal cases will soon follow, as we relentlessly pursue our commitment to bring the guilty to justice.

I had campaigned for national peace and reconciliation.

Immediately after the Revolution, I ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. I waived court martial jurisdiction over cases of human rights abuse in favor of the civil courts. And I released all political prisoners, among them the founder of the New People’s Army, Bernabe Buscayno and party ideologue, Jose Maria Sison. The military objected. But I had pledged a fresh start for all Filipinos who had fought the dictatorship. Some of them might give democracy another chance.

I called for a ceasefire and invited the rebel leadership to a dialogue for peace.

I was serious; the Communists were not.

They demanded a share of political power as the price of peace. I gave the order to resume offensive operations against the insurgents.

The dialogue had failed, but the short experience of peace sowed division in the ranks of the rebel leadership. Our policy of reconciliation first, and force when it fails, has brought down the strength of the insurgency considerably.

Only our enemies will not see that the ceasefire was a moral victory for democracy, and a political setback for the Communists. But that victory came with a price.

The rightwing fringe of the military denounced the ceasefire as a betrayal and launched a succession of destablizing actions to topple me from power. The assassination of leftist leaders discredited my commitment to human rights. Throughout these challenges I held firmly on to power, but the nation lost its best chance of an early economic recovery. The military rebels succeeded in all but destroying the faith and confidence of the world in our country, and in undoing a great deal of what had been achieved from our early reforms.

Despite these discouraging developments, we continued to make progress, and largely through our own efforts. Foreign investments accounted for only 10% of private investments made in this country, although this is still an improvement over the 3.7% under the dictatorship. Our ability to meet the demands of our foreign creditors proves the strength of the economy. We paid our foreign creditors $8.5 billion in interest and principal – $4.3 billion straight out of our own foreign exchange earnings. We have complied with all the conditionalities and paid out vastly more than we have received. We expect to be treated better than those who have not.

Despite the uncertainty and unrelieved hardship, we pushed ahead with reforms.

We abolished the agricultural monopolies, lowered the prices of many factors of production, and restored initiative and profits to the producers on the land.

We instituted agrarian reform, one of the most important pledges of the campaign. We have given out 154,000 emancipation patents, benefitting 108,000 families. A system of rural credit and agricultural extension services, as well as a massive public works program have been prepared and are being implemented.

We have built 4,411 kilometers of roads; 443 bridges; 896 ports; and 35,028 wells. We irrigated 75,416 hectares of new agricultural lands, rehabilitated 533,473 hectares of existing irrigation systems, and laid out 15,352 kilometers of access roads leading to them. We reforested 18,785 hectares of watershed in, among other areas, Magat, Pantabangan, and Agno River in Luzon, and Alah Valley and Muleta in Mindanao.

We have implemented free secondary education and built 53,184 classrooms.

Congress passed the Generic Drugs law to bring medicines within reach of the common people. Nine million children below one-year of age have been immunized. Public health services have markedly improved, in quality and reach.

We have established better coordination now of government efforts, and more effective consultations with communities throughout the country. We have decentralized political authority and devolved the initial setting of priorities to the regions, their local governments, and their private sectors.

In the field of foreign affairs, we had very successful visits to Indonesia, Singapore, the United States, Japan, China, Switzerland, the Holy See, Italy and Brunei Darussalam. We hosted the ASEAN Summit and the Conference of Newly Restored Democracies.

We have imparted a deeper understanding of our people’s democratic experience, and a deeper appreciation of our country’s crucial role in maintaining stability in Asia. The recently concluded review substantially increased the compensation for the Bases and ended, on a high note of equal respect, a chapter in Philippine-US relations.

In 1,000 days, GNP grew from a negative 4% to a positive 2% in 1986; to 6.4% in 1987. It was 6.8% in the first half ’88.

Three million one hundred seventy-five thousand new jobs were created in the past 1,000 days – more than enough to absorb the yearly fresh entrants to the labor force.

The average Filipino’s income increased from P10,900 in 1985 to P13,700 this year – a 25 percent increase in the past 1,000 days during which we kept inflation down to single digit levels. We drove down inflation levels from a high 54% in 1984 to 8.7% this year. We are targeting a per capita income of P15,700 for 1989.

Some critics say these improvements were the result of pure luck. To a certain extent, that is true.

But it was democracy and this government that made sure the tremendous profits that were made went to the procedures, planters, and workers not to the pockets of a dictator and a few.

As the price of its support in the SNAP Election, business asked that it be made again the engine of the economy.

We not only gave the engine, we even reduced the fuel price. In its own 1,000-day report, business must show what it has done with the engine and with the fuel.

For all the talk of lack of confidence, there appears to be a boom in the economy. It may be consumer-led and therefore shortlived, but money is being made today. Yet the corresponding taxes are not being paid. There has been altogether too much crying all the way to the bank and not enough remittances to the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

Some blame cannot be shared. There are faults that cannot be covered.

The most glaring is the garbage problem right here in the nation’s capital. This is a reflection of the inhabitant’s lack of self-respect and discipline, as it is of a government’s competence. I have heard the arguments about the impossibility of cleaning up Manila given present capabilities. I do not accept these arguments. I demand results in the next few weeks.

The infrastructure program fell far short of targets by almost 25%. At this rate, we shall never reach our targets.

The shortcomings in the infrastructure program were already evident last June. I therefore organized a Cabinet Action Committee on Implementation Assistance or CACIA to investigate the delay in specific projects, encourage the solution of problems in the Regional Development Councils, facilitate the release of funds, and recommend the removal of obstructing officials.

Some progress has been made in housing, such as the Kalayaan project for police and teachers housing, but it is far short of the target. NHA’s capacity will be expanded. The Community Mortgage Program has been launched to enable residents of blighted or depressed areas to organize themselves and own the lots that they occupy and eventually build a decent house thereon, within the concept of low-cost house financing.

The tax collection has been disappointing. Instead of achieving a tax effort ratio of 12.4%, BIR and Customs reached only 11.1%. In money terms, almost P10.7 billion was not collected or 8% of the current budget. The tax collection efficiency of local government units is only 59%.

There is an economic boom out there. Whether it is consumer-led and shortlived or not, the taxes are due. The Bureau of Internal Revenue shall prepare a list of outstanding tax-evaders which I shall forward to the Department of Justice for prosecution. All tax-evaders must be on that list. Tax-evasion is non-partisan; it cuts across political sympathies and will be equally prosecuted wherever it is found.

Just as disappointing has been the anti-smuggling effort. The smugglers are known; there is no excuse for not prosecuting them.

I do not buy the argument that this is a democracy and due process takes time. I am not asking for immediate convictions. Only that the appropriate charges be filed immediately. There is no violation of due process there.

The targets for the next thousand days have been specified in terms of:

A growth rate of 6.5% annually in real terms; At least one million new jobs a year; Single-digit inflation levels; Adequate international reserves; Reducing poverty incidence to 45% of Filipino families.

All these have been broken down into specific regional, sectoral and agency targets in the Philippine Medium-Term Development Plan, which is evaluated and assessed yearly.

I find that we cannot afford to wait for one year between reports. I have therefore ordered quarterly reports from the social and economic sectors, such as health, education, and environment, and monthly reports from the infrastructure agencies, such as public works and transportation.

All these will be made public and will permit us to take immediate action on the problems which arise. The more closely we monitor performance, the better our chance for success. We cannot afford to fail.

I look back on the past 1,000 days and see much that we Filipinos can be proud of. I see also, in hindsight, how much more might have been accomplished without the struggle for final mastery that followed the Revolution.

There is not much I regret, not even my failure to strike earlier at the rightwing threat. It was a matter of timing – theirs was wrong and mine was right. The price of delay was, of course, the deterioration of the Philippine image abroad. Yet it gave us the certain survival of democracy.

Aside from God, my greatest trust is in the people who never failed me and brought us through the many trials of the past 1,000 days.

God gave us the gift of freedom; the rest we must work for – keeping our freedom and making progress in the economy.

For myself, I acknowledge the obligation to show that democracy can work for our people in real terms of effective security for our communities and real progress in the economy, of the greater health and education of our children, and in a greener and richer land where we can fulfill the promises we have made to ourselves and our posterity. And always, in working towards these goals, to treat each other with the respect and compassion one owes to a fellow Filipino.

I firmly believe that our success lies in democracy. That democracy will bring about proper peace and genuine progress in our lives; better health and wisdom for our children; a greener and more prosperous land where we can fulfill our promises to ourselves and to those who will come after us.

Let us proudly proclaim that we are Filipinos – a race that respects and loves one another, a race that is ready to work together to achieve the future we aspire to.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].