A Group of Achievers

Justice is the heart and soul of democracy. The local Prosecutors has dedicated themselves to their mission thus speeding up the flow of justice in our country. In the affair, President Aquino has directed the Secretary of Justice to submit recommendations regarding the measures to equalize retirement and other benefits and the establishment of a Prosecutorial Academy to train lawyers in the special acts of Prosecutors. President Aquino also reiterates a study to be prepared for a massive courthouse building program to give justices worthy houses throughout the land.

Here, finally, is an audience I am not going to upbraid, and, so far as I know, here is an audience that has nothing or little to criticize me for. Usually, in preparing for a speech before an agency of government, I get a long list of requirements and complaints. Not from Justice.

The national prosecutors already enjoy the respectable increase in salaries that I mandated to improve morale and performance in government.

We shall study measures to equalize your retirement and other benefits with those enjoyed by the judiciary. I direct the Secretary of Justice to submit his recommendations to me as soon as possible.

What pleases me, as I said, earlier is that I am before achievers, before a self-disciplined organization that has put itself into trim fighting form. You have purged your ranks of the unfit, and, by dedicating yourselves single-mindedly to your mission have greatly speeded up the disposition of the cases brought before you.

I congratulate you.

Reforms in the bureaucracy have reduced your jurisdiction somewhat. The various agencies with special jurisdictions, like the military courts, the Tanodbayan, the PCGG, have removed your former jurisdiction over abusive military and police, crooked public officials, and cronies. What has been left to you, however, is far from modest. For what remains for you to do is protect and vindicate the rights of a little less than the 58 million Filipinos who are honest and law-abiding.

This may not seem as glamorous as what the others are doing, but it is more important, as I had occasion to point out at last month’s convention on Constitutionalism. There I said that my first concern and duty is to do justice to the ordinary citizen. I said that if we failed in this, if justice fails for the vast majority of Filipinos, then we can expect the end of order and society as we cherish it.

We can fail in almost anything — in the economy, in health, in education — but we cannot fail to do justice to everyman.

A man who is poor might blame his own lack of diligence or his hard luck for his hardship. A man who is ill might accept that the human body is not perfect. And a man who is ignorant may not know better.

But a man who is abused in his inalienable rights, a man who is maltreated by another, who is hurt or robbed will demand justice, and if he is killed, his blood will cry out for it — whether he is poor or sick or ignorant. For the sense of justice is implanted by God in all of us. It is this sense of justice and its embodiment in the laws of the land that fall under the protecting hand of the prosecutor.

I promised the judges to do all I can to assist them in their tasks. I now extend the same promise to you.

I ordered a study to be prepared for a massive courthouse building program to give Justice worthy houses throughout our land. Buildings that will improve efficiency in the administration and lend that noble aspect of dignity it deserves. I now extend this program to include facilities for the prosecutorial arm of government.

I should make myself clear on this matter. The budget for this building program is not meant to come from the budget of the Justice Department. That is why I instructed the Secretary of the Budget to sit with the Secretary of Justice to discuss with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court the creation of a joint Executive-Judiciary Committee that will oversee the program.

I am still waiting for a response to that directive.

We take note also of a suggestion to establish a Prosecutorial Academy to train lawyers in the special arts of prosecutors and ask the Secretary of Justice to prepare a recommendation on the matter.

May I congratulate you again on your performance. Much remains to be done, of course. Please apprise me of all your requirements. Your accomplishments thus far, despite limited resources, encourages government to extend to you every help it can. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].