ASEAN UNITY FOR PEACE AND PROGRESS

President Aquino assures the delegates of the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Organization that she shares their dreams of having a truly ASEAN Community with common goals of regional unity, peace, progress and prosperity. Aware that the attention of the world is focused on Asia as the next area of economic growth, she supports the possibilities of an ASEAN Trade Expansion scheme which she says would be meaningful if its benefits redound to the majority.

I am glad to extend the warm welcome of the Filipino people to all our ASEAN friends gathered here. The Philippines is truly honored to host for the third time the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Organization (AIPO). Thus, I bid you, delegates and observers to this Tenth General Assembly a hearty Mabuhay!

AIPO has recognized in its early years that the strength of ASEAN emanates from the collective will of its peoples. And that closer cooperation among our respective legislatures would result in greater participation by our peoples in collective ASEAN endeavors. The prompt recognition has given the organization the determination to grow in pursuit of its mission for the ASEAN people.

Since its creation in 1975 with 54 parliamentary representatives from five (5) ASEAN countries, AIPO has grown in stature and influence. Whereas in its first assembly, it declared its desire to promote closer parliamentary cooperation among ASEAN countries, it now has succeeded not only in forging closer ties among members of the parliaments of ASEAN but also in establishing links with the European, Australian and other parliaments.

I am glad that AIPO has developed along this direction. Our nations have long felt the need for regional unity. This was the compelling reason for establishing ASEAN. And ASEAN welcomes any move that promotes this idea of oneness. Beyond doubt, AIPO can contribute much to foster this spirit of regional solidarity, for its voice is highly respected, coming as it does from the collective minds of ASEAN’s parliamentarians.

I am heartened to know that you have prepared for this Tenth Assembly an impressive range of issues relating to the enhancement of cooperation among our countries. For, being representatives of your respective peoples, you, delegates, are a good gauge of your people’s sentiments and therefore are in a vantage position to define our similarities, thresh out our differences, and hopefully, generate solutions generally acceptable to all. Although not formally integrated into the ASEAN framework, your organization nevertheless wields a special influence among our countries. Past and present ASEAN leaders have attested to this in their messages to you.

I share your dream to have a truly ASEAN community. I have high hopes for a prosperous ASEAN developing together, with each country complementing the others’ needs. The complementarity of our moves hinges on our mutual respect for each nation’s sovereignty and on the strength of our beliefs in an ASEAN way of life. Thus we need the commitment of everyone from ASEAN.

Moving in accord would not be too difficult for, as neighbors, we have many things in common. We share a common Asian cultural heritage from which we derive the traits common to our peoples. We share special friendships nurtured by cultural kinship and the proximity of our territories. These bonds were tested once more during the Third ASEAN Summit Meeting in 1987. When all your leaders came here to renew their resolve for ASEAN, despite fears about their safety in Manila, these bonds were further sealed. And most importantly, we share common goals, foremost of which are peace, progress and prosperity.

Even as we in ASEAN share common hopes, so do we have common concerns. Being Third World countries, we are faced with problems of development, and corrollarily, of economics. Our countries individually face decisions which may have regional implications but must be borne singly by individual nations. Several non-ASEAN countries have expressed their own views on keeping peace in our region. But are we not the best judges of our collective destiny, just as each sovereign nation can best shape its own future?

Let us continue to use AIPO as a venue for the exchange of views on sensitive issues of mutual interest, such as regional defense. It can, indeed, be a force linking every ASEAN country to her neighbors through resolutions that may translate into significant legislation in our respective countries.

I am particularly pleased to know that you will discuss a scheme for ASEAN Trade Expansion. We are all aware that the attention of the world is riveted on the Asia Pacific Basin as the next area of economic growth. This area includes the ASEAN region, your respective countries and mine. ASEAN is now living up to this expectation. Although the pace of growth may be uneven among its member countries, the fact remains: we in ASEAN are all aiming to belong to the Newly-Industrialized Countries of the 21st Century. And this, we can achieve faster if we can put into action what we had promised ourselves to be our areas of cooperation: trade, technology, banking and finance, utilization of our natural resources, and all other aspects that affect our national economies. I urge this Assembly to explore the other areas of economic cooperation embodied in the Manila Declaration of 1987.

As we move forward to realize the ASEAN economic miracle foretold of us, it would be good to remember that an economic boom would be meaningful only if its benefits redound to the majority. Development should not merely be more food nor additional jobs. It should enhance the people’s capacity to make decisions that vitally affect their lives. In this context, your organization is most relevant to the path ASEAN is taking now, for you, being members of deliberative bodies, are expected to have integrated the various viewpoints of your respective peoples on the manner of development that we should pursue.

I have noted with great interest your efforts toward common legislative programs on key ASEAN concerns. Truly, there is need to give teeth to your resolutions. I thus enjoin the leaders of the parliaments of ASEAN member countries to enact legislation corresponding with AIPO resolutions. I was informed that you will continue to discuss the viability of establishing an ASEAN parliament. It would undoubtedly be to your best interests to have a permanent AIPO Secretariat to pave the way for an ASEAN legislative body. I fully support the proposal for the creation of this permanent Secretariat.

As I thank you now for the services you are rendering to ASEAN, allow me to remind you that it would take no less than full commitment from everyone to realize our mutual goals. Let me enjoin you to continue your noble efforts for ASEAN, for only if we work concertedly can we achieve the ASEAN quest for lasting peace and well-being.

Long live AIPO!

Long live ASEAN!

With great pleasure, I hereby declare the Tenth General Assembly of the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Organization open.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].