ISSUES BEFORE THE PRESIDENCY

In brief but wide-ranging remarks before the members of the Manila Overseas Press Club, President Aquino comments on the draft Constitution which she describes as merely the stage for the real effort that must be made to transform our country; the “economic miracles” of South Korea, Japan, and West Germany; the PCGG; and, finally, her own term as President.

The draft constitution I received this afternoon is an experiment, as all life is an experiment. In this particular case, it is an experiment in liberty, progress and justice; whether we can arrive at and work together towards common goals, solving our many problems along the way, within a democratic context. I barely had time to go over the text but I am satisfied that we have here the essentials of a democracy: the institutions that give voice and effect to the popular will and the guarantees that protect our inalienable rights. It sets forth also some of the deepest concerns of the forces that propelled us to freedom, the fears that continue to haunt us about the perishability of freedom, and the ideals that fired our revolution.

I am told it is not an elegant document. But democracy is not an elegant affair, it is just the best thing yet devised by men for the arrangement of their affairs consistent with their dignity. It does not try to cut through differences or hammer them by oppression into conformity. Instead it provides the mechanisms by which these differences and the energies that uphold them can be drawn together in compatible goals that can be achieved by collective effort. It is not the answer to our many problems, but it is the indispensable instrument for meeting what we would prefer to call the challenges that confront us: the challenges of peace, justice, and progress for all our people. As I said this afternoon, democracy is safe with this Constitution. Safe in regard to its necessary institutions and in regard to the inalienable rights of our people. The powers of government are wisely divided in the time-honored fashion of enduring democracies, where the energy of the single hand, as one would refer to the executive, finds its counterpoise and guidance in the collective wisdom of an elected Congress and in the strict accountability of all elected officials. More than safety, democracy finds in this Constitution the firm ground from which to step upwards to the other goals of our nation: its material progress and the well-being of our people.

There is nothing in this Constitution that gives reason for fundamental differences among reasonable men, differences that would argue strongly against its ratification. I see nothing here that endangers the deeply held values for which our people struggled with such distinction, but on the contrary much that protects those values. Yet, I am sure that in the ratification campaign there will be attempts to becloud and distort the issues. But the essential rightness of this document will come through to the people in whom I have always reposed my final confidence.

Even as I am confident that the people will receive this attempt to give enduring form to their values and effective expression to their aspirations with gladness and approbation, in the spirit of candor that has marked my administration, I must say that it is merely the stage for the real effort that must be made to transform our country.

Yesterday, Vice President Laurel reported to the Cabinet on his recent trip. One of his salient points was that the No. 1 factor behind the phenomenal success of South Korea is HARD WORK. This country must support a huge military effort to answer a perceived threat to its integrity, and yet has risen from the depths of war ruin, underdevelopment and poverty to challenge the modern economies of the world. Today, Japan, another Asian miracle, still has the so-called MacArthur Draft as its constitution. Its foreign provenance did not dampen the efforts of this extremely proud race to outdo any country on any terms. The West German Constitution was adopted when the Allied powers held sway over it. The Japanese and the West Germans never used history as an excuse for failure, for not giving their all to the reconstruction and progress of their countries. Little politics and much hard work would explain the fantastic success of these countries I have mentioned.

There have been suggestions that I lift the ban against the members of the Constitutional Commission running in the coming elections. I am strongly inclined against it. And I reject any insinuation, made without the least effort to investigate, that I struck a deal with the honorable men and women of the Commission to lift the ban. Contrary to what some critics believe, there are honorable Filipinos. And they are legion. I would have thought that the Philippine Revolution of 1986 proved this beyond all doubt.

But yes, there was a deal struck between myself and the Commissioners which was that the integrity of this document, as attested by the self-sacrifice of its drafters, would never be put in question by suspicions of selfish motives. They took the commission to draft this constitution together with the prohibition to appointment or election to public office. I stand by that deal and reject any suggestion to remove the ban.

What will I do should the people vote down the draft? Frankly, I am persuaded that the vast majority of our people are sensible citizens, who will go beyond the narrow, partisan, personal, and parochial points of view of a few, and will examine the great question on the basis of what is good for the country, now and in the future.

There is concern about the PCGG. The country must make up its mind whether we should continue to go after those who stole the country’s wealth, who emptied our future, who condemned us to working hard for many years to come only to pay off what they looted. Today, in other parts of the world, they are still looking for war criminals. I believe that our people will support the continuing effort to go after those who plundered our nation’s wealth. This is not vendetta but plain and simple justice. Yet, at the same time, this reaffirmation on my part to continue the quest for justice in this area should not be construed as a license to disregard the basic values for which we fought, of which due process is eminently one.

Finally, what about my term? You will recall that the Batas Pambansa Blg. 883 under which Doy Laurel and I ran had been condemned as unconstitutional because there was no vacancy. But the Supreme Court said in effect: let the people decide. And so they did. That law gave them the opening to freedom and the government of their choice, the government of Cory Aquino. The event that established my claim to the Presidency, and Doy’s to the Vice-Presidency, was our election by the people. The act that put the reins of power in my hand was the rising of a people to defeat the attempt of my predecessor and his unlamented Batasan to frustrate their will.

A new Constitution does not negate everything that preceded it, when that Constitution builds upon the cornerstone of the people’s victory in my election to the Presidency. This constitution will not close the book on one phase of our history and start another, but will rather establish for posterity the link between that glorious moment when the people took the fate of the nation into their hands and this when you and I, the government and the people, must build upon what they accomplished. My election by the people is the one certain landmark we have as we move towards the future. The people spoke so clearly, the whole world heard them. But I am not surprised that some people in this country could not hear them as the walls of tyranny they had helped to build crashed around their ears. That is their problem. As the Chinese saying goes: Despite the barking of the dogs in the night, the caravan moves on.

And so we shall. From the ratification of this constitution to the election of Congress until all the familiar landmarks of a democratic country are in place to guide us on our way to the future we have dreamed of.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].