UP Alumni Association Oblation Award Conferment Rites June 24, 1988

NINOY AND THE OBLATION AWARD

Ninoy followed the longer, rougher road to heroism and martyrdom. The President in getting the Oblation Award for Ninoy, the highest accolade U.P. can possibly bestow on an alumnus, proudly asserts that knowing her husband, he’s fully convinced he deserves this award.

It is certainly a distinct honor and pleasure to be with you today.

One thing you can certainly say about Ninoy. He always got more than he bargained for. While he was a law student at the University of the Philippines, Ninoy set about to accomplish a number of things. He became the star reporter of The Manila Times, one of the country’s leading dailies; he became the youngest correspondent to cover the war in Korea; he even won the heart of another law student who eventually married him and got more out of her life with him than she bargained for. If there was one thing he did not manage to do at the University of the Philippines, it was to finish his studies and get his degree.

I can almost hear him saying now, and not without a hint of his usual braggadocio: “You see, I did one better. I got the Oblation Award, the highest accolade the University can possibly bestow on an alumnus.”

I understand that the five previous recipients of the award have either been presidents of the university or Presidents of the Republic. Certainly all have had a direct hand in the shaping of the University and were intimately acquainted with its affairs. Ninoy was only 17 when he left for the war in Korea. In 1949, I understand, the U.P. Oblation statue made its famous journey from the old university grounds in Padre Faura to its permanent home in Diliman, Quezon City.

Ninoy may not have been there when the Oblation was set on its foundation to become the symbol of everything the University of the Philippines stands for. But the spirit and ideals that guided its sculptor, Guillermo Tolentino, were as firmly imbedded in Ninoy’s heart as they are engraved in bronze at the base of the Oblation today.

That spirit is contained in the second stanza of Rizal’s “Mi Ultimo Adios.” As the martyr wrote: “On the fields of battle, in the fury of the fight, others give you their lives without pain or hesitancy. The place does not matter; cypress, laurel, lily white, scaffold, open field, conflict or martyrdom’s site, it is the same if asked by the home and country.”

And as I said, Ninoy got more than he bargained for. He had originally set his sights to lead his republic. Instead, he followed the longer, rougher road to heroism and martyrdom. Guillermo Tolentino’s interpretation of Rizal’s vision of martyrdom is that of a young man free of all encumberments. He no longer looks behind or ahead, or at the conditions immediately surrounding him. Instead, his face is lifted to the sky, his arms outstretched as he gloriously offers himself for the loftier purposes of the Almighty. Those purposes went beyond the shattered dreams of Rizal’s or Ninoy’s time, and took shape in a surge towards freedom that remains the driving force of the University of the Philippines today.

There were, of course, times when the Oblation seemed less to look upwards and beyond than away from the confusion and rage that attended some of the more turbulent years of the University of the Philippines. On various occasions, the statue was blindfolded, draped with a skirt, or smeared with paint by campus activists protesting not only the policies of the university of the state, but the vision and direction of the state that sustained it.

Those years, I believe, are over. May the Oblation stand from hereon as it was meant to – naked and unfettered, solid as the foundations upon which the country and its foremost college, now stand.

Ninoy was very proud to have been a student of the University of the Philippines. In behalf of the Aquino family, let me express our heartfelt gratitude for the great honor you have bestowed on Ninoy. I am sure that Ninoy is not only flattered, but if I know him, he’s also fully convinced he deserves this award.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library