Speech of the Honorable Corazon C. Aquino, President of the Philippines, on Independence Day

HONOR AND PRIDE

As we celebrate the 91st anniversary of our freedom, the President recalled our past struggle at EDSA to restore our democracy, which had been lost for a long time due to a dictator. Her plea to all Filipinos who love freedom is not to waste what we sacrificed to restore democracy. Let us strive and unite towards progress and prosperity.

Today, we celebrate the ninety-first anniversary of our freedom. Ninety-one years have passed, but it was only in the last three years that the world noticed and observed us closely. Through television, everyone learned that in this part of the world, there is a race that knows how to fight for freedom in a peaceful manner. What we did in February 1986 was admired by the whole world and wanted to be emulated by other countries. Foreigners saw “People Power” at EDSA on their televisions. They saw the peaceful uprising of the Filipino people. They saw the nuns and priests praying the rosary. They saw the countless people, old and young, women and men, jointly fighting for democracy. And after four days, they were surprised to see the success of “People Power”. The dictator was removed and your humble servant, who was cheated in the election, became president through “People Power”.

Because of what they saw on television, foreigners thought our revolution was very easy. Some thought that the removal of the dictator and the restoration of democracy happened within just four days. But you, my beloved countrymen, and I, we know the true history of the restoration of our freedom. Allow me to refresh your minds with the true events.

When Marcos declared “Martial Law” on September 23, 1972, he ordered the arrest and imprisonment of hundreds of people. The first to be imprisoned were my husband, Ninoy Aquino, along with Pepe Diokno, Chino Roces, Monching Mitra, Soc Rodrigo, Max Soliven, Jose Mari Velez, Nap Rama, Teodoro Locsin Sr., Joe Concepcion, Bren Guiao, Amando Doronila and many others.

And not only did many of our countrymen lose their freedom – we also lost what we call “freedom of the press”. The newspapers, radio and TV were placed in the hands of the dictator. The news we received then was censored by the dictator. The truth was hidden from us. Only what the dictator wanted appeared in the newspapers and was seen on television and heard on the radio. More and more people were imprisoned during the time of “Martial Law”. The dictator really intimidated the people. And because of fear, many just kept silent.

Fortunately, there were still brave Filipinos. They gradually found ways to awaken their fellowmen. The Filipino people awoke again in 1978 during the election for the Interim National Assembly. That was also the birth of the LABAN Party. Twenty-one candidates of LABAN faced the candidates of the KBL here in Metro Manila.

On April 6, 1978, the “Noise Barrage” was held. Perhaps you still remember that it was like New Year's Eve on April 6. Almost everyone here in Metro Manila made noise to indicate to the country that they were on the side of Ninoy and the LABAN candidates. This was the first time the Filipino people learned that many were against Marcos and many wanted to vote for the LABAN candidates.

Marcos was surprised and to suppress this awakened struggle of the Filipino people, he cheated in the election and all the LABAN candidates lost. Marcos was not satisfied with the cheating. He arrested the candidates and officials of LABAN and imprisoned them. This included Senator Lorenzo Tanada, Soc Rodrigo, Nene Pimentel, Tito Guingona and many others. When these leaders were imprisoned, the “morale” of those in the opposition somewhat decreased. But they continued their meetings and planning how to attract their many countrymen to help fight the dictator.

Several years passed. On August 21, 1983, Ninoy returned to the Philippines from America. He returned to ask Marcos to restore democracy. He was shot at the airport. And Ninoy's offering of his life was the beginning of the change of many Filipinos. They lost their fear. Two million mourned and attended the burial. They showed that they were united with Ninoy. They showed that they were united with the Filipino people who did not want the dictator. “Rallies” and demonstrations began after the burial. We had an election for the Batasan in 1984. The opposition fought and with the help of the Filipino people, almost thirty percent of the opposition candidates won.

Next came the “snap elections”. We, the people, endured many hardships and sacrifices during the “snap elections”. Many volunteered to help in the campaign. Many also trained on how to defend the “ballot boxes”. Many also joined the “rallies” and showed their solidarity with those fighting for democracy. We saw the cheating that Marcos and his people did during the “snap elections”. We also saw the courage of our countrymen who guarded the ballot boxes. Several of those who helped in our campaign were shot and killed. One of them was Evelio Javier, the former governor of Antique.

When the Batasan proclaimed Marcos as the winner of the election, we did not agree. Right here in this place we had a “Tagumpay Ng Bayan Rally” attended by almost half a million people. We started our “boycott movement.” Instead of losing hope, our determination grew stronger. We continued to fight to restore our democracy.

Therefore, when “People Power” was needed at EDSA, many were ready to stand up, because many Filipinos had been waiting and striving for a long time to restore our democracy.

We offered countless hardships, sweat, tears and blood to restore our freedom. It was not just one person and not just a few Filipinos who cared to taste freedom again. Let us never forget this thing.

Therefore, I implore all Filipinos who love freedom—let us not waste what we have exerted to restore democracy. Let us not squander the blessings we have attained.

The selfish, greedy, and arrogant can be found everywhere. I need you, the citizens, to fight them. You are my hope and my trust. Together, let us suppress falsehood with truth, violence with legal force, the incompetent through their ostracism, and corruption through the full force and power of the law.

The fulfillment of freedom is in our hands… in our effort and in our unity.

Next year, I want to stand here again and declare that we have finished the task we began for the sake of freedom. I want to let our countrymen know, especially those who are suffering, that we are vigorously moving towards progress and prosperity. Shame is in the past. Only honor and pride remain – honor in what we have done, honor in our own ability, honor in our integrity, and above all, honor as Filipinos.

Long live the Filipino.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].