Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On remembering Ninoy

[Delivered at the St. Ignatius Boston College, Boston, Massachusetts, September 21, 1986]

REMEMBERING NINOY

Ninoy’s life had run its full course. Not a minute or day could be added or subtracted. He left exactly at the appointed time, in the fullness of his development, a worthy sacrifice to a noble cause: the rebirth of democracy whose time had come.

I am glad to be here again among familiar faces: in this church that offered a place of solace and meditation, in this city that provided the last home Ninoy, the children and I would ever share.

I wish now to speak less about myself than of Ninoy. Since many of you were his friends and you miss him as I do, I thought you might want to spend a few moments of remembrance.

I have stood, for the past ten months, in the vortex of political events, first as the challenger to the dictator and then as the President that took away his place. If I had plotted the scenario of those events, I would not be at the center but Ninoy. I would have given to Ninoy the role of populist leader and revolutionary. After all, he was the star of the family. And he was better rehearsed for the part. Ninoy had been our country’s youngest mayor, governor, and senator. He was the chief challenger to Marcos’ ambition. He seemed the logical choice for next president. He became, at any rate, Marcos’s logical choice to be the first in jail.

But scenarios in the real world, I’ve learned, do not unfold as we expect them to. People have remarked what a waste of a life Ninoy’s was, what a waste of brains, of political savvy, of vast experience and knowledge, of sheer energy that flowed through him more abundantly than most other men. But perhaps no less than the sacrifice of a man for all men was needed to give freedom back to a whole nation.

Still the question: Why should others, who did not push the plow and sow as tirelessly as he had, enjoy the harvest?

Faced with questions like these, I am glad my foundations are in my Faith. For I am certain that Ninoy is savoring the fruits of his labors with greater relish than any of us. For Faith tells us that men of faith are meant for greater ends and richer rewards than we can imagine. And adding to Ninoy’s joy is the knowledge that he pulled a fast one on me. Once again, he has gone his merry way and left me behind to pick up after him.

Thanks to my faith also, I can see that Ninoy’s life had run its full course. Not a minute or a day could be added or subtracted. He left us exactly at the appointed time, in the fullness of his development, a worthy sacrifice to a noble cause: the rebirth of democracy whose time had come.

Ninoy was a man in a hurry, rushing through his incarnations as local politician, national leader, and champion of the opposition, to meet his appointment in jail so he could begin his education as a man fit to be the liberator of his people.

For it was during those seven and a half years in a military stockade in Fort Bonifacio, most of it spent in solitary confinement, that Ninoy grew to his full measure as a man. It was in that empty, windowless cell, that Ninoy saw the things that had eluded him: the vanity of ambition, the true meaning of freedom, the limitless endurance of the human spirit, and the real purpose of his life. By shutting one door on Ninoy, Marcos opened the other one to his destiny.

From the teachings of the Bible, which he read and reread, Ninoy formed a new strategy for political change. It was a strategy of mercy, peace and gentleness, of the Christian virtues of forgiveness and self-sacrifice. The pragmatic politician in Ninoy remained to work out the means, but it was his Christian conscience that shaped those means for their noble and gentle purpose: the return of freedom through reconciliation.

Still there are those who would say what a waste of manhood Ninoy was, to be cut down in his prime, the perfect leader for his country and time. But it is said in the Old Testament that only the most pleasing sacrifice would move heaven to give an abundant harvest. I would like to believe that in a very similar way Ninoy was such a sacrifice. He came from our people, and thus atoned for our apathy. He came from the discredited world of democratic politics, so no one else or less could redeem it in the eyes of our people. We had failed so miserably to protect our cherished freedoms that only the best of us could make up for our neglect and failure. I would like to believe that his martyrdom is an assurance of the abundance and prosperity that might someday be restored to our land.

Perhaps I read too much into recent events, in which case I hope you will forgive me. Like Ninoy, I find so much hope and strength in my Faith. Also, I know I speak before an audience of his friends; and who else will indulge and be patient with me, than you who were so supportive and indulgent during our years here in exile? Among you he regained his good cheer and confidence. With the resident professors and wits of Boston academe, Ninoy matched and sharpened his wits. In this liberal and reflective atmosphere, Ninoy found the space and atmosphere to work out and refine his vision of non-violent change in the Philippines.

In the lives of those who are committed, nothing happens by accident. Even when Ninoy won too many rounds of mahjong, I knew there was more to it than luck. In fact the word is out that those of you who played with him would let him win to lift him out of his occasional depression. He would never have admitted that. But I suppose, with the victory of his cause, he can afford to be magnanimous. And so, in his behalf, I thank you for these little things and for the big things; for making Ninoy’s stay here so pleasant, for helping to fill his cup of joy before he went home to drain it in sacrifice, and for extending to me the same familiar warmth and acceptance.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].