A NATION LEANING ON ITS OWN PEOPLE

Reaffirming the bonds between Canada and the United States and the Philippines, President Aquino speaks before the Filipino community in L.A. before returning to the country. She urges them to show their desire to serve their country and fellowmen by concrete actions. She exhorts them to help their country so that the nation will no longer have to depend on other nations but rather will lean on its own people in times of great trials.

I came to North America to reaffirm the bonds between Canada and the United States and the Philippines. I return to my country with their firm expressions of support for our development.

The path we have walked towards Philippine political reform and economic recovery has been difficult and exasperating; but we persevered. Our steadfastness has started to pay off. Political normalcy has returned. The economy has taken off.

For the past week, I have been talking to Filipinos in Canada and in the United States how things are in the home country and why they should be even prouder of what it has become.

Dominating the heart of every Filipino is a strong desire to serve the country and fellow citizens. Let us prove this desire through concrete actions so that our country will no longer rely on others but on its own citizens in times of adversity and trials.

Before I return to you, I want to thank you for joining me and your fellow countrymen in your prayers. Carrying your prayers, we will return to the Philippines with renewed strength to fulfill our duties for the further greatness of our country.

On behalf of our government and your fellow countrymen in the Philippines, I would like to extend to you our heartfelt wish that you succeed in your endeavors and activities, because your success is the success of the entire Filipino people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].