Shining Star of the Industry

The garments industry turned in a sterling performance in 1987. It has been tagged as the “shining star” of the industrial sector for achieving its target of P1 billion. President Aquino pledges the government’s wholehearted support to the garments industry. It will curb textile smuggling, train the necessary skilled workers for garment factories, provide the equipment and buildings for these trainings, and review garments and textile import/export policies. The government is also taking appropriate measures to make the industry more competitive by not raising taxes on garments.

I am very happy to be here today, speaking to a sector that turned in a sterling performance last year despite the troubles that the ambitious and misguided brought upon us. The garments industry delivered in 1987 and has been tagged as the “shining star” of the industrial sector for achieving its target of P1 Billion. The target next year is P1.3 Billion.

Government will do its best to help you meet that target. We are already implementing the Local Value Added scheme to reduce your dependence on imported fabrics, and to pave the way for the expansion of the Philippine textile industry. This is another goal to which we are deeply committed.

The Philippine textile industry, despite its serious efforts to improve quality and increase capacity, continues to reel from foreign textiles that continue to be dumped and smuggled into the country. From employing over 100,000 workers in 1979, the textile industry has declined to employing some 70,000 workers last year. Smuggling was a major factor in this decline. Smuggling has to stop. And it will.

I have instructed the Commissioner of Customs to increase the bounty for turning in textile smugglers to a level that is sure to kill the profitability of that illicit trade. I expect your cooperation in this campaign. The textile industry has just invested an additional P2 Billion in 65 projects to upgrade its mills. Government will give the textile industry the protection it deserves for the generous commitment it has made to national recovery. But there is more at stake here than investments. Over 70,000 workers depend on the textile industry for their livelihoods; counting their dependents, that could easily run to 300,000 men, women and children. So let me here serve warning on the textile smugglers: We are poised to strike, and we will make no exceptions.

The garment industry has its share of problems too: Lack of raw materials and shortage of accessories, shortage of skilled labor, unavailability of spare parts, quota restrictions, lack of suitable infrastructure, labor relations, and government regulations.

In response to your Association’s appeal for Government to address the shortage of skilled garment workers, I instructed the Labor Department to produce the needed 13,000 to 16,000 skilled workers every year. Government will provide facilities. We hope that the private sector will contribute its share. Right now, it seems that we shall have to import British trainors, since the local industry has said it cannot spare any of its own. That may be a good sign of heavy demand for your products. Perhaps, what industry can do is already plan for the absorption of the annual crop of graduates. The first batch should be graduating by March 30.

The Department of Trade and Industry has been directed to purchase the high-speed sewing machines, the knitting machines and whatever equipment is required to get the training going. Let me repeat that instruction with this emphasis: Do it fast, and do it straight. The Bureau of Customs is directed to facilitate the entry of these machineries, with due regard of course to the possibility of smuggling unauthorized items. You can never tell what people will do in the name of development. I likewise instruct the Department of Public Works to speed up the construction of the necessary buildings.

I also direct the CB, GTEB and Customs Interagency group to speed up the review of import/export procedures for garments.

The Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Labor and Employment are directed to review the rules on subcontracting with a view to generating more employment without any loss in workers’ protection. We have set employment generation as our highest priority this year.

These are just some of the measures we have taken to encourage the industry. You know what you have to contribute: quality and dependability. The textile and garments industries are among the most competitive and volatile businesses in the world. People expect the best and they will get it, if not from us then from the competition.

To that end, I have vetoed Congressional measures to raise the tariff on garments from 50 percent to 75 percent. The increase proposed is beyond the present maximum tariff rate of 50 percent ad valorem, and flies in the face of the cornerstone policy of this Government, which is to invite competition in order to bring out the best in the Filipino. I am not afraid of the competition, and neither are you.

We pin great hopes on the garments industry as one of the leaders of our economic recovery. I know we won’t be disappointed.

The last political exercise was completed last month. Those who are entitled to it have each their share of democratic political power and office. The last excuse was played out for delaying a wholehearted commitment to national development. Now it is time to work – together – for the one and only country that is ours. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library