SERVING THE PEOPLE

Civil Service Week was proclaimed to correct the injustice done to the men and women in the civil service and to call everyone’s attention to their role which is no less than that of maintaining our society. She cites the many outstanding achievements of those in the service of the people.

On the day we honored the fallen heroes of our race, the men and women who fell in battle to make us free and keep us free, I gave equal honor to the silent but living heroes among us: the men and women of quiet dedication throughout the civil service who keep this country and its government functioning.

Public opinion overlooks them, except when one or two of the thousands of these heroes falter in their essential integrity and commitment to duty and country. And then they hit the headlines, blackening the shining record of the civil service.

Civil Service Week was proclaimed to rectify that injustice, to call everyone’s attention to your role, which is no less than that of maintaining our society. The week was set aside also to enable you to re-examine your record in the light of the great tasks you are called to perform. It has been a time also of re-examining that very role itself in the light of our new thrust to bring government closer to the people.

The record speaks for itself. Time constraints prevent me from mentioning more than a few of many outstanding achievements:

Department of Health personnel serviced 19,121,075 patients in 1987 – the precision of the count is another manifestation of the efficiency and drive of that agency. 1,061,435 children were also immunized in 1988 nationwide – concrete proof that even as we recover from the past, we have made wise and caring provisions for the future.

The 544th Engineer Construction Battalion of the 52nd Engineer Brigade of the Philippine Army is commended for completing the concreting of the Tugaya-Bacolod Section Project (the Marawi-Malaband Road), one month and three days ahead of schedule. Proof positive of the potential efficiency of the entire civil service, given the right motivation and leadership. Colonel Leonito E. Lambino, commander of the battalion, must take a bow for this one.

The work of social workers in the rebel returnee program, in caring for the children of the streets, the rehabilitation and protection of abused women and children, and in countless other areas where we have fallen short of even our people’s modest demands, defy enumeration and our ability to express our admiration and respect for the work they have done. The same admiration and respect on our part goes out to our public school teachers, who willingly added, to the burden of educating our youth, the dangerous and difficult task of assuring the integrity of the democratic process in various elections.

New dimensions will be added to the work of the civil service. The constitutional direction of decentralized government will come increasingly into play. We must bring government closer to the ordinary people it is meant to serve first and foremost.

We have strengthened the Regional Development Councils to identify and prioritize projects within their respective areas. Agency regional offices are now mandated to inform, consult and seek the approval of the RDCs for projects the agency proposes to undertake in the region.

We have established the Cabinet Action Committee on Implementation Assistance or CACIA as a support mechanism to the CORD and the RDCs.

CACIA regional consultations are taking place at this very moment. The aims are to identify and address quickly project-related problems, and to institutionalize, within the RDCs, the process of problem-identification and problem-solving.

At last September 7’s meeting, the Cabinet endorsed the CACIA’s recommendations on this and related issues. Among the significant recommendations are:

The delegation to regional directors and district engineers the work of implementing and supervising foreign-assisted projects on an area-jurisdiction basis.

And the early finalization (by November 1988) of the 1989 Infrastructure Program.

Yet even as we mark the achievements of the civil service, refine its concepts, and improve its role, we note with sadness that the epithet “heroic” was not casually applied to the civil service:

Asst. District Engineer Floriano Sarmiento was ambushed last 8 July 1988 in Camarines Sur while investigating several graft and corruption cases – underscoring the fact that our cruelest enemies are not only the rebels but also the crooks who undermine more effectively the people’s faith in democracy and good government.

Dr. Pedro Vilela, Medical Specialist TB Control Program, died of a heart attack in the course of field work in Palawan last November.

Atty. Esteban Calalang, a Department of Labor and Employment legal officer, was gunned down while leaving his office last February.

Each name underscores the self-sacrifice that is the essence of public service. Each name should stir us all to a greater resolve to match their courage and their dedication to duty.

My fellow government workers, what happened to us at EDSA is not just a memory of struggle. It continuously indicates that if we do not safeguard our freedoms, they can be stolen by those who pretend to offer greater prosperity, development, and peace.

Therefore, let us, who are in government, intensify our efforts, service, and concern for the nation. Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].