EMERGENCY POWERS: IN RESPONSE TO THE EXIGENCIES OF THE TIMES

In response to the declared state of national emergency, President Aquino signs R.A. 6826 which authorizes her to exercise emergency powers. This includes the power to fix price ceilings, and to protect the people from hoarding, profiteering, price manipulation, and similar acts.

Responding to the state of national emergency that I declared under Proclamation No. 503 two weeks ago, Congress has passed an Act to declare a national policy in connection with the existing national emergency and authorizing me to exercise powers necessary and proper to carry out that policy.

Signed today as Republic Act No. 6826, this law shall take effect upon publication in two newspapers of general publication.

These powers, given pursuant to the Constitution for a limited duration and subject to restrictions, are intended to enable government to deal effectively with the exigencies of the emergency.

This includes the power to protect the people from hoarding, profiteering, price manipulation, and similar acts; the power to purchase articles and commodities for the relief of the people, to fix maximum selling prices, regulate fees, and seize hoarded commodities; to take over or direct the operation of public utilities or private businesses affected with public interests; to ease imports of needed vehicles, ensure availability of credit, stagger office hours, conserve energy, adopt economy measures in the bureaucracy.

It also empowers agents of governments upon my specific orders or those of my duly authorized representative to recover AFP firearms, explosives, and military equipage, and reasonably take the same into their custody.

I have directed all departments under me to prepare suggested measures necessary to carry out these powers in their respective areas.

I thank Congress for their swift and responsive action.

I shall exercise these powers decisively to carry out their end of protecting our people and reconstructing our economic gains.

These powers given under the Constitution will be exercised in accordance with the Constitution.

But I intend to exercise them to the full extent needed during the emergency.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].