87th Anniversary of the Western Police District January 9, 1988

STILL MANILA’S FINEST

The President announces a package of incentives to the police like; 1) no equity deposit shall be required to qualify under the NHA plan for policy housing; 2) a system of automatic promotion of patrolmen; 3) DOH to formalize specific arrangements for hospitals to fully treat wounded lawmen without requiring a deposit.

Last year, I had the honor to congratulate you on your 86th anniversary. I thank you for giving me that honor again.

Many things have changed since that occasion. I said then that our democracy is fighting two wars:

One against the communist insurgents (and military adventurers); the other against crime, lawlessness, and anarchy. The first is fought by the Armed Forces. The second by the police, not least by the men and women of Manila’s Finest: the police of the Western District, under the extremely capable leadership of our fighting Police General Alfredo Lim. He is one reason I sleep well at night.

The first called on our warfighting capability, the second on our crimefighting capability.

Much has changed since then. In the past year, criminality, insurgency and military mutiny struck indiscriminately at anyone who stood in their way. A private citizen or a policeman had as much chance of being shot in the neck by a Communist assassin or mowed down by a rebel soldier, as shot at by a fleeing robber.

Much has also been accomplished,

We stopped talking and went back to fighting the Communist rebels. As expected, they fought back harder and brought the war to the cities. The truce, nonetheless, showed the true colors of the insurgency: as a movement dedicated not to peace and the general good, but to the enslavement by terror of our people. Our people now know the true face of the enemy.

The other enemy of democracy, the rightwing rebels, made an all-or-nothing attempt, a desperate stab at the heart of Philippine democracy. We blunted their attack and hunted them down successfully. The Armed Forces and the Police stood resolutely by democracy on that fateful day, and earned the deep respect and undying gratitude of the nation.

Last January, I pledged to work hard to improve the living conditions of the police. As you kept faith with democracy, so have I kept my pledge to you. A housing plan was prepared, approved and is being implemented by the National Housing Authority and other agencies of the government.

I want to improve on that pledge by announcing that no equity deposit shall be required to qualify under the NHA plan for police housing.

PC-INP Chief, General de Villa, has initiated a process for the automatic promotion of patrolmen to patrolmen first class after 10 years of service. He is directed to study the feasibility of extending this to progressively higher ranks and longer terms of service.

Likewise, I have told General de Villa to give first priority in promotions to the members of our police forces who distinguish themselves in exceptional deeds, such as the heroic actions that thwarted the August 28 Coup.

The character of a nation, and a government, it has been said, is shown by the decent, not to say noble, manner in which it honors its heroic dead, and cares for its wounded. To that end, I have directed the Acting Metro Manila Governor to set aside an area that will serve as a cemetery for the police dead.

The Department of Health is directed to formalize specific arrangements for government and private hospitals to fully treat wounded lawmen without requiring a deposit. All charges incurred for their full emergency care should be shouldered by the respective Police Districts. It is true that there are existing laws requiring emergency medical care for anyone in need, but the reality has been that only the most cursory treatment is given to our police who are brought in wounded. This shameful treatment of those who lay down their lives each day to protect our lives will end. Any hospital that fails to meet this obligation should be reported to my office.

At the convening of the first Congress, I said, Can we expect our men to fight if we will not give them the means to fight? I know that you continue to lack the necessary arms and equipment that will maximize your efficiency. Our enemies remain better armed than you, our protectors. I pledge here and now to redress the imbalance in firepower between crime and order. I expect a report from General de Villa on the logistical lack and requirements of our police forces. I don’t want our men going out there with only a hope and a prayer. To the protection and compassion of Providence, let us not forget to add the stopping power of a. 38.

Let me end by congratulating you on another great year of notable service to our people and our democracy. In a week, local elections will be held. We are going to need every hand, and every brave heart, to make this a peaceful, honest and orderly election. I call on you, the men and women of the Western Police District, and on all police forces throughout the country, to do your part in assuring the success of the elections. Let us show the world again that we Filipinos know as much about working a democracy as winning it.

Congratulations again, and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library