Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the 35th National Convention of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines

[Delivered in Iloilo City, May 5, 1988]

THE RURAL BANKS: UP AND ALIVE

Very noticeable during the past year was the improved profitability of the rural banks. President Aquino notes this is another healthy indicator of recovery in the Rural Banking System, which is closely tied to the emerging effects of our government program of financial reforms. The President also outlines important measures which will serve as strategic interventions and innovations in the financial sector during the transition process.

First, let me congratulate you for holding your national convention near the countryside, in the fair and progressive City of Iloilo. Rural banks, by definition, know the rural areas. It is thus fitting that your annual gathering is held outside Metropolitan Manila and closer to the rural community served by your members. This reinforces your convention theme: “Rural Banks: Catalysts of Agricultural Productivity and Countryside Development.” The city and province of Iloilo, and in fact the entire island of Panay, are models of rural entrepreneurship and agricultural productivity that we can all be proud of. I am told that Iloilo and Panay Island have become one of the most productive agricultural areas of our country, particularly in the production of rice and in aquaculture which is now earning a substantial proportion of our foreign exchange. I therefore commend the people of Panay and Iloilo, and your leaders and officials. You are setting an example worthy of emulation for the entire country in rural and agricultural development.

I am pleased to be with you again. Last year, when you honored me as your guest at your 34th National Convention in Manila, I pledged to keep a close watch on the rural banks. I have been observing the developments in rural banking over the past year with great interest. In the past year, the growth in capital base, total assets and particularly loan portfolio of the rural banks has been faster than that of most other types of banks. The acceleration in the lending activities of the rural banks is all the more remarkable, at a time when the number of operating rural banks decreased. The financial reports of the rural banks also show that the past year has improved in profitability. These developments are in sharp contrast to the trends for the rural banks up until 1986. At that time the performance of the rural banks was less impressive than that of the other types of banks. The relatively greater growth in rural bank lending and profitability in the recent period therefore is another healthy indicator of recovery in the rural banking system which, I believe, is closely tied to the emerging effects of our government’s program of financial reforms, in combination with increasing productive activities in our rural and agricultural sector.

While encouraged by the improving performance of the rural banks over the past year, more still needs to be done to accelerate development in our rural and agricultural sector along with the rural financial system. I note that as many as 500 rural banks have applied to participate in the rehabilitation program for rural banks now being implemented by the Central Bank of the Philippines. These applicants include many of the 350 or so banks that had been classified as being in poor financial health. The fact that only about one-half have been approved, raises concern about the slow processing of the applications. Undue delay in the rehabilitation program, I am afraid, may lead to more failures among the rural banks than desirable. I therefore strongly encourage the Central Bank and the Rural Bankers Association to work, independently or together, to implement measures to streamline and speed up the processing of applications for participation in the rehabilitation program.

I understand that there have been comments made describing the rehabilitation program as being overly restrictive and having conditions difficult to comply with. I believe that the program is more accurately described as selective, in that the only rural banks which will be able to participate are those with reasonable prospects for viability, independent of continuing subsidies. A program which is easily entered into and whose conditions are easily fulfilled is probably not a rehabilitation program at all, since the fundamental reasons for non-viability would not have been faced squarely and dealt with.

However, given the government’s objective of implementing a rehabilitation program that is selective and long-lasting, there have already been at least three stages wherein the selectivity of the program has been liberalized: first , as a result of the dialogues and discussions between your RBAP officers and the Rural Bank Review and Rationalization Committee and the Central Bank; second , in the issuance of CB Circular 1158 which amended CB Circular 1143, the original circular on the rehabilitation program; and finally , in late March this year, in issuing CB Circular 1172, the Central Bank further liberalized the program in response to your recommendations and the intercession of the Congressional Committee on Banks and Financial Institutions chaired by Representative Isidro Real of Zamboanga.

The liberalizing changes that have been introduced into the rehabilitation process underlines our understanding that the rehabilitation of rural banks is a dynamic process. It is also an effort that focuses not only on the rural banks but involves the entire rural financial market, and all the economic agents in the rural sector as well. It is clear that the rehabilitation program for the rural banks will be an exercise in futility if the rural economy is not also revitalized. We have already learned from painful and costly experience that credit programs are wasted when borrower’s capacity to repay are not enhanced by support for production. Thus credit programs have to be preceded and complemented by savings mobilization, investment into physical and social infrastructure, and improvements in agricultural productivity and rural enterprises.

It is this vision of a dynamic and complex rural economy that leads us to view the development of the countryside and of our entire nation as the task of creating an atmosphere within which the private sector can freely respond to productive opportunities with a minimum of intervention by the government. The responsibility of government in this context is to be supportive of the efforts of the private sector. The government must thus focus its limited resources on providing the goods and services which the private sector cannot; public goods like roads, bridges, ports, irrigation, research, information, electrification, price stabilization and extension. At the same time the government must act as the custodian of public welfare, by promoting social justice and equity, safeguarding food security and health, and maintaining peace and order.

In short, both the government and the private sector have roles to play in rural development. These roles are equally important and critical. The partnership is necessary, but neither is self-sufficient. Both have to be present, and one without the other will not be adequate for the task. Thus the banks must mobilize savings and provide loans, and the government must act to ensure that savings are indeed available and that borrowers develop credit worthiness.

I realize that the task of accelerating development is a long, drawn-out process, and that our nation is still at the beginning stages of the journey. Along this road, the government must also implement certain measures which serve as strategic interventions and innovations which will help bridge any gaps in the transition process. In the financial sector our government has already undertaken a number of measures, including:

Finally, the most recent measure which our government has taken to provide liquidity and support for the rural banks is the continuation and expansion of the Integrated Rural Financing (IRF) Program. The IRF is one of the more successful financing programs of the government, having maintained very high repayment rates on both the borrower-to-bank and bank-to-Central Bank levels. The IRF program provides special time deposits from the CALF into qualified rural banks, and the rural banks then relend the funds to agri-based projects. Under the IRF, there are no restrictions on the types and combinations of agricultural commodities that may be financed. The STDs are treated like credit lines. In addition, the IRF program provides intensive training in project management for both borrowers and bank staff. The IRF therefore provides maximum flexibility and support for the participating rural banks. The Department of Agriculture has expanded the funds available to the IRF program from P100-P300 million, effective immediately.

In closing, let me emphasize that the programs of the government in support of the lending activities of the rural banks are merely instruments of the transition process. Wide spread development and revitalization can only take place with the effectivity of reforms which spread wealth and income among most of our countrymen, and allow them to make full use of productive opportunities. Therefore, agrarian reform must be a key element of our development efforts. The effective delivery of basic services in agriculture and rural development provides additional necessary elements. Finally, for effective and efficient financial intermediation, the maintenance of a policy atmosphere which encourages freedom and flexibility is another critical element. All these factors, working together, provide the fertile ground for recovery, growth and development.

I recognize that the rural banks have the potential for playing the critical role of countryside development, specially in support of the poor. This is specially true of the sound rural banks, those that have survived the years when government subsidies for rural banking could no longer be maintained. These rural banks have learned how to mobilize the small deposits of the rural savers. The good rural bankers have also developed the practical expertise in lending to small, often uncollateralized farmers and rural entrepreneurs. This expertise is the unique comparative advantage of the rural banks. It is also the basic rationale for their rehabilitation, and in your much-needed efforts to assume your rightful place as key catalysts of agricultural productivity and countryside development.

Thank you and good day!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].