He showed the way.

President Aquino pays tribute to Don Chino Roces and his selfless, courageous, and unceasing service to his country and his people. She acknowledges his invaluable contributions to the struggle to achieve democracy in the Philippines. Don Chino’s legacy is leadership by example which he attested by the values and goals he exemplified.

With your kind permission, may I speak of Don Chino not only in my capacity as President but as one of those whose lives he specially touched and transformed. May I speak also for Ninoy, whom he treated like a son. For Chino’s relationship with me started with my husband.

As you know, it was Chino who introduced Ninoy to the political life – something Ninoy’s father might have done for him had he lived longer. Chino took him into the Manila Times as a reporter and put him immediately in harm’s way, to cover the Korean war. You might say, “Some ‘father’ Chino was to Ninoy.” But that was Chino’s way. He measured out his love and respect by the height of his expectations of you.

He knew that Ninoy was aching to serve where his talents would bring most honor quickly to himself, to his family, and to his country. And so Chino sent him to war.

The reputation he made in Korea launched Ninoy’s political career. It made him a national figure and smoothed his political ascent. Ninoy would always be conscious of Chino’s help throughout his career, yet not as a debt to be repaid but as a great expectation on the old man’s part that he could not disappoint.

I do not think Ninoy disappointed Chino, not in the time of his meteoric rise in politics, nor in the time of his descent to the greatest misfortunes that could befall any person. Always, Ninoy was conscious of being watched and judged by Chino and the grand old men of the Republic who refused to collaborate with, and who carried on the struggle against the dictatorship.

After Ninoy’s untimely death, but timely sacrifice, Chino turned his attention to me. As Ninoy’s widow, I did not need anyone to tell me that I must do honor to that sacrifice by adding my voice to the general clamor for justice and freedom that the assassination had unleashed. But Chino had decided that doing honor was not enough; that a dignified witness was insufficient; that, in fact the time would come when it would be necessary for me to lead the movement in order to unify the forces of the opposition.

That is essentially what he said to me, in the midst of others more eloquent, more experienced in politics, and therefore more capable of presenting a credible challenge to an entrenched dictatorship.

Eloquence, he believed, would be supplied by the simple truth that I must always tell. And experience, by the courage to persevere until the goal was achieved. As for presenting a credible challenge, Chino would have none of it. He wasn’t interested in a credible challenge; he wanted a victory. As a downpayment on his promise, he gave me the million signatures that finally convinced me he knew what he was talking about.

Chino was the man of few words in the opposition, comparatively speaking. Yet, he was one of its most effective members. I think his effectiveness lay in the simplicity of his goals and the simplicity of his method. His goal was the liberation of his country. And his method was simply this: he gave himself entirely to the task.

He himself went around gathering those million signatures, directly or through the hundreds of volunteers he had recruited. To raise money for the cause, he went around himself with a grocery cart or with a bag into which people, more embarrassed than he, put their money. Their embarrassment was not for this old man doing such an undignified thing, but for themselves that they were not doing it instead. For they would certainly enjoy, far longer than he, the freedom for which this old man struggled.

That was Chino’s method: to attest by your personal example, the values and goals that you proclaim. It was the method and the single biggest issue of the campaign. Leadership by personal example, we said, would pull this country back from the brink and set it on the right path again. We showed, in our lives then, the kind of leadership that would do it. And not just me, but all of you who were with me in the campaign. Your selflessness, your courage and unstinting service without expectation of reward, spoke more convincingly to the masses than any speeches of the Tightness of our cause.

Chino showed the way and it worked.

Two years after the victory, Chino came back to remind us, especially me, that the work was not finished. If we thought it was, then he was sorely disappointed. That was his testy response to the Legion of Honor that was conferred on him. The response gave more significance to the award than the award gave him, for it unleashed a wave of recriminations and, more profitably, of self-examination on the part of many. It hurt when he said it. But it had to be said, and he was one with the moral authority to say it.

In this tranquil and grieving moment I see now that it was his legacy to me and to us all. He has warned us that we, the friends of democracy, shall have a worse time of it than the clear enemies of the people — if we fail the people. For the great expectations we raised in them will be the measure of their scorn and retribution.

Everyone whom the Revolution has put in a position of power and influence, whether in the public or private sector, should heed his warning. For Chino was seldom wrong. More importantly, let us heed it given the affection and the enormous debt we owe the old man for our freedom and for that piece of wisdom that he left us.

To Chino, now, I say: You disappeared from the public scene so quickly after the victory, you gave us no chance to thank you properly. We thought it was your modesty that made you shy away. Now we understand your reticence. You wanted us to realize that the gratitude was owed not to you, but to the people whom you had merely helped to call out. It was their power in the end that made us free. Your modesty reveals to us the more onerous obligation to satisfy our people commensurately with the great hopes we have raised and the great sacrifices they have made.

Chino was that way with those from whom he expected much in the way of patriotism: there shall be no rest except that to which he has now gone. He was that way with us, with you and me — the generation that struggled for freedom. Let us not disappoint him.

With Don Chino’s death, another great tree that sheltered us from the winds of adversity comes down. I hope we have learned, while we were protected, to stand upright against them. We are increasingly on our own.

Goodbye, my friend —

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].