Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Commission on Immigration and Deportation

[Released on September 2, 1988]

A TRANSFORMED CID

President Aquino commends Commission on Immigration and Deportation Commissioner Miriam Santiago for the changes and reforms that have successfully taken place in the CID making it more honest and relevant to our times. She adds that the transformed CID has proved her thesis that it is possible to cleanse and energize the bureaucracy.

One of the decisions I am pleased to have made in office was to corner Miriam Santiago into accepting the position of Commissioner of Immigration and Deportation.

If I recall correctly, Miriam and I had the same reactions to the challenge thrown unexpectedly our way: reluctance and apprehension, less over the task than over the toll it would exact upon our private lives. But, fortunately or unfortunately for ourselves, we came to the same conclusion. It would be cowardly, not to say unpatriotic , and lastly un-Filipina to say no. For if there is anything which a Filipina woman who is also a wife and mother is raised to do, it is to trust that God will give her the strength and capability to protect her own. And to every Filipina, every one of her fellow countrymen is her own.

And so, for better or worse for our well-being, here I stand at the helm of the nation, and here is Miriam, in charge of CID.

Another thing that I think we have both discovered is the unusual and unpleasant diet that goes with our jobs.

Miriam says she eats death threats for breakfast.

I for my part have tasted coups, demonstrations, lies and insults. A man would say in our place that he would chew up this diet and spit it out.

But Miriam and I, being ladies, have learned to chew it all quite daintily, and, when we’re through, go into the kitchen, reason with the cook or throw him out.

I am pleased that Miriam has not tired of this diet, and that many of her colleagues in the CID have learned to take it as well.

The public and I are well informed of the changes and reforms that have successfully taken place in the CID, making the Commission far more efficient, far better organized, more relevant to our times, and more honest in its dealings and operations than at any time in the last twenty years.

I credit this not only to the Commissioner’s strong stomach and stronger words and actions, but to your responsiveness to the challenge she has laid: to let this, of all unlikely agencies, serve as the model of good government. It is of people such as yourselves that I spoke in glowing praise at National Heroes Day—the men and women of quiet determination and unhesitating self-sacrifice in the public service, who are greater heroes than the chest-thumping, sabre rattling men who brought this nation to the sad past from which you and I have tried very hard to rescue it. More importantly, you have transformed the CID by your own inner strength. You have proved my thesis that it is possible to cleanse and energize the bureaucracy. You have shown the strength of your moral will.

Today, Miriam speaks with some experience when she says that “there is life after the bureaucracy.” I am sure she also means there is life and fulfillment even within it. For I see it in all of you who have worked so hard to clean up and present the image of government proper to the country of the Yellow Revolution.

I have spoken quite highly of your boss, but she and I are transients in our present positions. It is you who will abide here to make sure that what we have all tried to build will be completed and will endure. Keep up the good work and May God Bless you in your efforts.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].