Inauguration of the Bayto river irrigation project November 7, 1987

IRRIGATION FOR PROGRESS

Through this irrigation project, I believe that the lives of thousands of Filipino citizens will improve, and this will be realized if the citizens, including the farmers, cooperate with the government.

Good morning to all of you. I am pleased to be with you at this very important gathering where the Bayto River Irrigation Project will be inaugurated, which I know is the main response to alleviate the drought of the lands here in your province. On this occasion, I would like to read to you from the Holy Scriptures the beautiful word of God about the importance of water. In the Book of the Old Testament, the Lord said: “…Fill the canals of this valley. You will see no wind or rain but this valley will be filled with water for you and your animals to drink… The next day, as the time of the offering drew near, the stream of water from Edom came. The land was filled with water.” It was further added in the Scripture, “A small thing this is in the Lord.” Truly a small thing this is in the Lord, but as the proverb says, “Mercy is with God, work is with man.” That is why I am very happy on this day of inauguration of this irrigation system here in Sta. Cruz, Zambales.

I learned from NIA Administrator Freddie Alday that this project can irrigate approximately 1,600 hectares of land in six barangays of Sta. Cruz.

Because of this, your harvest is expected to increase and you will be able to plant twice within a year. The total harvest within a year is estimated to increase from 60,000 cavans at present to 160,000 cavans in the total area covered by the farms. Each farmer can obtain approximately 100 cavans per hectare of land he cultivates if their farms are applied with modern farming methods.

I congratulate the personnel of the National Irrigation Administration or NIA for their efforts to improve the situation of farmers by building irrigation projects like this Bayto River Irrigation Project.

In connection with this, our government will add to the NIA fund from 1988 to continue the construction of more irrigation projects.

In February 1986, in the first year of my assumption as President, the fund for irrigation expansion was at P36.5 million. This was increased by P1.1 billion from April to December 1986. Currently, the NIA budget has a total amount of P1.181 billion. In 1988, this will be further increased to reach an amount of P2.8 billion.

I am pleased that despite the small fund of the NIA in 1986, we were able to irrigate approximately 30,000 hectares of dry land, and repair or rehabilitate old irrigation structures that are currently supplying water to 86,000 hectares of farmland throughout the archipelago. In total, the additional national harvest achieved due to the said additional irrigation is estimated to reach more than five million cavans of rice.

Currently, the NIA irrigates 1.4 million hectares of land planted with rice, vegetables, corn and other crops. This consists of 136 national irrigation systems irrigating 611,690 hectares; 6,112 communal irrigation systems irrigating 704,685 hectares; and 17,031 pump irrigation systems irrigating 152,503 hectares.

Based on the 3.1 million hectares of total land area that can be irrigated or potential areas for irrigation development, there are still 1.6 million hectares of land that need to be irrigated throughout the archipelago. Currently, this is what our government is striving to irrigate.

For example, the work on the Balog-Balog Multi-purpose Project will begin. This project, located in the province of Tarlac, will irrigate 39,150 hectares of farmland in ten towns of Tarlac. The water reservoir will also provide additional electricity to what we call the Luzon Grid. This project will cost P4.5 billion.

For the year 1988, the NIA will also start 437 communal irrigation projects that can irrigate more than 60,000 hectares of land.

These projects will also greatly help in providing livelihood to thousands of Filipino citizens. If our government's program to promote irrigation is fulfilled, the problem of crop shortage will surely be avoided.

However, this can only be achieved if the citizens, including the farmers, cooperate with the government.

Therefore, I call upon you, my beloved countrymen . . . You . . . I . . . you . . . all of us . . . working together to implement programs that will respond to the needs of the Filipino people.

I leave this great challenge to you . . . I believe that with the help of the Almighty, we can lift our beloved country out of poverty with our heads held high.

Thank you very much!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library