NO EASY ROAD TO DEMOCRACY

As we celebrate this momentous event, we also recall those who sacrificed to help us find our way and acknowledge with gratitude their valuable contribution to the country and people. The President hopes that as we begin our ten-year march to nationhood, we will be guided by the fixed star of nationalism.

We first took the road to nationhood and democracy 90 years ago. It did not take long for us to lose our way. Those who tried to pick up the trail of true nationhood again, found only martyrdom.

There is no easy road to nationhood and enduring democracy. And the road signs have been erased or confused by those who do not want us to complete the journey.

Today, we recall those who sacrificed to help us find our way and rededicate ourselves to continue their search and undertake their sacrifices. We cherish their memory and acknowledge with gratitude the sacrifices they made on the altar of country and democracy.

This year, we begin the decade of nationalism, in hopes that we may celebrate June 12, 1998, the Centennial of Independence, as a nation fully free at last. Free from the threat of renewed tyranny, free from poverty, disease, ignorance, homelessness, and conflict.

We got rid of the first.

We applaud the initiative towards peace abroad taken by the superpowers, and towards peace at home taken by your government.

Congress is about to pass a Bill mandating generic labelling of drugs, making them more accessible to our people.

On Monday next week, 11 million children will enter our public school system, the largest number in our history, and, for the first time, all public high schools will be free.

Last Friday, I signed into law the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program. Now the stage is set for a revolution in agricultural productivity and greater social justice for our people in the countryside. More wealth and a fairer distribution of that wealth are the twin goals of the Program.

Today I am announcing the reduction of interest rates for housing loans of P60,000 and below. Interest rates are reduced from 9% to 6%; for new loans of P90,000 and below, from 12% to 9%. One Billion Pesos has been allocated for this program.

As we begin our 10 year march to full nationhood, let our steps be guided by the fixed star of nationalism, and our bodies and souls be emboldened by the spirit that moved our forebears in their noble sacrifices.

We cannot pause to rest; we cannot flag in our efforts. The goal is distant and recedes with every lessening of our resolve and our exertions. There are forces at home and abroad that seek to keep us weak, poor and subservient. If they succeed, the fault will not be theirs but ours. Nasa atin ang katuparan ng tunay na kalayaan.

The decade we face can be said to be the most historic in our country. We are facing many trials and we will also represent and make the next history. I challenge you to participate in the unique history that will happen.

In June of the year 1898, the journey of us Filipinos towards a hundred years of freedom and unity began. And the end of the long journey is approaching. We will greet this with our heads held high so that the struggle of our heroes and ancestors will not be in vain. But the freedom they longed for and which we now enjoy, we must protect.

We only have one decade left to finish, continue, and nurture the principles of our great ones, and even our unknown heroes. We need to continue. We cannot accept defeat. Let us begin the final stage, whose boundary is the true independence that we aspire to.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].