Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Filipinos in Brunei

[Released on August 30, 1988]

A TEST OF CHARACTER

The President speaks to the many Filipinos working in this foreign land to manifest her continuing interest in the expatriate life which she herself lived. She acknowledges the tremendous contribution of the overseas workers to the Philippine recovery effort.

Whenever I go on a foreign visit, I make it a point to talk with fellow Filipinos abroad. This is not just a ceremony expected of all Philippine presidents, but a manifestation of my continuing interest in the expatriate life which I myself lived with my husband and children.

Political persecution aside, just living abroad — away from the ways of life in which we grew up, away from the comforting and saving network of family and friends — is a trial in itself. It is a test of character on the part of the Filipino who uproots himself and starts again in a foreign land. May I say also, it is a test of the character of the people who welcome him in their fold.

Our presence abroad, particularly here in Brunei Darussalam shows the wealth of opportunity for livelihood and advancement and the generous welcome which foreign lands offer to Filipino industry, skill, and talent, even as the protection and hospitality you receive are a recognition of the contributions and a manifestation of the care and concern of your particular hosts, the people and government of Brunei Darussalam.

The mutual advantage which your stint here in Brunei Darussalam represents is matched by the equal advantage we derive at home from your employment abroad. The tremendous debt service burden and the other priorities of our economic recovery program are met in no small measure by your remittances to the home country. That fact has moved me to call communities like yours, the unsung heroes of the Revolution.

For the tremendous contribution you have made to the Philippine recovery effort, we offer you every assistance we can, especially here through our Embassy. Your government will exert every effort to meet your needs.

The Department of Labor, for instance, has already attended to your concern to see the period for issuing a travel exit pass shortened. The POEA has decentralized the Balik Manggagawa processing system to its regional offices in Cebu, Davao, Cagayan de Oro, La Union, and Baguio. This will soon extend to the 12 labor regional offices all over the country.

The Overseas Workers Welfare Administration is hereby directed to immediately send a welfare officer whose only function will be to attend to your needs here in Brunei Darussalam. By next month, a number of measures will be adopted to make it easier and faster for you to send money to your loved ones back home. I have also directed Secretary Drilon to study what incentives we can offer to our overseas workers who remit their earnings through our banking system.

We shall continue to explore ways to make your exemplary sacrifices abroad lighter and more rewarding. We would welcome suggestions from you.

The well-being of the Filipinos in Brunei Darussalam speaks highly of our hosts — of the liberality of the rulers of Brunei, and of the ever-deepening friendship between our two nations which are so near each other.

Even before we came over, your outstanding work here has been the best ambassador of goodwill which the Philippines could have. You make us all proud at home.

I wish you more success. God bless you all. Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].