BIR Anniversary August 1, 1988

NOT A POPULARITY CONTEST

President Aquino recognizes the tough job the BIR handles. She states that popularity is not that important so long that the job is done, in the right perspective. According to her, doing good work in government is the opposite of a popularity contest.

Most of my time in government is spent with people who spend money. Cabinet secretaries of the line and staff departments spend their time drawing up programs for the public improvement that cost hundreds of millions, if not billions, of pesos. When things don’t improve, they blame the lack of money for it and cast a sour eye on the Bureau of Internal Revenue. Today, for a change, I’m pleased to meet with the people whose job it is to raise this money.

The people of the BIR hold perhaps one of the toughest and most critical jobs in the government. Without them, all the best-laid plans would come to nothing.

The rest of government look to the BIR to give them the fuel that will make programs move. This puts a great deal of pressure on the Bureau to perform.

But pressure on the Bureau comes not only from on top, but equally and perhaps worse from below, from the public. I say yours is a tough job because the public from whom you must collect the revenues of government are far from being cooperative and happy. As the saying goes, there are two things people dread and feel they cannot escape: death and the tax collector.

I am here today to change that saying into “death and the payment of taxes.” That is how it is in the advanced countries of the world: the payment of taxes is unavoidable, like the day of reckoning. If we want to become a modern country with all the amenities, we must advance that day to now.

This goal will not make you popular. But you should be used to it.

Since Biblical times, the tax collector was intensely disliked. The only modern parallel I can think of is the dentist. And the analogy is striking: the task of pulling out for their own good something to which people are intensely attached, their teeth and their money.

Unlike in other posts in government, doing your duty well will not earn you plaudits, but brickbats. Not surprisingly, one is tempted to compromise, to relax, to make friends instead of enemies among the public because life can be lonely. I speak from experience when I say, doing good work in government is the opposite of a popularity contest.

But never mind. For no less than Christ chose among his first followers a tax-collector. Of course, he had him stop collecting taxes, but nevertheless it still means that however unpopular tax-collecting may be, it does not, contrary to common belief, condemn your soul.

I too am calling you to follow a path: the path of diligent work in the task to which you are called: not to give, but to take. Not for yourselves, but for the country. And no more, and no less, than what the law says you should.

You have been doing good work. Do more. We need it. It will be unpopular, and it will be lonely going. But that is the price of honesty in public service. The opposite is worse. Because I may find out. And then, it will really be much lonelier and harder for you.

I am particularly demanding because of one added pressure in your job. The public gauges the honesty of government by the conduct of this Bureau. You are the barometer of integrity. It is just like the Bureau of Customs, whose job is the same as yours.

I want this government to be remembered as the most honest in our history. That achievement must be recorded first and foremost in this Bureau. And so I and our people look to you for this historic first. That will be your burden, but I think also, for most of you, it will be your greatest honor and challenge. I congratulate you on your anniversary and wish you continued success.

God bless you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library