Confindustria Rome June 17, 1988

IDEAL CLIMATE FOR INVESTMENTS

With a reinvigorated economy and its relative immunity from any political turbulence in the region, the Philippines deserves serious consideration as a most promising country to invest in. The President tells her audience that the Italian industry will find ideal conditions for setting up plants in the Philippines.

Two years after the Revolution which many of you followed on television and on the front pages of the newspapers, another, quieter revolution has been taking place in the Philippines. A revolution in the political attitudes of the vast majority of Filipinos and in the remarkable exertions they are making to achieve economic recovery quickly.

Quite as remarkable as stopping tanks with prayers, is the picture of virtually a whole population taking democratic elections seriously and jealously defending their new democracy – thereby providing the surest basis for enduring social stability and order.

Western analysts had predicted that the peaceful February Revolution was a flash in the pan, that the Filipino people would sink back into lethargy and indifference to the fate of their new democracy and their country. In the past two years, as essential democratic institutions were firmly implanted in swift succession, that prediction has turned out to be totally false.

In less than two years, we had a new Constitution and had had it ratified in a referendum participated in by virtually the entire voting population. We elected a Congress with almost the same record turnout, and then all the local governments.

We did not neglect the economy. On the contrary, we knew that its plundered and devastated condition required immediate attention. Following a medium-term plan, whose preparation was in itself a very difficult task, we reversed the negative growth trend the economy had been posting for three years previous, and by 1987 achieved a growth rate of 5.6% in real terms. In the first quarter of this year, we posted a real growth rate of 7.5%.

This was done against the backdrop of persistent rightist attempts to seize the government and a continuing Communist insurgency. In August last year, the right made its strongest bid for power in a ruthless assault on the Presidential Palace. The attack was repulsed and the coup was crushed. Its instigators have been captured or are being hunted; at any rate, I can say without any reservation that they are finished as credible threats, not only of another coup but even of any measure of destabilization.

We tried to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the Communist insurgency and invited its representatives to talks. This was interpreted by the Right as naivete and by the Communists as surrender. The exercise failed to achieve a settlement, but turned out to be a success in other respects. The gesture convinced many in the countryside that the government was serious about wanting peace and addressing the issues that had fueled the rebellion. At any rate, the resumption and escalation of military offensives and urban raids should have convinced the insurgent leadership and the Right that I will take peace only on terms that respect our Constitution and our traditional values and way of life.

A few months ago, the military captured the top leadership of the insurgency. Documents seized in urban raids now show a much diminished insurgent force.

No one can dispute the facts now: there is order, predictability, and freedom in the Philippines, as well as a reinvigorated economy. Given its strategic location in Southeast Asia, its relative immunity from any political turbulence in the region, and the skill and industry of its labor force, the Philippines deserves serious consideration as a most promising country to invest in. Perhaps the best indication of this is the rate at which Filipinos are investing in their own country, reversing a pattern of capital flight that antedated even the dictatorship and the instability it created.

Italian industry, with its wide range of manufactured products and technology, will find ideal conditions for setting up plants in the Philippines, which offers not only its rapidly expanding markets but also the equally promising and easily accessible markets of the region.

We have been studying with deep interest both the products and the methods of Italian industry, especially the important part played by small and medium enterprises in Italian progress. We have watched the growth of these sectors in the Italian economy with great interest and admiration, remarking both the excellent quality of their products and their efficient methods and resiliency.

The European business community is presently the third largest investor in the country. Italy, however, has been one of the smallest investors. We invite you to come to our country and study its prospects for yourselves. You will experience not only its traditional hospitality, but an environment in which you will find yourselves very much at home.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library