Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Hotel de Ville

[Delivered on July 12, 1989]

THE PHILIPPINES NEEDS FRANCE IN PRESERVING DEMOCRACY

The Filipino people’s support is the force behind President Aquino’s endurance against numerous attempts to topple her government. Her commitment to democratic and peaceful means has made her loved by many.

I was very happy to hear the very sympathetic words of the mayor and here is a man who understands the problems of a new democracy. While it is true we have restored our democracy in the Philippines during the past three years inspite of enormous difficulties facing us, I need the cooperation of countries like France to help us strengthen and preserve this democracy.

As the mayor had said, I was a woman of very little experience. It was my husband who was in politics. But because of the tremendous support of the Filipino people who loves freedom, I have been able to govern in my country inspite of the coup attempts, inspite of the other attempts to destabilize my government.

I am very glad that the mayor quoted Mahatma Gandhi because my husband, in offering his life for our people, presented the best weapon against tyranny. And this was confirmed at his funeral, when around two million people joined us to bury my husband.

I have always believed in peaceful measures. Sometimes I am accused by my critics that I am too good that I should be more forceful and I should punish my enemies. But I believe a democracy means observing due process and giving to every citizen his right according to the law.

Some people say that in comparing me to my predecessor, that in the Philippines, nobody is afraid of Cory Aquino. But many people love Cory Aquino. My successor was feared, and people were doing things simply because they were afraid of him. But I believe it is better to be loved than to be feared.

I want to thank you again for the very warm reception that you have given me and in parting let me say (speaks in French).

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].