Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the opening of the Ninoy Memorabilia Exhibits

[Released on August 4, 1986]

REMEMBERING NINOY

Ninoy lives in the Filipino of the February Revolution, a Filipino who is zealous of his rights, fierce in the protection of his liberties, alert to the needs of his country and dedicated to its progress.

I want to thank you all for helping me to open Ninoy’s memorabilia. It is important that you are here with me on this occasion. For when Ninoy was lost to his family, he became a part of you for whom he gave his life. I will not talk about the family’s grief except to say that for myself, having lost him on the tarmac, I saw him again in the revolutionary movement that his death released. I saw the face of Ninoy in the massive crowds that pressed unrelentingly for change but always with a gay, lighthearted spirit. And he was smiling. No, it wasn’t the smile of a man getting back at his enemies, but of a man who loved people so much there could not be a higher destiny for him than to become their animating spirit toward liberation. Every time the people scored a victory by a demonstration whose massiveness paralyzed the government, by an electoral turnout so huge it could not be covered over by cheating, and finally by that remarkable revolution that had an entire nation turning its back as one on the dictator until he had to leave like an uninvited guest, I smiled to return the smile on Ninoy’s face. A smile that said, I told you, the Filipino is worth dying for. For as long as his spirit is in our people, I haven’t lost him and I shall not need this memorabilia to remind me. But it may not be the same for others. And so we have this exhibit of the things that accompanied Ninoy in his life. But what really registers his presence most is not any of these things, but what you were in the glory days of the campaign and the election, and, of course, during the four days in February. Ninoy lives in the Filipino of the February Revolution, a Filipino who is jealous of his rights, fierce in the protection of his liberties, alert to the needs of his country and dedicated to its progress. To the end of developing more such Filipinos, I am pleased to announce the Ninoy Aquino High School Scholarship grant. Each year, for four years, fifteen Filipinos will receive a four-year grant. The grant will include tuition fees, books, school supplies and a monthly allowance.

Nine boys will be accommodated in Ateneo, De La Salle and San Beda; three in each school. Six girls will study in U.P. These are the schools where Ninoy studied. These schools will determine the scholars’ entrance requirements and qualifications.

I can think of no better place to build a memorial to Ninoy than in the hearts and minds of the people he loved.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].