ADDRESSING BUSINESS PROBLEMS

In this conference the immediate problems expressed are power, transport and telecommunications. With these problems the government sees business opportunities wherein the private sector will be responsible for generating power, expanding transport units together with the road network in Metro Manila. Telecommunications program for the entire country will be accelerated. The government will be a facilitator in involving private sector firms in all of these projects, helping where needed through technical assistance and providing access to ODA funds.

I am pleased to be once again before you, committed men and women of Philippine business, who truly deserve to be called the engines of economic growth.

Let me start by addressing the immediate problems you have expressed in this conference: power, transport, and telecommunications.

I share your concern about the present deficiency in the supply of power, which has resulted in manhour and production losses due to brownouts.

Brownouts are costly. During the period October 1 to November 20, 1989, about 200 million kilowatt-hours, representing about 8 percent of electric energy requirements in Luzon, had not been served. This was due to heavy damage from two typhoons, electric machinery breakdowns, and low water availability in the Angat Dam.

The National Power Corporation (NPC) is rushing the repair work on all typhoon-damaged facilities. By December, there should be only minimal interruptions of power. However, until the completion of an additional 320 megawatts of gas turbine capacity by May of 1990, summer season reserves will not be sufficient to adequately ensure service. By June onward, the situation will have been normalized.

To ensure adequate and reliable power service in the future, the NPC will generate, in six phases, an additional 5,523 megawatts up to the year 2000.

For developing countries, the World Bank has estimated that approximately $100 billion a year will be required for investments in power. Available funds from multilateral and bilateral sources, however, will amount to only $20 billion a year, or a shortfall of $80 billion a year. For our own power projects, the NPC will have to spend P20 billion a year for the next 10 years.

But we can see business opportunities in this problem. Government shall aggressively pursue Build-Operate-and-Transfer projects, whereby the private sector will be responsible for generating power and selling it to the NPC. In this way, the provision of power is not saddled with the financial constraints and bureaucratic delays attendant to large government projects. A good number of investors whom I met in the United States, Canada, West Germany and France, have expressed serious interest in this arrangement. NPC has already issued a solicitation tender for a 700 megawatt block of coal BOT generating capacity. Tenders will be submitted by March of 1990 and the selection will be completed by June of 1990, with operation scheduled for mid 1993.

We are also encouraging the establishment of power-intensive industries in Visayas and Mindanao because of the excess power generated from geothermal and hydro resources available in these areas.

Another major reason for the current critical power situation is the delay in the implementation of NPC’s power projects.

To ensure the timely completion of all power projects I am directing the NPC President to report to me every two weeks the status of implementation of all major generation and transmission projects.

Accordingly, I am also directing the NPC to establish a tight monitoring system to track down the status of its power projects at all levels of implementation, and identify all bottlenecks and causes. My office shall act to resolve any issue causing delays.

I am confident that we will be able to meet the power needs of the country, both in the short term and medium-to-long term.

In the meantime, let me commend the 1,267 industrial customers taking part in the Voluntary Load Curtailment Program. Their initiative and sense of social responsibility should serve as our examples.

Government’s attention is also focused on the problem of mass transport, particularly in Metro Manila.

We are not blind to the plight of the many for whom getting a ride is a daily ordeal.

To address the lack of transport units, we are expanding the bus fleet from the present 2,500 to 5,000 units within two years.

I am asking the DBP and PNB to make available the amount of P1 billion through a special loan window to qualified bus operators for the acquisition of these buses.

I am also asking the DOTC to undertake immediately a review of bus fares to arrive at a structure that will provide a reasonable return to private bus operators, not only to sustain their viability but also to equip themselves with safe and well-maintained buses for the public.

Aside from the buses, the DOTC will make operational, within 90 days, the PNR Commuter Train to carry 10,000 passengers a day along the Manila to Calamba/Carmona route in the South, and the Manila to San Fernando, Pampanga route in the North.

The LRT system will also be developed as the major means of public transport in Metro Manila. The system will be expanded by 50% to increase its passenger capacity to 475,000 passengers a day. In fact, bidding for this expansion will be held on Wednesday, November 29th. Two more LRT lines will be installed on a Build-Operate-and-Transfer basis: One, from Tutuban to Cubao, will be started in March next year; the other via EDSA from Monumento to Baclaran, will follow.

In addition, DOTC and the Mayor of Manila are discussing the details for the operation of ferryboats to transport commuters from Makati and Pasig to Manila and back.

To support this increase of transport units, we are also expanding the road network in Metro Manila. The DPWH will begin construction of overpasses and exchanges at the intersections of Ortigas Avenue and EDSA, Ayala Avenue and EDSA, and Nagtahan and Ramon Magsaysay Boulevard.

Also, the DPWH will proceed with several roadwidening projects, such as the Paranaque-Sucat Road, and the construction of Circumferential Roads 3 and 5 – also known as the alternate inner and outer EDSA, respectively.

The improvement of traffic flow, particularly through the strict enforcement of traffic laws, is also an integral part of this improved program. Exclusive bus lanes for peak hours have been designated since this Tuesday.

We have also set up the Metro Manila Land Transportation Coordinating Council (MMLTC), to work out together with the DOTC, the transport problem in its various aspects.

The telecommunication system is the third area of infrastructure support that we must improve. As everyone knows, no business can be induced to set up shop in a location where it cannot contact its customers, suppliers or financiers.

In this regard and given our limited resources, we shall give the highest priority in telephone facilities to identified regional industrial centers (RICs). It is more practicable, I understand, to concentrate telephone facilities at certain designated geographic points with access to microwave facilities, rather than scatter them individually throughout a region.

To supplement the limited resources of government and to accelerate the telecommunications program for the entire country, we would like to see greater private sector involvement in telecommunications.

Let me be very clear in stating my position on this matter.

The government will see to it that private sector firms that are permitted to provide service to profitable areas will be required to provide at least basic services to the remote, less profitable locations throughout the country. The government will be a facilitator, helping where needed, through technical assistance and providing access to ODA funds.

The DOTC has a number of projects under way, aimed at providing much-needed telecommunication services throughout the country.

The Regional Telecommunications Development Plan will be completed in 1990, providing some 8,000 telephone lines in Regions 1 and 2. There is also the National Telephone Program which will provide some 130,000 lines to 133 municipalities by 1991.

The government will involve private sector firms in all of these projects at the earliest possible time, to ensure the orderly transfer of the resources to private sector hands at completion.

The DOTC is currently preparing the Rural Telephone Plan which, pursuant to the Municipal Telecommunications Act recently passed by Congress, will provide at least one telephone per municipality throughout the country. The feasibility studies are underway, and full implementation is expected to begin, in partnership with private sector service providers, early in 1990.

It is our hope and expectation, that with the completion of these projects, and those currently underway by PLDT and other firms in the Philippines, the nation will see marked improvements in telecommunications’ availability and quality over the next couple of years.

If the resources of private entities already engaged in providing such service in the area are limited to the extent that the short and medium-term needs of the public cannot be met, I say let not their limitation impede the country’s progress. These private entities should put in more of their resources and capital. If they cannot, then we should allow the entry of new capital from other private sources to augment the service.

For these moves, our premise is clear. As infrastructure is today’s main determinant in generating investment inflows, trade and industrialization, then we will improve our infrastructure.

Let me now go to new developments to further improve the business and investment climate.

Over the past three and a half years, much has been accomplished to enhance the climate for doing business in the Philippines. Nowhere is this more clearly reflected than in the record levels of exports and investments that have been attained.

Our exports last year of over $7 billion is the highest ever achieved in our trade history. Investments registered by the BOI, which reached P31 billion in 1988 and P60 billion for the first nine months of 1989, are unprecedented in the annals of any past administration.

Yet, we know that if we must be an NIC by the end of this century, we have to do even more. We have to close the distance, for example, to Thailand’s exports of $15.7 billion and approved investments of $7.8 billion.

In my recently-concluded trip to the United States and Canada, it was very clear that many other countries are competing for the same investment dollar, the same import dollar, we are after.

I have been derided by some for serving as a kind of “promo girl” in this trip. But let me ask them – in the midst of such intense competition in markets abroad, would the edge not be gained by a country whose President herself led the campaign?

I saw my role in that trip as drawing together the most senior and influential business leaders of the area to listen to our case, in a way that only a Head of State could have done.

The 36 Filipino business leaders who accompanied me also served an important role, as living testimonies to the growth and success of private enterprise in the Philippines.

We all have a contribution to make in enhancing the climate for doing business in the Philippines.

We have noted the signals that have come from our legislators in calling for a review of our investment laws as another step in this direction.

At our suggestion, our legislators have now taken the action of undertaking a joint congressional review of existing laws that impact on the flow of investments.

We are aware of the interest and attention that the business community has given to this review effort. I assure you that we will take into cognizance the inputs and recommendations coming from you — for we recognize that, in the end, the businessman knows best what investment conditions and measures would be most attractive to him.

In this regard, I have taken personal interest in the success of the One-Stop Action Center for Investments, which has served the needs of over 8,000 investors since 1986. I am now asking each of the government agencies to adopt the one-stop shop concept as a mechanism for getting things done in government.

One of the priorities here is a One-Stop Shop for Imports of Exporters, where import shipments of legitimate exporters can be released within 72 hours of arrival.

I am asking the Secretary of Trade and Industry to convene a group, consisting of the Department of Finance including the Bureau of Customs, the Central Bank and other government agencies together with the private sector, to study and submit a report to me within 60 days on how we can organize and operationalize a One-Stop Shop for Imports of Exporters.

Finally, I want to say a few words about graft and corruption.

The fight against graft and corruption has been a personal crusade of mine. On many occasions, I have said that graft and corruption must be weeded out for they destroy the sense of trust and honor that are the bases of legitimate government-business relationships.

I would like you to know that we shall continue our crusade to eliminate this festering problem that has been the scourge not only of this government but of all previous governments as well.

In addition, we must not lose sight of the fact that graft and corruption involves not only a grafting official but also a corruptor who may be another official or most likely an outsider. I am serving notice again to corruptors, whoever they may be, including those who may claim closeness to me by reason of kinship or friendship. In this business of running the government, I do not recognize kinship, whether by blood or affinity, as a passport to closing favored deals.

A little over two years ago, I invited a similarly large gathering of businessmen to participate in rebuilding our economy. Some of you here may have been present then. I outlined to them my immediate plans for the country, and was met by applause several times. It was the sector’s expression of appreciation for the improved business climate that government was willing to provide them. I had hoped then, that the applause would be translated into more active participation by the business sector, and I have not been disappointed. I would like to use this Conference to thank you, the Philippine businessmen, for providing the hardest push to the wheels of our economy. When you were asked, you delivered. Thank you for the fine performance. I hope you will let that faith continue.

It is perhaps propitious that EDSA took place and I was thrust into power at a time when our options in the economy were fast running out.

The Philippines had the chance to go for an NIC status as early as the 1960s. We were then running far ahead of South Korea, Taiwan and ASEAN member-countries in exports, per capita income, and industrial development.

But we missed the boat. We squandered 20 valuable years, time enough to solve the most intractable of our problems. By 1985, we were floundering in uncertainty.

I believe that this coming decade will make or break our long-held aspiration to industrialize. This is our last chance to gear up and be in a position to benefit to the full when the Pacific Century comes.

Lest we forget how bad it had become in those years before EDSA, I say let us bear that in mind, so we can keep in perspective what difficulties we are now going through. Let us remember the past, so we can draw from it the firm resolve to move our nation forward.

Let us not forget what it was like to be uncertain where the dollars for our imported raw materials would be coming from. To pay interest of 35 percent. Or to live with inflation of 30 to 40 percent.

Most of all, let us not forget how it was to face a government more inclined to take you over than to help you.

Today, we still have problems, it is true.

But we have also had three straight years of growth in the economy. We have combined sales of the top 1,000 corporations running 25 percent higher than 1985, and combined net income soaring from P1 billion in 1985 to P38 billion in 1988.

We have a fairly stable business environment, and an earnest, democratic process of determining how we can improve it further.

But most of all, as we come to the dawn of a new decade, we have this hope, that the dream of a strong, vibrant and industrialized Philippines can be finally within our reach. And when we shall have achieved this dream, the acclaim should ring loudest for you.

I greet you all with a good afternoon.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library