FOR HUMANITY AND FREEDOM

President Aquino recounts that in the Philippine struggle for freedom and democracy, Canada, at this critical period, stood by her side. She exalts the Canadian tradition to stand by freedom wherever in the world it is born and to defend it wherever it is imperilled, as the bones of Canada’s sons also littered the road to freedom in two World Wars and in the Korean conflict.

I have looked forward to this visit since you invited me in 1986, shortly after I assumed the presidency. I recognized the gesture gratefully for what it was: a stabilizing act of recognition by a great sovereign state for a new government and a young democracy. That it came from a woman head of state was not lost on those who doubted that a woman could lead and protect the new democracy in the Philippines.

It was a period of great uncertainty for my government and for the new democracy. Every friend of freedom counted immensely in the calculation of democracy’s chances of survival. Yet I was always confident that Canada would stand by our side. For it has become a Canadian tradition to stand by freedom wherever in the world it is born, and to defend it wherever in the world it is imperilled.

The bones of Canada’s sons littered the road to freedom in two World Wars and in the Korean conflict. And Canada’s extensive involvement in UN Peacekeeping Missions has made its armed forces highly respected as virtually the army of humanity in the cause of peace. In these many trials of strength, the courage of the Canadian soldier was legendary and a critical factor in the outcome of the battle or in the enemy’s decision to engage at all.

The Philippines has also been unsparing in its commitments to the general causes of humanity. Canadians and Filipinos spilled blood on the same steep slopes of Korea. Both the Philippines and Canada are original members of the United Nations and are among the earliest signatories to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

No doubt the difficulties that Canadians faced in forging this great country from the immensity explain Canada’s disproportionate perception of the problems of the Third World and the contributions it makes to solve them, in the form of aid, investments or debt relief.

But the fact is that Canada distinguishes itself from other developed countries by the generosity of its assistance to the Third World and by the intelligence it demonstrates in implementing this aid.

The Philippines, which are not members of the Commonwealth, have been the object of very particular assistance from Canada. They rank third among the beneficiaries of its assistance in East Asian countries. In the dark hours of 1987, when the combined forces of the Right and the Left seriously jeopardized our young Democracy, Canada provided it with $100 million in support.

Our contributions to the same universal causes are, by necessity, limited. We are still a developing country. And yet, we too have contributed a lot to the cause of Freedom and the Security of everyone. Although materially poor, the Philippines can boast of having – during our Revolution which so well illustrated the Power of the People – shown the modern path to Freedom which, since then, has been followed, on both sides of the Iron Curtain, by other enslaved nations.

But the distance that separates our two countries is very great, just as are the differences between our two cultures.

But what unites us is faith in certain intangible principles: Peace, human dignity and political freedom, and also the willingness to respect the point of view of others which in fact represents the best guarantee for obtaining this peace for which we must constantly fight in this world of discord.

May I now ask you to join me and raise your glasses.

– in honor of the people of Canada, to whom the Philippine people express their deep gratitude for the sympathy and help it has given them,

– for the relations between Canada and the Philippines, so that the warmth and affection that has been shown to us during this visit attest on both sides to the depth and solidity of the ties that we consecrate here,

– for Governor General Jeanne Sauvé, to whom we wish good health and success in her endeavors.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino: August – December 1989. [Manila: Office of the President of the Philippines].