Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the aid for Negros

[Held at Paglaum Stadium, Bacalod City, October 16, 1986]

AID FOR NEGROS

The collapse of the sugar industry has hit the province of Negros hard. The government, however, is ready with various assistance packages to help the province get back on its feet.

I said when I returned from the United States that the time for talk is over, the time for action is now. I have come here to learn at first hand what your problems are and, equally important, to learn from you how you believe these problems should be addressed. But above all I have come to see the work that you have already began to get your great province back on its feet and on the road to progress and justice. The consultations with the various sectors of Negros society start this morning. But I have done my homework and can say already now some of the initiatives that your government will take.

I have instructed the Philippine National Bank to make sugar lands that were mortgaged to it available to displaced sugar workers. The PNB has told me that it is now prepared to implement my instruction. Some ten thousand hectares will be parcelled out soon and sold to the sugar workers. Some financing will be available, thanks largely to the initiative of your own governor, but the ultimate decision of ownership will depend on you, the sugar workers, on your industry, on your determination to prove that the Filipino farmer can hold his own.

I know that land reform isn’t just parceling out land. It means just as importantly providing the means to make it productive. The Ministry of Agriculture and Food stands ready to extend technical expertise to the new land beneficiaries. And I am assured by your governor that the private sector stands equally ready to pitch in with its assistance. The PNB is studying the possibility of extending crop loans to new farmers under a special financing scheme for the crop year 1987-88.

Your government is ready to do more. We have programmed some P6.13 billion to finance the building of infrastructures such as roads, bridges, ports, and wells over the next six years. Not only will this program improve your productivity and access to markets, it will by itself generate the jobs that are so desperately needed in the countryside.

And we are striving to bring you peace, the peace in which to work without fear, the peace to enjoy the fruits of your labor, and build a future for your children. You know of our efforts to bring the insurgent leadership to the negotiating table, to call for a ceasefire so that the killing will stop and we can save our sons and daughters for the nobler task of rebuilding our country together. Nothing is lost by making the effort to find peace by the ways of peace. Instead we gain time and save lives. And contrary to what some critics say, there is evidence of some success in our efforts. There is peace in the Cordilleras and peace in the Muslim South. I continue to pray that we shall have peace throughout our beloved land. At any rate, we have made the first moves, we have signaled our sincere desire to stop fighting, and use the democracy we achieved to reach the goals we all desire: progress and justice.

Yesterday, I received the draft of the new constitution. The campaign for its ratification starts here in Negros. This new Constitution enshrines the ideals we sacrificed for in our Revolution. It gives us the form of our new democracy, the permanent framework of our freedoms, and the general direction we must take to achieve justice and progress for all our people. I urge you all to campaign for its ratification. It will be one giant step towards the stability we need to work single-mindedly for the reconstruction of our country.

Before I conclude, I want to express, out here before Negros, the gratitude of your government and of our country for the generous assistance extended to the people of Negros by foreign governments and institutions, and by private corporations and civic groups. As I said about the recovery of Filipino freedom: it happened by our own efforts, but the help and encouragement of friends of democracy abroad strengthened our determination to stay the course. It will be the same in the rehabilitation of Negros. You, the people of Negros, will bear the main burden, but the sympathy and understanding of friends are always welcome. My countrymen, we showed last February what courage, faith and perseverance can accomplish. The task here in Negros is daunting. But we shall make it. We shall succeed in this as in anything the Power of the People sets its mind to.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].