Independence, at last.

Free and hopeful sum up the state of the nation as of Independence Day in 1986. Despite lack of funds and firepower, Filipinos were able to stand up to a dictatorship of 14 years and liberate their country once again. Hard resolve and unbelievable courage gave them strength.

A week ago, I delivered my Hundred Days address that described how far we’ve gone, how much farther we must go, and again reminding you how hard the journey will be. But I can still sum up the state of the nation in two words: free and hopeful. Today we celebrate meaningfully our freedom and independence as we have not been able to for the past 14 years. But what is more important is that today, tomorrow, and in the months and years to come, we shall be able to exercise our freedom and independence as we were never able to. The Philippine independence of 1896 was too brief. Our independence of 1946 was quickly misused and finally betrayed by our leaders. But today we have another chance, our third try, to make something of the freedom and independence for which so many Filipinos have sacrificed and died.

This time independence has come purely by Filipino effort. Not just the effort of a handful of noble and courageous individuals but of a whole people spontaneously rising, and peacefully but inexorably moving to win their freedom. The sad and difficult part, of course, is that independence had to be won from fellow Filipinos. Each of you out there is a hero of this struggle. You are not here to thank anyone but yourselves for what our nation achieved before an astonished and admiring world.

Looking back on the events of February, we wonder now why the ignominy of the Marcos regime had lasted so long. I remember during the dark days of shameful servitude hearing Filipinos say that the only way to be free again is for the Filipinos to be organized, to be armed, to be well-led and well-funded for a frontal confrontation with the dictatorship. You would think that those who were saying this were talking about race, and not about themselves. And so Filipinos waited for this separate race of Filipinos to materialize and liberate them. They did not think that the handful of determined and unflagging oppositionists were this race, not even Ninoy Aquino in his cell. And so they sat and waited and despaired.

Now we are free and the fate of our country is back in our hands. That long-awaited race of Filipino freedom fighters suddenly appeared and faced down the dictatorship. It was even better than we had expected. For what this race lacked in funds and firepower, they more than made up in hard resolve and unbelievable courage. Where did these freedom fighters come from? They came from within ourselves. When Cory Aquino accepted the challenge to fight Marcos for the Presidency, millions of ordinary Filipinos stepped out of their resignation and despair and threw the weight of their energy and numbers behind her. Without any direction from my campaign headquarters, Filipino men, women and children organized themselves, pooled their resources, and campaigned for their Presidency. Their courage, determination and numbers stunned the dictatorship into surrender.

It is this race of Filipinos that now stands here and throughout our land to celebrate independence today. I ask you now not to fall back into complacency and slip back into despair as though the fate of our country were not in your hands, as though you did not collectively have the power to make of it what you want. Every waking moment of your lives can be a reaffirmation of our independence by your continuing determination to be free and responsible for our future and our freedom.

I shall make no policy pronouncements today. No policy or program for recovery that my government can announce today can give you as much hope for the progress of our country than the realization of the power that you who stand before me represent. I said that I can sum up the state of the nation in two words, free and hopeful. We are free because we decided collectively to be free. Nothing could stand in the way of our freedom thereafter. And we have reason to be hopeful because now we realize that united we have the power to accomplish what we wish.

I want today to be a day of celebration. A celebration commemorating the past sacrifices and noble achievements of the Filipino people in the cause of freedom and independence. But more importantly, I want it to be a celebration of the People Power, power that can assure that freedom and independence for all time. To celebrate that power, I do not want you to look in the direction of this grandstand but into yourselves. Because that is where it lies. Let us go from here therefore and celebrate among ourselves our independence.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].