Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the PDP Laban Convention

[Held at the Ninoy Aquino Stadium, March 18, 1989]

LINES OF ACTION

In meeting with the PDP-Laban, the President says that she is also willing to attend the convention of other parties if invited. She adds that a multi-party principle is intended to take in advance every shade of opinion and every kind of interest. Likewise, she urges everyone to work together for the advancement of the nation.

I am happy to be here today upon the invitation of Senator Nene Pimentel. Last year I had told both Speaker Mitra and Senate President Salonga that if I were invited by their respective parties I would attend their conventions. The multi-party principle is intended to take in and advance every shade of opinion and every kind of interest. Yet the result should not be a universal standoff but rather the advancement of the nation – on the broadest front, if possible, but never to stop moving because this is necessary. For there is a lot of catching up that we must do.

With due allowance to inevitable differences among leaders, parties, and groups, the ground for agreement should be equally broad and compelling: we are first Filipinos: no one else will care for us as we do. We are also tested friends and long-time campaigners for democracy. The enemies of freedom are powerful against each of us individually, but powerless before our unity.

Within the wide framework of our democratic faith, let us work together where we agree, and respect each other where we do not. And never doubt each other’s patriotism.

The deepest concerns of your party are among the most pressing issues that I have addressed.

We have pushed hard for the kind of regional autonomy that will improve the living standards of the communities involved, compensate for their weaknesses and build upon their strengths. We are not for the kind of autonomy that will merely perpetuate the underdevelopment of these regions and leave their communities far behind the rest of the nation to which they must be tied by bonds of indissoluble union. We are first Filipinos before anything else.

Much has been achieved in the devolution of power, authority, and control of resources on local governments. We want this enshrined in a new local government code that will be a covenant guiding the relationship between national government and local governments.

We also want to give regional autonomy to our Muslim brothers and the Cordillerans whose histories and unique cultures must be recognized as different yet enriching the one country to which we all belong.

We have gone further, in line with the constitution, to encourage the growth of non-governmental organizations to harness the energy and idealism of communities.

We have committed to honor all our legitimate obligations. What we are seeking are repayment terms consistent with the imperative of growth – given the growing demands of a growing population that is fired by the high expectations that go with political freedom. Thus we have negotiated hard for fairer terms of payment. We have made our chief appeal to reason: in our economic progress lies the best assurance that we shall discharge our proper obligations.

It is the basic thrust of this government to generate the resources for our needed growth through the more efficient use of our resources and by convincing our friends abroad that we are serious about our desire for progress and are prepared to pay for it in necessary sacrifices.

Thus, the tax system has been reformed to enhance revenues and introduce greater equity into the system. All tax exempt privileges were removed effective December 1986. To the extent possible, everyone should pull his own weight unless the national interest and the wellbeing of our people require the extraordinary assistance of government. We shall build this country strength upon strength, and, to the extent we can, without nurturing any weaknesses. To that end, we shall gradually open our economy to the full range of competition, strong in the confidence that we shall make the grade.

Transparency is the first principle of democratic government, before which all other considerations must bow. For we have the greatest confidence that the people will always understand what is foremost their affair: the government of their country and determination of their future.

Past and ongoing negotiations on international security and on financial and economic affairs, particularly the foreign debt, have been thrown to public debate. The need for a wider and more formal exchange of views on this critical issue is recognized. But at the end of the road government has had to make decisions – not the best in a perfect world, but the best, I can say with confidence, in the imperfect circumstances in which our country finds itself today.

The country’s natural resources must be preserved and developed, for what is a country if not its natural wealth and its people. The devastation that has been visited by the greed of commerce, the corruption of officials, and the ignorance of men on our fair country has got to stop. Floods and other natural calamities signal that it is almost too late. Extraordinary measures are needed to stop the denudation of our forests, the pollution of our waters, and the poisoning of our air, and turn the tide of devastation into the progressive recovery of the ancient wealth and beauty of our land.

Equally must we regain the preeminence we enjoyed as one of the best and most widely educated nations in the world. The mind is the best resource of a country, and if we do our work well, it is potentially infinite. We have achieved near universal education at 98.5 percent and are working hard to improve its quality. We have introduced free high school education. Yet we recognize that we are still far behind the wide proficiency in the hard sciences that is key to swift modernization. We must work together to fill this gap.

We are committed to the complete and meaningful implementation of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law. The law was fully debated and every interest on the land was considered. The law contains the irreducible minimum of land justice for the farmer. The implementation of the law is my responsibility and it will be done to the letter.

We recognize poverty and injustice as the roots of insurgency. The first is buried deep in the structure of our economy and the second in the attitudes of officials and the institutions of society. The structural reforms that we have been implementing have started to bear fruit in an economy once again on the move, in noticeable improvements in living standards, in gradually pulling out the roots of poverty. More recent measures seek to unleash, by de-regulating the economy, our people’s boundless ability to generate wealth.

While the reform of the justice system is properly the domain of a co-equal branch, the magnitude of the problem of judicial delay and corruption calls for the combined efforts of all the branches to meet this basic demand of communities, which is also the first principle of political community : justice. Education must be geared to sharpening our people’s awareness of their rights.

I have given some of my thoughts and outlined the initiatives I have already taken in areas of common concern. I understand that you will proceed from here to discuss these issues further, in the light of new developments and your own experiences at the grassroots. I look forward to the results of your discussions, for I believe that there is much that Filipinos can learn from each other.

I am pleased to be a part of this search for the best approaches to the future we all desire for our country. I hope that we can continue to share the common ground of patriotism that the presence of so many here has opened up. Before politics, country must come first.

We must show that today and everyday of our lives.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].