PRAY FOR PEACE

President Aquino praises two peoples, the Filipinos and the Japanese, who were once at war, but can now sit together in peace and prayer. She states that wounds of the past can indeed be healed but she questions the premise that war is necessary, after all, to cleanse a nation.

Today, I see before me two peoples together in prayer who were once at war, and are now at peace. It was almost impossible to see Japanese and Filipinos together, as I see you today, sharing a friendship, common prayers and a mutual faith in the goodwill that binds our nations.

Why was it that only two generations ago, the wounds we had inflicted upon each other seemed beyond healing? That our hatred and enmity knew no bounds? That the causes we respectively fought for superseded our birthright as men to live as brothers created in the same fashion, by the same hand? Why, at certain points in history, does it become so simple, inexorable and justified to fight and kill? How could so many fighting faiths for which so many died become so irrelevant to this generation of the children and grandchildren of war?

For despite what seemed the unbridgeable rifts of the past, this is how it is between Japanese and Filipinos today. We do not face each other and see the nemesis of our fathers and grandfathers. We are not compelled to demand restitution for lives lost and unavenged. We do not keep the grudges of the past, for we have long since abandoned its illusions and vain aspirations. As we sit here today, we do not see one race mingling with another, but Christian brethren, sharing and celebrating the same faith in the love of our saviour, Jesus Christ. Thanks to Him, the plunder and destruction of war is buried and behind us. The future is ours to build, together, and with the choice of the best means – the methods of peace. For He did assure us through his disciple James that “those who sow in peace raise a harvest of righteousness.”

There are those who insist that nations are cleansed, their soil and patrimony nurtured and enriched by floodtides of violence. I saw nations suffer the rites of bloodshed only to find that what has been spilled is rarely worth the victory or defeat. The lesson of war is that wars, at best, should never be fought. But it is a difficult and elusive lesson to learn and apply. And the most progressive nations on our aging earth have tried, and with all the best intentions, but have not mastered it.

And yet, despite the fragility of the dream, the prayers of Filipinos, and surely the friends of Filipinos here in Japan, are for peace. We pray for peace in the world, peace in our region, Asia. But we pray most fervently for peace in our troubled islands. We pray again for the same miraculous, precedent-breaking peace that was God’s unexpected gift to Filipinos last February, during and after our Yellow Revolution. For then, as now, we were a people standing tense and apprehensive, at the end of what seemed like the precipice, when God in His mercy, snatched us from the edge and brought us gently back to freedom.

Then, as now, when the options of reasonable dialogue and settlement by peaceful means has been exhausted, we stand ready for the good, the honorable, the moral fight. But as in those days of groping and hope, we continue to pray that God, if it is His will, might spare us a second time from being drawn into battle. But if we must confront and scatter the perpetrators of an ideology that denies the primacy of God and what He teaches and commands, then we pray that the signal to march forward might be clear and unequivocal. For my highest priority, and that of many others in my country, is to be true to our God who granted us our second lease on peace and life. Without His blessing and grace, our best efforts will lead us nowhere.

The Japanese, I know, have a deep understanding of the value and meaning of peace. For it was in the aftermath of war, when they turned from the way of the sword to the path of industry, that they achieved real victory and power.

I am filled with hope, as I see Japanese and Filipinos sitting here side-by-side. You are the clear and living testament that the wounds of the past can indeed be healed, and healed completely. And if you, who are set apart by dint of bloodlines and traditions, can forgive, forget and unite; then so can Filipinos find it in their hearts to reconcile with brother Filipinos.

For we look to Japan as a model in the achievement of progress. And we know that like our Japanese brothers, we too can rebuild most effectively, and enjoy the greatest prosperity, in the working space provided by unity and peace.

Is an unbroken, continuing peace possible in the Philippines? Must it come only after the trauma of war? We pray not. We pray that the current negotiations for dialogue and ceasefire might continue in all sincerity, and prosper and come to a happy end. But if we must fight, if we must defend our life and future as a free nation from those who insist on taking it by force, then we pray that the forces of democracy might have the strength, and might be given the victory.

We are a nation at the crossroads. But what gives me confidence is that God’s people are numerous among us. And God has promised to guide and protect His chosen. As David, who often stood at the crossroads of war and peace would sing: “The Lord is the strength of His people, a fortress of salvation for his anointed ones. Save your people and bless your inheritance; be their shepherd and carry them forever.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].