Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 7th Annual World Dental Congress

[Delivered at the PICC, November 9, 1986]

NEEDED: VOLUNTEER DENTAL SERVICES

It is undeniable that there is greater dental consciousness now compared to a generation ago and that dentistry is now up there along with other medical sciences. President Aquino, however, stresses that dental services must be brought to as many people as possible.

The government is committed to do its part but dental care is expensive and so, to a great extent, the immediate dental needs of the people must be met by volunteer services.

Thank you for the honor of inviting me to address this distinguished body. I cannot help but be reminded tonight about how my husband Ninoy used to regard dental appointments with mortal dread and how martial law changed all that for him, among other things. For a political prisoner in solitary confinement, a dental appointment in prison meant the rare opportunity to see and talk to people from the outside world. I remember only too well how eagerly my husband looked forward to each visit of our dentist, Dr. Primo Gonzales. One of the ironies of life was that both Ninoy and Marcos had the same dentist. Am I glad that that was one of the very few things they had in common!

But many more things have changed, for all of us. For instance, thinking about government is no longer like thinking about going to the dentist. And even real dental appointments are no longer associated with intense pain. This is not to say that dental bills can no longer cause migraine or something else.

But it is undeniable that there is greater dental consciousness now than say a generation ago. For instance, I never fail on any evening I watch television to see former assemblyman and now National Parks Chairman, Orly Mercado, and TV host Ric Puno brandishing their teeth along with a tube of toothpaste. This just goes to show how important dental health has become as a concern and an issue.

I see children, and even teenagers, with braces, head gear, molar bands, brackets, arch wire, and retainers. The idea is to save teeth, make them better, rather than just pulling them out to put an abrupt end to pain and inconvenience. A sort of dental reconciliation, as opposed to confrontation with bad teeth. And I am told that specializations have increased, along with dental schools. Dentistry is now up there along with all the other medical sciences. And we see, as here, dental associations holding international seminars just as medical associations have been doing to share developments in the science. I hope we can go farther and see the dental profession make a concerted effort to bring the services I have mentioned to as many of the people as possible. Services that, as of now, only the affluent can have.

Government is committed to doing its part. But dental care is expensive and so, to a great extent, the immediate needs of our people must be met by volunteer services. You have all heard the rumored plan of “God Save the Queen.” Well, this Queen doesn’t want to be saved, but proposes instead a better project, “Dentists Save Our People’s Teeth.” That’s one plan, on a nationwide scale, that will get my endorsement and support. We all have to do our share. There isn’t enough money to go around for Government to do it alone. Be reminded that half of every dollar we earn goes to pay for servicing our debts.

I make this appeal for your volunteer help because I know of your readiness to sacrifice for your country. Many of you were in the streets to extract the dictatorship from our country and restore our democracy. And that, as you know, went rather painlessly. But more remains to be done. We have to preserve what we won. That is why we have a new Constitution soon to be ratified. It will implant firmly our rights and liberties. I count on your support to get it ratified. And I mean not just your votes, but your participation in the campaign as well. There are those who say I should not campaign for ratification. They are the same ones who say that if the Constitution is not ratified, then it is a rejection of me and I should step down. Now does that make sense? I will campaign. The first law is survival. We intend to win convincingly.

I wish I could be with you longer. My attention has been called to some of the pressing concerns of your profession. These will be studied, along with so many other equally pressing matters that demand our attention. Unfortunately, not all these matters contribute to national progress. The rumors you have heard is one. They take time away from genuine concerns, not to mention discrediting our country in the eyes of the world. But with all these pressures, your concerns will be attended to.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].