CLARIFYING THE ROLE OF THE PC-INP

Ang Philippine Constabulary-Integrated National Police (PC-INP) ay itinatag upang maging pangunahing ahensya ng pamahalaan sa pagpapanatili ng kapayapaan at kaayusan, pagpapatupad ng batas, at pagprotekta sa buhay at ari-arian ng mga mamamayan. Ito ay binuo sa pamamagitan ng pagsasanib ng Philippine Constabulary at ng Integrated National Police noong 1975, sa ilalim ng Presidential Decree No. 706.

The PC-INP was initially placed under the Ministry of National Defense, reflecting its paramilitary origins and its role in internal security. However, over time, its functions expanded to include general law enforcement duties, similar to those of a civilian police force. This dual role created ambiguities and overlaps in its responsibilities.

Ang pangunahing layunin ng paglilinaw sa papel ng PC-INP ay upang matukoy ang mga tiyak na tungkulin at responsibilidad nito, at upang maiwasan ang pagkalito at pagkakasalungatan sa pagitan nito at ng iba pang ahensya ng pamahalaan. Ito rin ay upang matiyak na ang PC-INP ay gumaganap ng kanyang mga tungkulin alinsunod sa batas at sa paggalang sa karapatang pantao.

Specifically, this clarification aims to delineate the PC-INP’s authority in areas such as crime prevention, investigation, and apprehension; traffic management; and disaster response. It also seeks to define its relationship with the military and other law enforcement agencies.

Sa pamamagitan ng malinaw na pagtukoy sa papel ng PC-INP, inaasahan na mapapabuti ang koordinasyon at pagtutulungan sa pagitan ng iba't ibang ahensya ng pamahalaan, at mapapalakas ang kakayahan ng pamahalaan na mapanatili ang kapayapaan at kaayusan sa buong bansa. Ito ay mahalaga para sa pagtataguyod ng isang ligtas at maunlad na lipunan para sa lahat ng Pilipino.

Ultimately, a clear definition of the PC-INP’s role is crucial for enhancing public safety, strengthening the rule of law, and promoting good governance. It is a vital step towards building a more secure and prosperous Philippines for all its citizens.

Addressing the Philippine Constabulary and the Integrated National Police on their 85th and 11th anniversaries respectively, President Aquino underscores the chief lesson of the February Revolution: that the only solid foundation of government is the people’s consent and cooperation. Tasked with maintaining peace and order in the communities, the PC-INP must recognize this. The mission of these forces is essentially preventive, and as such they must learn to interact well with the communities.

I am happy to be here, for this camp evokes stirring memories of the triumph of the non-violent movement I had launched to depose the dictatorship. Here at EDSA we witnessed and were a part of the fitting climax to that movement: the heartfelt union of military and people in the struggle for Filipino freedom.

Today, as I join the Philippine Constabulary in the celebration of its 85th anniversary, and as I congratulate the Integrated National Police for its 11 years of dedicated service to the nation, I want to point up the chief lesson of the February Revolution: that government rests securely only on the foundation of the people’s consent and cooperation.

When we hear it said that a government must be for the people and not the people for the government, we regard this as a statement of democratic principle. It is more than that. It is a statement of fact. If government is not for the people it will not last. The clearer statement really is: a people must be for their government or the government is doomed; doomed to extinction, and long before that doomed to ineffectiveness, which is an even more shameful fate.

This is what happened to the previous government. From August 21, 1983, the people increasingly withdrew their consent and cooperation from the government. The bullet that cut off Ninoy from us, severed the bond between people and government. When this separation took place, we saw who really depended on the other for its life.

The people reacted to the assassination with massive demonstrations and widespread boycotts. Despite the frequency of these actions that paralyzed the government and interrupted economic activity, life for the people went on much as usual except for a sense of higher purpose that filled their lives. The government on the other hand reeled from these blows. Its reform initiatives fell flat and its threats fell on deaf ears. Only Marcos, deep in his palace, did not feel it. He looked around him and counted his armed retainers and concluded that all was well with the government. But as he reassured himself by counting his batallions on the fingers of his hand, the country slipped through his fingers and joined what was becoming a revolution against him.

This was Marcos’s big mistake. He equated power with force. Toward the end, I think the dictator lowered his standard of power. He figured, as he counted his batallions again, that so long as they were not against him, he was alright. He was still their commander and therefore still the President. After all, it was only a small rebel band that had holed up at EDSA.

I do not think Marcos ever realized that you cannot be a real Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces without also being the President of your people. His batallions finally realized this. They did not turn their guns on him. Instead, they joined the Filipino people in turning their backs on him.

And so the old dictator must still be baffled why he is in Hawaii and I am here. He must still be counting the batallions that did not turn against him and must therefore still be for him. That is why he keeps wasting our money calling here long distance. He has not learned that you must first be the President of the People before you can presume to call yourself the Commander of their Armed Forces. He never learned that real power cannot be counted on the fingers of your hands, even if you do it by batallions or services. For true power derives from the multitudes of the people. Lacking their support, you can put your hands to better use packing your bags than counting your soldiers.

That there is only people power if you are talking about real power, I have long known. My whole campaign rested on the simple and daunting strategy of reaching out personally to as many Filipinos as I could to bring them over to the cause of their liberation. It is a lesson that I know you have learned here at EDSA. That with the people, there is nothing you cannot accomplish, whether it is governing the country as President or bringing security to the people as soldiers and police.

The importance I place on drawing upon the power and wisdom of the people makes my job a little more complicated and, some complain, tedious. It is tedious for them. It has only been enriching for me. The pains I take to consult the people are more than offset by the confidence I have in the decisions I finally take.

I note with great satisfaction that you have been charting the same course of popular consultation in drawing up your strategies. No one can know better than the people what they need protection from, and what kind of protection will improve rather than aggravate the security of their communities. Open yourselves to what the people have to say, enlist their support and not just their tolerance of your presence. I address these matters to you because, of all the elements of the Armed Forces, you the constabulary and police forces, have been specially charged and trained to maintain peace and order in our communities. You are shaped to be finer instruments for peacekeeping than the regular armed forces. You are expected not to disrupt, but, on the contrary, to preserve the way of life of the communities placed in your charge. For this reason, interaction with the community becomes an integral part of your work. Your mission is essentially preventive. To prevent threats to the peace from growing to a size that would require the intervention of our regular forces.

In the 85 years of its history, the Philippine Constabulary has, by and large, discharged this mission well. The ignoble use to which the previous government had sometimes put the Constabulary cannot obscure the distinction of its overall performance. Throughout our history there have been many movements that have sought to rend the fabric of our society. Only recently have any of these movements approached their objective. The vast majority of these attempts to break up our society have failed and this is thanks to the work of the Constabulary.

While keeping the peace is a difficult mission in itself, you have another role to play. Because your work requires your intimate involvement in the life of our communities, and because you wear the uniform of authority, you have the added responsibility to reflect the ethic of the new order you serve. This government stands for integrity, selfless service and self-sacrifice. I know that these qualities have generally marked the Constabulary and the police. In many areas of the country, you will stand out as symbols of the national government and its ideals. I have every confidence, my constables, that you will do us justice.

Congratulations to the Philippine Constabulary and the National Police. I wish all success in your missions.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].