Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Upon the bill signing of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP)

[Held at the Malacañang, June 10, 1988]

THE UPLIFTMENT OF THE FILIPINO MASSES

CARP is viewed as a way of liberating the hitherto suppressed energies and creativity of the nation for the material upliftment of the many and the prosperity of all.

I have just signed into law the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program. This act, I hope, will end all the acrimony and misgivings of the contending parties to the Program, and unite the nation behind the effort to make agrarian reform a success in our country. Every side has been respectfully heard; few measures have been as rigorously scrutinized and discussed as this Program has been by representatives of the people and by the people themselves.

It was my intention from the start to assign the substantive portions of the Program to those who would be most affected and therefore most informed about them – the people themselves through their elected representatives. I should hope that, now, the various interests in the land will be able to work together to achieve the twin goals of the Program: a radical leap in agricultural productivity and therefore a significant contribution by the agricultural sector to Philippine progress, and the upliftment of the Filipino masses from their ancient poverty.

Let us see the Program not as a taking of property from some and a giving of it to others, but as a way of liberating the hitherto suppressed energies and creativity of the nation for the material upliftment of the many and the prosperity of all.

The division of lands that the Program will gradually implement merely sets the stage for the more important task ahead: turning the land to its most productive use achieving, as a first objective at least, a permanent self-sufficiency in food for our country.

The stewardship of the land that the landlords were said to have neglected shall now pass as the law is implemented to the tillers. The stewardship should weigh as heavily on the many as it did on the few. The same bottomline applies to them: the wisest use of the land for the greatest generation of wealth for themselves and for the entire nation.

The main responsibility for the implementation of the Program lies with the Department of Agrarian Reform but I expect all the other departments, the entire apparatus of government, civil and military, be as deeply involved and as committed to its success. I will not tolerate disputes over jurisdiction, jealousy over turf, to derail this Program. Agrarian Reform is now a legal reality and it will be around as a compelling obligation long after I have changed those who fail to do their part.

The law itself, in the equal emphasis it puts on support services for the success of the Program, underscores the necessity of cooperation on the part of all departments.

Agrarian Reform Secretary Juico is hereby instructed to prepare his department, and to advise all the other departments to prepare themselves, for the meeting of the PARC which I shall convene upon my return.

I would like to express my congratulations to the Congress for the work it has done. The task of course is far from complete. This is only the beginning, and the greater part that remains requires the cooperation of the President and the Congress.

Let me end with a reiteration of what I have always believed was the basic justification for agrarian reform: beyond the justice of giving land to the landless tiller, this is the means by which we shall truly achieve the independence that we will celebrate on Sunday. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].