Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the multilateral aid plan

[Delivered on January 19, 1989]

A SHARED CONCERN

With the initiation of the US Congress for a bi-partisan call for a multilateral aid plan for the Philippines and with the creation of the Coordinating Council of the Philippine Assistance Program, the President opines that we are now prepared to advance the activation of this plan for freedom, justice and progress.

Along with the restoration of democracy, we set out to secure the material progress that is essential to its long-term survival.

These were the challenges we faced:

To build from an utterly ruined economy,

To raise the living standard of a growing population living in the direst poverty,

To restore to its former strength and high standing, the economy of our country, and

To prepare this nation for the period of greater growth, yet also of fiercer economic competition, that lies ahead for the Pacific.

Motivated by the desire to be part of that future, yet fearful also of losing our precious freedoms in the sea of poverty that already engulfs the majority of our people, we set out to recover what we had lost and build higher towards our goals — freedom, justice and progress.

The process of attainment was simple: A democracy cannot survive with the majority of its people in poverty. Poverty cannot be eliminated without economic growth. Growth can be attained only harnessing the productive energies of private’ enterprise. And private enterprise cannot be productive unless liberated from state interference on the one hand, and supported by basic infrastructure on the other. The implementation has been far from simple or smooth-going.

Yet, we achieved a measure of success no one can pretend to overlook, and of which we are justly proud. By our own efforts — fettered by obligations and hampered by the consequences of the corrupt and mistaken practices and policies of the past—we made progress, astonishing progress. The challenge of growth with equity, rendered yet more difficult by the economic decline with which we began and by the crushing legacy of debt, was met vigorously by sweeping reforms that gave new life to the economy and a new faith in our country—among ourselves and among the nations who have stood up to be counted as our friends.

Yet, we have always known that the timely completion of our task, before regressive forces overwhelm our efforts, depends not only on ourselves but on timely and meaningful financial assistance from abroad.

The dilemma of growth and debt threatens the survival of democracies and must be a shared concern of the international community.

Its resolution is a shared responsibility.

The consequences of failure will be everyone’s fate.

Recognizing these facts and inspired by the success of a similar effort in the past, four legislators from both Houses of the US Congress initiated a bi-partisan call for a multilateral aid plan for the Philippines. They proposed to repeat the assistance mounted for a Europe liberated from the Dictators for a Philippines liberated from its own.

In a parallel development, the leaders of seven leading industrial countries meeting in Toronto in June last year endorsed a similar proposal put forward by the President of the United States.

In response to this liberal and far-sighted initiative, I constituted a Task Force to develop, in consultation with sectoral groups, the framework of a program that will efficiently absorb the assistance contemplated by the initiative.

The work of the Task Force has reached the stage where it can only continue on the level of a Coordinating Council, able to draw on the resources, expertise and the coordinated actions of the various agencies and departments of governments and of groups in the private sector.

I have therefore created the Coordinating Council of the Philippine Assistance Program. The Council shall be a tri-lateral body with members of the Cabinet and representatives of the Congress, as well as of the private sector.

I am pleased that a distinguished citizen, Mr. Roberto T. Villanueva, has agreed to serve as my special representative to foreign governments and institutions for the adoption and early implementation of the international aid plan. He will act concurrently as Chairman of the Coordinating Council. In both capacities, he has stipulated that he will serve pro bono but in a full-time capacity. We all commend him for his high sense of duty and patriotism.

As Chairman, he is empowered to call on all departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of government to assist him in this task. I appeal as well to the private sector to lend him every cooperation and assistance. What he has committed himself to accomplish is for all of us.

My decision to draft a man of Mr. Villanueva’s accomplishments and stature underscores the importance of the aid program in our over-all plan of development, and the critical part that the sector from which he comes will play in the success of both the program and our developmental efforts.

With the creation of the Coordinating Council and the appointment of its Chairman, we are now prepared to advance the activation of the multilateral aid plan.

When the initiative was made, it was asked if we were prepared for it. With the greatest confidence, pointing to our accomplishments to date, we answer: We are.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].