Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Rizal Day

[ Released on December 30, 1986 ]

RIZAL’S DREAM REALIZED

Dr. Jose Rizal, the first man to implant in our national tradition the ideals of reconciliation, believed that freedom is won not through the sword but through the people making themselves worthy of it. He died without seeing this vision come to pass. Today, the Filipinos are at last ready to prove Rizal right as we begin to implement his dream of a self-willed society propelled only by a vision of the good and not by the prodding of the lash.

Let me begin by quoting these lines, spoken by Father Florentino in Rizal’s novel, El Filibusterismo:

“I do not mean to say that our liberty will be secured at the sword’s point, for the sword plays but little part in modern affairs, but that we must secure it by making ourselves worthy of it, by exalting the intelligence and dignity of the individual, by loving justice, right and greatness, even to the extent of dying for them . . . and when a people reaches that height, God will provide the weapon, the idols will be shattered, tyranny will crumble like a house of cards and liberty will shine out like the first dawn.”

Father Florentino was wrong to discount the role of the sword in the affairs of the world, speaking as he did on the threshold of this tragic age. Even when Rizal wrote these words, the sword had already been drawn. And in a few years it would be raised to catch on its gleaming edge the first light of the dawn that look his life. But he was right that our age would be marked by a greater commitment to justice and reason, dignity and freedom than any previous age had ever known.

Still, with a premonition of the violence inherent in the order of the world, Rizal persisted in believing that freedom must be won through peace and reason. He held fast to this belief through persecution, exile, and finally imprisonment and death.

Rizal died, but not his dream. To quote another friend of Filipino freedom: The work goes on, the cause endures, hope still lives, and the dream shall never die.

The dream of freedom through peace and reason did not die with Rizal, nor with the many Filipinos who shared his convictions and his fate, all the way up to the last one three years ago whose death presaged and hastened the dawn of true dignity and freedom.

As in Rizal’s time, prolonged tyranny and repression had polarized the forces of society. Again, as the men of peace among us watched with dread, a bloodbath seemed the imminent and only solution. Again, a series of martyrdoms, culminating in the execution of a crusader for peace brought the drama to its end. But at last it was the finale Rizal had wanted. As Filipinos stood as one to proclaim their love of freedom and justice, God himself provided the weapon. The idols, garbed in luxury and power, were shattered, and tyranny fell as harmlessly as a house of cards.

And so today, we pause to remember and to honor the first major sacrifice on the national altar of peace. Doctor Jose Rizal, by the ideals of reconciliation he implanted in our national tradition, also deserves credit for the success of our last Revolution. His founding philosophy, as with all foundations, is buried beneath where it cannot be seen. But it is because it is a foundation that we are able to stand securely upon it as we rebuild our nation from the ground upwards. And even if we should sometime in the future stand poised and tense, ready to draw the sword, Rizal leaves us with a reminder of the broader perspective. Perhaps what he really meant by the words of Father Florentino was that in the last analysis “the sword plays but little part in modern affairs.” True liberty is best and permanently secured “by making ourselves worthy of it.” We cannot hold our society together by the force of laws if these laws are an imposition and not an extension of our spirit. Nor can any President in a democracy rule effectively simply by command, unless the authority behind it is that of a self-determining and believing people.

When Rizal wrote his last farewell to the country he loved, that country was not fully ready to implement his dream of a self-willed society propelled only by a vision of the good and not by the prodding of the lash. Today, perhaps, we are ready. By looking back to Rizal, a hero ahead of his time, we find a comforting continuity to our national purpose, and the impetus to work forward to a nation worthy of his dream.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library