Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Philippine Military Academy (PMA) Graduation Rites

[Delivered on March 22, 1986]

At graduation exercises of the Philippine Military Academy, President Aquino shares her thoughts on the proper relationship between army and state: A soldier’s role is not in politics. He is the guarantor of the people’s security and the protector of the people’s government. But that role can only be properly exercised under the supervision of a government the people have chosen and recognized.

She also pledged, as Commander-in-Chief, that the Armed Forces will never again be misused the way it was by former President Marcos.

You, the finest of our military youth, have reason to be the proudest graduating class in PMA history. By your actions in the final days of the people’s revolution, you went through a graduation ceremony of far greater importance than any held on this field.

Your defection made you the first graduating class of the people’s army. This new army was forged in a moment of national crisis when every Filipino had to search his and her heart for the courage to face death. Our institutions, such as the Armed Forces, had to decide: Were they for a man or for a people? Were they for a small clique of crooks clinging to power, or for country? Would they open fire on the people, or finally add their strength to the near unanimous resolve of our people to end 14 years of shame?

You, this graduating class, made the same choice as some of your brothers in the military, including your new Chief of Staff and the Minister of Defense: You opted for the people, and the President the people had chosen and the Batasan had ignored. You opted to be a part of the people’s revolution.

In the classrooms of this academy you were lectured on the proper relationship between army and state. The life of a democracy depends on civilian supremacy over the military. It requires that the military stay out of politics yet in February you faced a dilemma that no textbook prepared you for: What do you do when the civilian authority is itself the threat to democracy? Where lies the loyalty of the officer corps and the troops? With nations and state or with the government of the day?

As you prepare for a life of military service let me share with you my thoughts on the proper relationship between army and state. A soldier’s role is not in politics. He is the guarantor of the people’s security and the protector of the people’s government. But that role can only be properly exercised under the supervision of a government the people have chosen and recognize. During the long years of the Marcos regime, our armed forces shared the agony of every Filipino. The shame and dismay of having at the head of our proud nation a man whose greed humbled our pride and whose cruelty put Filipino at war with Filipino.

Just as we owe it to every Filipino to restore a government they can be proud of, so we owe it to our young soldiers to restore a government they can be proud to defend. Military honor and pride in service of the state cannot be separated from the kind of government that a soldier is required to serve.

But it is not soldiers who can make a government fit for themselves and the people. It is only the people that can do that. For the soldier must serve the people’s government; not the people a soldier’s government. Your strength lies in having a Commander-in-Chief who is the people’s choice and not yours. Your honor lies in the fact that she was your choice as well.

You and many of your colleagues rose not to overthrow a President but to protect one: the President the people had elected and that the Batasan had cheated of her proclamation. Your actions were not a revolt against, but a restoration of legitimate government. And you did it with the people and not against them. That is what validated what you did.

There, in the streets around Crame and Aguinaldo, we saw the rebirth of the proper partnership of trust and respect between army and people. As the Marcos generals poised their confused and wavering troops to strike at the soldiers with Messrs. Ramos and Enrile, we saw the yellow shirts of our followers, the white frocks of our priests, and the grey habits of our nuns mingle their colors with the khaki green of your colleagues. As we emerged from the dark night of dictatorship, there was a new rainbow of colors across our land: the yellow of courage, the grey of faith, and the green of duty united in the willingness to work together, bury past conflicts, and begin the healing of our nation’s wounds.

The Armed Forces had begun to resume its proper place in the service of a government that belonged to the people. The reward for that lay, not just in the physical protection those nuns and yellow legions gave your colleagues but in the new respect for you that their decision to do so represented. When Cardinal Sin called on the people to go to Aguinaldo and Crame and when the people responded in their hundreds of thousands, a vast act of reconciliation had begun. You, who had seen your noble profession brought low by those who commanded it, were being welcomed back into the fold of the nation.

Peace and reconciliation are now the most powerful weapons in our nation’s armory. But, just as they were the strength of our revolution, so will they be the basis of our government. We came to power through peace and I mean to govern in peace. After years of brutal repression, the craving of our people is for peace and dignity. Our government and our army must hold out their hands to our opponents as citizens and nuns did outside Crame, in friendship and peace.

We must seek an end to the divisions that have threatened to pull our nation apart. An army ordered to wage war on its own people is an army betrayed. A war can only be just if it is waged under a leadership representative of the people, and a leadership, moreover, that had earnestly sought peace through honest political means before trying to impose order through force. The former government turned its back on reconciliation and was, through its goons, warlords, and cronies, the most effective recruiter of the New People’s Army. I will not have this again.

I, as your Commander-in-Chief pledge before you today that the Armed Forces will not again be misused in this way. this is because I mean to wage a campaign for peace. I wish to persuade those insurgents who went to the hills because of despair, rather than ideology to return because now there is hope: Hope that they can be a part of a society based on a respect for human rights, welfare, and dignity. And pride in taking part in the building of a new Philippines.

To our brothers and sisters in the hills and the underground I have this to say: You waged war against Mr. Marcos because he was the embodiment of the worst injustice, greed and cruelty. I fought Marcos for the same reasons. We had a common stand and an overriding purpose: the end of tyranny and shame and the beginning of hope and pride. This is why I ordered the immediate release of political prisoners.

Now that the evil has fled from the land, I shall soon call on you to come out and rejoin your people in rebuilding our country. There should be no more reason to continue fighting. Our other differences can be settled through participation in peaceful process.

Yet let nobody mistake the importance we attach building a strong and disciplined Armed Forces. These are times of national crisis. It is still too early to claim with any assurance how many of those in the hills will heed our call and return to us. Those who do not will face a reformed and reinvigorated fighting force, dedicated to the protection of democracy and the honor of our country.

As your President and Commander-in-Chief I shall have no hesitation in calling on you to protect your government and state from any threat, be it internal or external. Equally I shall ask of your generals that they be vigilant in ensuring that our armed forces are well-led and well-armed. I should like to see a modern disciplined fighting force dedicated to the goals of a democratic state. As the Marcos maneuvers against the. rebellion in EDSA demonstrated, a crook not only makes a corrupt general but a bad one too.

Too manly good officers were held down by what was happening at the top of our Armed Forces. Now we have freed our army from that grip. Every member of the Armed Forces can now be judged by their qualities of bravery, integrity, competence and loyalty. Our Armed Forces, like the rest of our nation, has been liberated. Gone are the shackles on your performance, but gone too are the excuses. As your Commander-in-Chief I shall only be satisfied with the best. Yours will be an army that is as proud of itself as the nation is proud of it.

Let me be clear about one thing: I mean to fulfill my responsibility as Commander-in-Chief. My military staff, General Ramos and his service chiefs, will report directly to me. My Minister of Defense will monitor closely your performance. Neither errors of policy nor gross misconduct will long escape my attention and rebuke.

Like all our countrymen I have held my head high at the role played by the officers and members of the Reform Movement. Much credit for the renewal that is now underway goes to them. Indeed, today is the first anniversary of the We Belong Movement. It was founded in the hallowed grounds of this academy to reembody the ideal of professionalism and democratic commitment in the military. Those who took the brave step a year ago of forming the movement could not have guessed how much would have been achieved a year later. But their standards or professionalism and commitment are now the norm that I shall expect of everybody who is privileged to serve in our Armed Forces. You hold a sacred trust. It will not be abused.

What began in Crame and Aguinaldo must be taken much further. The general staff and I will work together to ensure this country has the armed services it deserves. We must purge our Armed Forces of all that has dishonored them in recent years. Your role in our nation’s life is too great to allow us to overlook what happened in the final years of Marcos.

The army is the servant of its government and cannot be held accountable for the sins of the politicians, except for those who have illegally enriched themselves or have violated human rights. Let me be frank with you. The concept of a military elite draws its sense of purpose from its professionalism and the concept of service. This can only be nurtured when it enjoys the respect of the people. Without that, a military however great its self-regard is nothing.

You had a Commander-in-Chief who destroyed the very essence of responsible militarism. He was at the center of the corruption and repression. This man did you more harm than you even now may recognize. He and his associates destroyed the army’s reputation as an impartial protector of the people’s security and a stout defender of the nation’s honor. Only by exposing the wrong-doing can we start the rebuilding. This revolution began with a bullet shot by a soldier into the head of my husband.

To all you young men, trained for lives of honor, sacrifice, and service, it must seem blindingly obvious that only through an honest explanation of the past can a clean start be made for the future.

I shall, as your Commander-in-Chief, make that clean start. Past abuses will be investigated and any officers and men guilty of crimes or serious misconduct will be dealt with appropriately. A new beginning requires a closing of the old chapter. But the people will not let the page be turned if crimes and human rights abuses lie unexplained.

Our Armed Forces was driven out of the people’s hearts by the ignoble uses it was put to under the dictatorship. Now the people have embraced you and you, I know, wish to respect the spirit in which they did so. It was one of peace and reconciliation and it must not be stifled but be allowed to reach every corner nation in the pursuit of justice.

Healing the divisions that led to the growth of insurgency in our beloved country demands a special partnership between our nation’s political leadership and our soldiers. General Ramos told me that he considers the chief concern of the Armed Forces of the Philippines to be, not just national security, but the people’s security. You are now a people’s army in the best sense of the word. That means that you serve the people.

That can only begin by addressing the insurgency. We must intensify our efforts for national reconciliation and re-integration of those who fought Marcos. We will not solve this problem just by sheathing our swords; we must also harness our ploughshares. Our countryside must be put back to work. Too many areas are devastated, not just by conflict but also by underdevelopment. The wealth of our countryside may not, like that of our industries, have ended up in American and Swiss bank accounts, but it was no less surely taken from us.

Now has come the time for rebuilding: the clinics, the schools, the roads, the wells, the farms, and above all, the will and hope of the people. The army is one organization that has the capacity to help do this. The church is another. The soldiers of the Republic and the soldiers of Christ have special roles in the effort of reconstruction. We are on the threshold of a great national mobilization of effort and resources to restore our bankrupt and battered country. Everyone has a vital part to play. It is a measure of how far we have come in the recent weeks that the first active operation you may be assigned to is building a school rather than a search and destroy mission against the NPA. To rebuild one nation we must have peace. Without peace we cannot have growth.

It may seem odd work for soldiers. Yet a central part in our reconstruction efforts is the noblest task you could hope for at this time. It affords the opportunity for soldiers to work side by side with villagers. This shared labor of rebuilding our infrastructure and economy after its brutal pillage does more than words can ever do to heal the wounds.

We need to build not just a passive peace where a ceasefire holds but an active peace where there is economic and social development to ease the deprivation of our people. The soldiers in this war, against poverty and economic injustice, will also be honored in the new Philippines. Indeed our military too have to cope with an appalling fall in their standard of living. The privilege of our military men is that there is a lead place for you in both wars: the peaceful containment of the insurgency and the offensive against poverty. Only if we move on both fronts will we banish the challenge of insurgency.

Such a push for peace will not leave us unprepared for war. An army must always be vigilant and in a high state of preparedness. The General Staff will ensure that the Armed Forces are returned to a peak of combat readiness after the years of professional decline.

Any group which considers undermining the stability of the country must understand that they will not be facing the demoralized forces of Marcos, rather they will be facing a national army, trained and ready to protect our sovereignty and the democratic government chosen by the people.

You leave this academy to play your part as officers in helping our nation back onto its feet after years of shameful prostration. You will be serving a government that faces huge challenges in rebuilding our society. Yet for the Armed Forces whether loyalist or rebel, who now stand behind the flag and the constitution, the worst is over. Whatever must be faced, we will face it together: you and I and the people. Once more you are back where you have longed to be: on the side of the people. Welcome home, my soldiers.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].