Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the clergies of San Carlos Seminary

[Delivered on May 20, 1986 ]

INTERCESSORS FOR PEACE AND UNITY

The clergy played an important role in the February revolution according to President Aquino. Through the evangelization of the priests, the Filipino people became aware of the injustices prevalent in the society.

She appeals to the clergy again, this time to help her by rebuilding the spirits of the people — through example and by word.

She specifically requests the clergy’s help in motivating the Marcos loyalists and the NPA’s to join the mainstream of the Filipino society in the work of national reconstruction.

It is with great joy that I come and stand before you this morning. I know that practically all of you participated actively in the February revolution which toppled Marcos’ dictatorial regime. Prior to the elections, during the elections and after the elections, you helped increase our people’s awareness of the injustices prevalent then in our society. You helped form their consciences through unflagging and daring evangelisation. If our people in Metro Manila acted the way they did, it was due in no small measure to your priestly work of evangelisation. Hence, I wish my presence among you today to be an expression of my gratitude for your signal contribution in the transformation of our nation.

But I come before you today for another reason: I have come to enter into dialogue with you so that we may together carry forward the transformation which has been so boldly begun.

I wish to hear from you whatever comments, criticisms and suggestions you and the people under your pastoral J care are saying. From the beginning, I stated that I would consult the people and that my administration would exercise consultation. Let this “be an opportunity for such a consultation in friendly and fraternal atmosphere.

I dare to express before you my expectations of you in the great work of reconstruction of our country ravaged by the Marcos regime. I know that your contribution to this process is indispensable.

I know that you are not experts in politics and economics. Yes, it is not your role as priests and pastors to propose technical solutions to the many problems that beset our nation. But precisely as priests and evangelisers of our people you have a vital role to play. For what has to be built up in our people is, first of all, the spirit of our people. And who can better help towards the rebuilding of our people’s spirit than you, our spiritual leaders?

You will recall what our bishops wrote in their draft pastoral letter on social transformation, “Man, Our Way.” In describing our society under Marcos, they pointed out two outstanding characteristics: 1) the widespread poverty and deep suffering of our people, and 2) the demoralization, i.e., the sense of discouragement and the erosion of moral values in our people. These two, poverty-suffering on the one hand, and demoralization on the other, did not simply stand side by side. They stood, I believe, in a casual relationship. The majority of our people were poor because many in our society no longer lived by moral principles and had caused the demoralization, i.e., the loss of morale in the majority. We could make no progress because people no longer trusted the government and the institutions that were supposed to help them and protect their rights. When one looks back at the years under the Marcos regime, one cannot but be impressed and depressed by the slow descent into the depths of the Filipino spirit. We seemed headed either towards national degeneration or violent confrontation. I believe in my heart of hearts that had God not allowed the murder of my late husband, Ninoy, as he returned to work non-violently for justice and national reconciliation, we might still be suffering today from the twofold demoralization our bishops have described or we might already be on the brink of a civil war.

But you all know how, that shot in the Manila International Airport awoke the failing spirit of our people.

From then on, that spirit refused to surrender to the evils in our society, until at last, the February revolution occurred — a magnificent triumph of the Filipino and Christian spirit in our land. We managed to overthrow the oppressive Marcos regime, in an almost completely bloodless manner. We succumbed neither to deadening apathy nor to the temptation to violence.

The February revolt was a magnificent climax — a true resurrection from the death. It was, however, only a beginning, as we are very painfully realizing now.

Two great tasks lie ahead of us. First, the renewal of the morals and morale of our people. This requires a change of heart, a change in our attitudes, a true conversion, the transformation of the Filipino as a person. I consider this primary. Unless we change within, the same demons that beset the Filipino people under the Marcos regime will return — and with a vengeance.

Herein, I believe, lies the field of your most urgent and most important contribution to the rebuilding of our nation. If you evangelise our people by example and by word regarding the centrality in God’s plan of the human-person-in-community; if you teach our people about the universal destination of created goods, and the priority of labor over capital, and set the right to private property within the context of these two truths; if you counter the kanya-kanya tendency with a stress on the common good; if you inculcate in us all the idea of public service, and if you show us by example and by word the preferential option for the poor; if, in other words, you evangelise our people in the way the Pope and our own bishops have told you to, you shall have made the most urgent and most important contribution to the rebuilding of our country.

I must stress, however, the necessity of your example, more than your words in this work of reforming our internal structures. The great defect of the Marcos regime was precisely this — that it was a regime of words unmatched by deeds. Never in our history were so many beautiful speeches and books spoken and written as during the time of the deposed dictator. But never also had there been such a wider gap between profession and action.

Words are necessary, but they are so woefully inadequate. A proliferation of words if unmatched by actions, can result in a credibility gap.

Hence, I have myself resolved to exercise leadership by personal example. I have asked my cabinet ministers to do the same. Allow me to request the same from you so that the necessary change in our way of thinking and attitudes may be achieved effectively.

If I may be more specific: the cause of national reconstruction will be helped immensely if you, our priests showed the way to simplicity of life, justice in human transactions, the sharing of this world’s goods, and the exercise of authority as service.

The change in internal structures of the Filipino needs to be matched and promoted by a corresponding change in our external structures, i.e., the economic, political and social structures of the land. I believe that this is primarily the work of lay persons like myself, and believe me, it is precisely as part of my Christian commitment as a lay person that I have assumed the burdens of the presidency.

But even here, you have your special role. In the postelection statement of the CBCP, a methodology was set forth: The bishops write, “In a creative imaginative way, under the guidance of Christ’s Spirit, let us pray together, reason together, decide together, act together, always to the end that the truth prevails.”

My dear fathers, who can better help bring about this coming together, praying together, reasoning together, deciding and acting together than you, our people’s spiritual leaders for unity?

I was told that in the Archdiocese of Manila, there is a thrust for the building of basic ecclesiastical communities where the aforementioned methodology proposed by our bishops can be realized. You have also in your parishes the different mandated Catholic organizations which can be potent instruments of renewal. Will it be possible for you to motivate these and other church groups towards that constructive, critical collaboration, which seems to be firming up as the attitude of Philippine Church officialdom towards the present government?

Yes, I invite you to promote this constructive, critical collaboration. We need to collaborate – for the good of our people. I have repeatedly said to our people: “MAGTULUNGAN TAYO! ” – not for the sake of Cory, but for the sake of the people we are all called to serve. I need your support, and I appeal for it. The time for rebuilding must be above all, a time for united effort. Ask your people to do their best, and give their all, for the sake of our country and its future. Ask them, and show them the way by your example.

I understand that this way mean a change in your leadership style. Just as the authoritarian style of Church leadership provided a spiritual climate favorable to martial rule, so also a more consultative and participative style of Church leadership will enable our people to be more participative also in the affairs of civil society.

With your help, perhaps we can bring into the collaborative effort of the Filipino people two groups: the first is the Marcos loyalists who, while clearly incapable of bringing back to power their discredited leader can, nevertheless, create annoying disturbances disruptive of peace and progress in our society. Is it possible to also influence this loyalist group towards the stance of active non-violence? If dissent they must, can they not be helped to express dissent relying only on the force of truth? Will it be possible for you to go even further and persuade them to join the mainstream of Filipino society in the work of national reconstruction?

The second are the NPA’s most of whom were driven to the hills by the excesses of the previous regime. Can you assure those who may come to you that the period of oppression is over and they are needed for the march towards the progress of our country?

I do not fail to note that the word “critical” has been inserted between “constructive” and “collaboration.” I welcome that too. Never again should our people be simply cowed or bribed to do certain things. Never again should they be robotized. The present government needs the collaboration of thinking and free persons. Let your voices and that of your people be heard — in dialogue and not in angry confrontation. I claim neither perfection nor infallibility. I understand that the Church cannot identify itself unreservedly with any government, no matter how good. It has to preserve a certain distance which will leave it freedom to exercise its prophetic role. I welcome criticism, provided it be honest and made as part of our search for unity. In fact, I have only recently dialogued with members of the CBCP on pressing problems of our country.

However, I appeal also for patience. Rome was not built in a day. The Philippines will not be rebuilt in a few months. There are long days of toil and sacrifices ahead of us. We are saddled by the misdeeds of a profligate regime. We are handicapped by the evil effects in our persons and in our structures of this discredited rule. We must be patient and learn to undo step by step the sad legacy of twenty years of Marcos’ misrule.

This will demand sacrifices and the spirit of sacrifice from all of us. My dear bishops, monsignori and fathers, challenge our people to make the necessary sacrifices. Show yourselves to be men of sacrifice as well.

But it is not on that note that I want to end. Hope must be the order of the day. The Filipino people is capable of great things. We produced in February another wonder of the world. A new Philippines is already being born in the hearts of our countrymen. Indeed, what can we not do with the help of God? How shall we fail when Mary stands by our side? I wish to ask you, my dear fathers, to give our people reasons for hoping and loving, for living and dying. The future beckons. Let us heed its call to greatness! No one of us can be blamed for not accomplishing everything. But we will be responsible before God and our people if we refuse to give all we can in this historical moment.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].