Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Freedom

[Delivered at the Kalayaan Hall, January 20, 1987]

SAYING YES TO FREEDOM

President Aquino says that the new Constitution not only embodies the ideals of democracy but also the dreams that the Filipino people aspire for as a nation.

The Constitution remembers the tyranny of the past and provides safeguards for the rights that were most abused, those of freedom of expression, and the right to a fair and speedy trial. Furthermore, to ensure that the injustices against civil liberties are not committed again, a Committee on Human Rights is established. A stricter system of public accountability is also provided so that the people are protected from an oppressive and corrupt government.

The people too must be provided the means to enjoy their new freedom, thus there are provisions for free elementary and secondary education as well as a national health care system.

The new Constitution also recognizes the cultural uniqueness of some regions of the country and provides for their autonomy.

I said democracy is safe with this Constitution. In fact, it is more than safe; it is strengthened as well, and made meaningful to the vast majority of our countrymen whose poverty denies them the full benefit of freedom.

The critics of the proposed Constitution say it is too long. It is not. It is only as long as the abuses it is meant to prevent, and the injustices it is intended to correct. I refer to such abuses and injustices as midnight arrests and executions, press censorship, detention without trial, torture, corrupt government, illiteracy, poverty and economic underdevelopment.

Our democratic rights and freedoms are, of course, the first priority and therefore enshrined in the Bill of Rights. These are our inalienable rights that make life worth living. I refer to such rights as freedom of expression, so we can speak our minds without hurt to the reputation and safety of others. There is the right to a fair and speedy trial. There is a right not to be detained without cause.

These rights no one, not even the majority of the nation, can take away from any person, citizen or not. They are inalienable because not even the victim himself can forsake them.

But to be free is not enough. A person must have the means to make a decent living, to improve his life and realize his full potential as a human being. Hence the new Constitution provides for free elementary and secondary education. The new Congress must provide for this.

There is provision for a healthy citizenry, making national health a primary goal of government. Congress again cannot escape the responsibility to provide for an adequate health care system.

The people must not only be protected from oppressive government; they must, as well, be assured of clean government. And so a strict system is created that makes public officials accountable for their acts and mandates punishment for their misdeeds.

We suffered 14 years of terrible oppression. These were years when people were picked up in the dead of night, tortured, and killed. The proposed Constitution brands this experience in our memories and provides for a Committee that will assure respect for human rights, expose their infractions, and remind us ever of our duty to respect each other as brothers and sisters in God.

We are a nation with a long and rich history, in the course of which some of our people developed unique cultural patterns. Just as the Bill of Rights respects our rights and liberties as individuals, the proposed Constitution provides for an equal respect for the uniqueness of certain communities and their right to preserve their special ways of life. And so there is a provision that protects the right of communities to live as their traditions prescribe, and to govern themselves, consistently with democratic principles, in the way they wish.

The proposed Constitution is indeed long. And I suppose Congress could have legislated many of the things that it provides. But is it not better now, while the spirit of the Revolution is vibrantly alive, to have them all written down in a constitution, and binding on our leaders and our people to respect and work for them?

Yes, the new Constitution is long; as long as our experience of oppression, as long as the list of the things we wish to achieve as a nation. We are leaving little to chance. We want to keep the democracy we won; and we want to build upon it the progressive economy and the just society we deserve to have.

For these reasons, I urge our countrymen to come out, and urge your friends and neighbors to join you, in voting “Yes” to the proposed Constitution; “Yes” to the democracy it enshrines; and “Yes” to the future that can be ours.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library