Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Opening of the Museo ng Malacañang

[Released on August 16, 1986]

OPENING THE PALACE TO THE PEOPLE

The Museo ng Malacañang stands as a symbol of the living reality of a government open to the people and trying to become an integral part of their lives and hopes. This, according to President Aquino, is the only kind of government that will survive and succeed from now on.

I want to thank you for your interest in the Museo ng Malacañang Foundation. The Foundation President, Mrs. Regina Coseteng, and the Chairman of the Membership Committee, Mr. Roberto Romulo, have given you the program and objectives of the Foundation. I wish to express only the larger significance of this project.

The opening of Malacañang Palace to the public as a museum and as a historical site achieves one of the most important goals of those who dreamed and fought for Filipino freedom. Before the opposition had decided on a definitive course of action to seize power and restore democracy in this country, and even before I had accepted to lead the effort, it was widely held that the new government could not do better than throw the Palace open to the people. The paralysis of Philippine society and government, the inability of that government to do anything but steal for its private benefit, was traced to the distance that this Palace created between the people and their government. Its inaccesibility, the mystery of what it contained and what transpired here, strengthened the popular belief that government can only be a bane and no boon to their lives. This one gesture of opening the Palace to the people brings people and government together in a bond of mutual trust that should give enduring strength and confident direction to our country.

Previous governments had cordoned off Malacañang for security reasons. My predecessor denied even street access to this Palace and filled its grounds with troops. This was a terrible mistake. What little gain he made in his personal security was totally erased by what he lost in popular trust. There just isn’t enough room in this park for the troops you would need to continue governing a people whose support and cooperation you had lost.

What we have done by opening the Palace is just a replication of the events of February where two things of great political importance were shown. The first is that real power must be rooted in popular support. The second is that nothing can offer better security than the people. You must remember that when the mutineers in Camps Aguinaldo and Crame got wind of the President’s intention to take military action against them, their correct impulse was to thrown open then-gates and let in the people.

Some people think that this idea of a Museo ng Malacañang in the same grounds as the seat of power is a security nightmare. It is not. It is the ultimate security. I do not want any protection from the people. On the contrary, the only protection in which I have confidence is that which they alone can give.

The Museo ng Malacañang is not just the symbol but the living reality of a government open to the people, and trying to become an integral part of their lives and hopes. Given the high degree of politicization that 14 years of oppression and three years of glorious struggle have injected into our people, this is the only kind of government that will survive and succeed from now on.

I want you therefore to appreciate the importance of the project that has been entrusted to you: to preserve the symbolism and reality of our new democracy.

I wish to thank the Board of Trustees of the Foundation for the tremendous amount of time and energy they have so generously poured into the establishment of this Foundation. But, most of all, I wish to thank all of you here today for your support.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].