Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Ateneo Law Commencement Rites

[Released on April 8, 1988]

THE PRESSING ISSUE OF LAW

In the commencement rites of Ateneo’s College of Law, the President talks about freedom of the press and its limitations. She also congratulates the graduates and expresses confidence that the graduates will apply what they have learned in the practice of their profession: justice for all.

As the date of this occasion approached, I was wondering what I could tell you that was new. But somehow I had the feeling that something would turn up. Something unfortunately did.

I would not have minded, even if you did, to have just stood here and shaken hands with each of you, giving no speech except for some brief congratulatory remarks. Things had settled down quite a bit. Everyone was saying that the economy was taking off. Developments were speaking more eloquently than I could about our country. This bouyant feeling increased when the military captured the top leadership of the Communist insurgency. But, as always, it was “win some, lose some.” Never a perfect week.

A well-known — I prefer to call him a “notorious” — prisoner escaped. His first act upon unlawfully regaining his illegal freedom was to impose upon the constitutional guarantee of free speech. This gives you a fair idea of how he understands freedom of speech, as a weapon rather than as a forum. He gave a radio interview the very day of his escape.

The Secretary of Justice warned that radio franchises may be cancelled if such interviews were aired. The interview was not aired. Since then, the government has received a great deal of criticism for the chilling of the Justice Secretary’s warning on free expression.

The question was asked: Is there really an emergency so grave as to justify a curtailment of speech, given that the government, from the start of the incident, had repeatedly assured the public that everything was under control? Wasn’t that a contradiction?

Let me deal with that apparent contradiction. Government had everything under control because we had decided to take full and complete control of the situation. We had resolved to isolate the rebel escapee so he could not repeat the damage he had done nor the murder and mayhem he had wrought on August 28 last year. By instituting checkpoints, a manhunt, and issuing a warning about aiding and abetting the fugitive, we had sharply curtailed his capability to increase the number of his confederates. So it is true that we were in control, and it is also true that we had to take emergency measures to achieve this control. There was no contradiction. We were in complete control of the situation because nothing and no one would be allowed to stand in our way.

That warning was issued about the dire consequences of airing the Honasan interview because coup-by-mouth and instability by public alarm had become this man’s chief stock-in-trade. We had to isolate the incident, clearly identify the perpetrators, and get a true estimate of the extent of the danger they posed to the public. In that man’s hands, media was not a means for the communication of ideas or the expression of feelings but a weapon of destabilization aimed at the institutions that protect the fundamental rights that give life to media and democracy. Had he gone on the air and falsely claimed that a large segment of the military itself had sprung him from imprisonment, the country would have been thrown into a panic. It would have been, indeed, like falsely shouting “Fire” in a crowded theater. As it was, for all the control we had achieved and the isolation we had succeeded in imposing upon him, the stock market was adversely affected.

With his right to speak and seek an audience, we have no quarrel. But we continue to reserve the right to punish those who allow themselves to be used as instruments of his evil purposes. This is a free country. You are free to say what you please, air what you want, but within the limits of the rights of others to their privacy and honor, of our democratic institutions to self-preservation.

There has been a complaint that the warning was ambiguous or too broad. Let me clarify it My instructions to Commissioner Alcuaz are not to prevent any radio or TV interview from being aired, on the one hand, and not to give clearance for the airing of any interview, on the other. But all media are forwarned that there are consequences they must be prepared to face, including the cancellation of franchises if, in our opinion, they have overstepped the line of public safety.

My first duty is to protect the state, and, yes, to protect democracy, even from those who would abuse its highest guarantees in order to destroy it. We have been accused of fostering Freedom of the Praise. Let me tell you, I haven’t the slightest interest in being praised by the press, for I take satisfaction only in doing what my conscience and my duty tell me is right. Our people and I have come this far by ourselves, building patiently and tirelessly from the “ruin we inherited. Sadly, we have had to see others destroy immediately what we had just built up.

I have neither time nor interest in praises from any but the people to whose progress, well-being, prosperity and enduring freedom alone I am dedicated.

I am pleased and honored to have been invited here to address this next generation of Ateneo lawyers. I spared you a lengthy and rhetorical speech and went straight instead to a pressing issue of law because that is how I hope you will apply yourselves in the practice of your profession. With unshakeable resolve to do quickly, unhesitatingly what is right, whatever the price. Only God and history in the long run know what is absolutely right. We are only human’ with only the single light of Christian conscience to guide us on the path of duty.

Congratulations on your graduation. God go with you and may success attend all your virtuous endeavors. Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].