Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the dinner in Honor of the Premier of Ontario

[Delivered on November 5, 1989]

RECIPROCITY, MUTUALLY ADVANTAGEOUS TO BOTH NATIONS

Ontario is beautiful, inviting, and welcoming. Filipinos have repaid its hospitality by contributing to Canada’s progress, prosperity, and diversity. Canada, in turn, has given protection to Filipino workers, and has formulated a multicultural policy towards immigrants. June 12 was even proclaimed “Philippine Independence Day in Ontario”. This friendship should be incorporated into programs and policies for the mutual benefit of both countries.

Thank you, Mr. Premier, for your warm words of welcome for me and my party. I want to thank you and Mrs. Peterson also for the wonderful dinner you have tendered in my honor and to which you invited many of my countrymen.

I am very happy to be here in beautiful Ontario and in the leading Canadian city of Toronto – the nest of the Blue Jays, and also the financial capital of Canada.

Of the 150,000 Filipinos who have settled in Canada, half have chosen the Province of Ontario to be their home. Filipino-Canadians will repay the welcome you extended to them with the fiercest loyalty for Canada and the greatest pride in being Canadians.

Filipino Canadians have reciprocated by contributing significantly to the progress and prosperity of their communities and to the diversity of Canadian culture. I am proud of my people here. They have been the best ambassadors of goodwill from the Philippines to Canada and from Canada to the Philippines. For they speak so highly of their new country.

Canada, we are told, takes care of its own. The Province of Ontario stands out, not only in the ample protection it extends to Filipino workers, but also for its multicultural policy towards immigrants. That wise policy regards diversity, not as detracting from national unity, so much as further elaborating the rich fabric of Canadian life.

That Canadians have a special sympathy for the Philippines is obvious. The account of the Four Day Revolution which does the most justice to that distinctively Filipino achievement was the one by Canadian Bryan Johnson.

In 1986, Ontario proclaimed June 12th as “Philippine Independence Day in Ontario”. It was an important gesture for us because, for the first time in 14 years, we were celebrating Philippine independence in freedom. Ontario’s message understood the universality of the event.

These separate acts of friendship and the special feeling that is so evident between us must be brought together into programs and policies that will draw the economic and cultural life of our two countries closer together – to our mutual advantage.

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast: to your good health, Premier and Mrs. Peterson, and to the deep and lasting friendship of our two countries.

Mabuhay!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].