Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Asia Pacific Council of the American Chambers

[Delivered on October 26, 1989]

EQUITY AND SOCIAL JUSTICE BY THE MOVERS OF ECONOMY

Despite the negative publicity circulated here and abroad about the country’s unstable investment climate, President Aquino is pleased over the steady economic gains since the EDSA Revolution. She attributes this to the national development priorities set by our government – poverty alleviation, employment generation, promotion of equity, social justice and sustainable economic growth – which have served as guides for the prime movers of our economy.

I believe that many of you are no strangers to my country. I therefore bid you welcome to observe the changes that have evolved since you were here last, even as I thank you for giving me a chance to interest you again in helping us revive our economy.

Your Chamber’s logo indicates that yours was the first American Chamber of Commerce abroad. This underscores the special friendship that your country and mine have enjoyed for so long. Despite this much-bruited-about special relationship, I thus find it ironic that the total U.S. investment in the Philippines from 1968 to August of this year comprises a mere P15.1 billion or 31% of the over P48 billion foreign investments coursed through our Board of Investments; and that my country lags behind other Asian countries in terms of over-all U.S. investments in the Asian region.

The U.S. and the Philippines have a long history of trading and business partnership. Until recently, your country was our number one trading partner. Since 1968 until the first half of this year, the U.S. A. was also this country’s biggest foreign investor, with a share of 37% of our total foreign investments. Of late, the total amount of U.S. investments has increased, but their relative shares have gone down. Some ascribe this decrease in your shares to the rapid growth of investments from other countries, notably Japan. Though I am inclined to believe this, I am also aware that we have much to offer you, our American friends, that can encourage you to maintain if not increase your investments here.

As you may be aware, since our People Power Revolution of 1986, this government has striven to establish the atmosphere conducive to economic development. After removing a dictatorship which fostered the interests only of a favored few, we immediately worked for the restoration of processes and structures basic to democracy. Then, we proceeded to revive our moribund economy in recognition of the fact that no nation can remain sovereign without a robust economy.

I am glad to say that we have achieved quite successfully the economic goals we had set for ourselves. This, despite the spate of negative rumors circulated here and abroad about the instability of investing in this country. I assure you that these are nothing but baseless rumors spread by those who desire to run the country through guns and might. Let me further assure you that this government is capable of handling those forces that threaten to erode the gains we have made.

On the other hand, some of our supporters have called our rise from a negative growth rate to a modest but positive 6.7% a phenomenon. While we are happy with their praises, we would like to grow faster. But we realize that we can obtain better growth targets with some help from friends like you.

We have set our national development priorities: poverty alleviation, employment generation, promotion of equity and social justice, and sustainable economic growth. To achieve these goals, we have adopted a set of trade and industrial policies which focus on the establishment of an efficient and stable industrial structure and the promotion of region-based industries. We have returned to the private sector their proper role as the prime movers of economic growth. Along these lines, we have dismantled state monopolies, privatized government-owned and acquired assets and firms, and liberalized imports. A market-oriented exchange rate policy continues to be enforced in support of export promotion.

Our primary objective is to improve the economic lot of our marginal sectors. To effect industrial peace and harmony, efforts are focused on the provision of the means and conditions under which both labor and capital can work together to reconcile their respective interests.

Because we recognize the appropriate roles of local and foreign capital in economic development, we have defined these roles and enhanced the climate for the entry and growth of foreign investments. Our limited domestic capital spurs us to attract foreign investments. Although we have already implemented a revised Omnibus Investments Code and simplified investment procedures and regulations, we are conducting a review of our investment incentives to make these incentives more responsive to our needs as well as those of foreign investors.

Allow me to give you more details. The Filipino labor force’s capability is unquestioned. We can provide you with an adequate supply of skilled and semi-skilled labor. And comparably, our labor rates are low. We are presently promoting the growth of family-size business enterprises in the countryside. Very recently, our Congress passed a bill, which I shall soon sign into law, encouraging the establishment of such small businesses through tax exemptions and other incentives. You may perhaps use these small establishments as sources of your materials. On top of these, I am sure that you are aware of our people’s proficiency in your tongue. Our adequacy in handling your language should be a big incentive for English-speaking investors.

So let me invite you to increase your investments here. You have the technology and the capital. We can supply you with the labor, materials and site components.

Yet while I invite you to be part of this massive program to rebuild our economy, I ask you to view your investment as a mutually-beneficial plan. Let it be a cooperation of equals, for your country and mine shall both gain from this endeavor.

U.S. Vice-President Dan Quayle once said that “The USA advances its interests best when it fosters the growth and security of its allies and friends”, – and I agreed with him. So I ask you, as potential investors, to help in our economic growth. Then I ask you, who are from the bastion of modern democracy, to help us nourish the fledgling democracy we have regained, that it may flourish. And that, perhaps, we may become the model of democracy in this part of Asia. When you do so, you will not only assist in nurturing a friend’s economy, you will also help espouse the very ideals that your country represents.

Lastly, I would be most interested to find out how the Council perceives the latest changes in this country. Though I cannot promise to totally accommodate your needs, I am sure we can arrive at mutually acceptable goals that will demonstrate the equality of sovereign nations even as it also proves equally advantageous to us.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].