Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 88th Anniversary of the Office of the Solicitor General

[Delivered on October 4, 1989]

COURT AND PRESIDENT: A SHARED COMMITMENT

It is a cardinal tenet of democracy that no one shall be above the law. The President underscores her fidelity to this principle through the Office of the Solicitor General, whose work is to defend the actions and initiatives of the Executive against the challenge of the law. She affirms her loyalty to the Constitution, the supremacy of the law and the shared commitment of Court and President for the country’s good.

The Honorable Chief Justice and members of the Supreme Court, Solicitor General Francisco Chavez, Justices, Judges, Solicitors. Fellow Workers in Government, Ladies and Gentlemen.

The Office of the Solicitor General or OSG is one of the oldest agencies of government. It was part of the Bureau of Justice created in 1901. There is a tendency to confuse the work of the OSG with that of the Department of Justice. They are different; different enough to justify their distinct personalities.

The Department of Justice is the law-enforcing arm of the Executive. It helps the President fulfill her oath to see to the due execution of the laws. In the general enforcement of the laws, it is the job of the OSG to defend the Executive — the Presidency and all its agencies and officials.

It is a cardinal tenet of democracy that no one shall be above the law. We know this as the rule of law. It is the litmus test of civilized government. By it we learn which governments are despotic beneath their forms and which are truly the people’s.

The Executive since EDS A is under the law. Nothing underscores the fidelity of the Executive to this principle than the distinct office of the Solicitor General, whose work it is to defend the actions of the Executive against challenges from the law. If this were not so, if the Executive were above the law, there would be no need for a solicitor to plead the government’s case. Executive action would be the word of the law. After all, it holds the sword of the nation. A fact which accounts for the saying: “When the guns speak the laws fall silent.”

The past regime did not dispense with the formality of a Solicitor General. In fact, it elevated the OSG to a separate ministry. Three years later the functions of Solicitor General and Minister of Justice were combined in one man, who would be concurrently a provincial governor. It was as if to say that the Executive would never need to defend itself before the courts.

With the EDSA Revolution, we have returned to the old forms of unchanging justice. Once again, the OSG stands as a separate agency, with a distinct function: to defend the Executive under the laws. I signed Executive Order No. 300 separating the OSG from the Justice Ministry to formally recognize the submission of a democratic presidency to the supremacy of the law. It was a fitting gesture to make on the eve of my willing surrender of my extraordinary powers under the Freedom Constitution.

The separate existence of the OSG and, by that token, the submission of the presidency to the rule of law has not diminished one whit the effectiveness of the Executive.

The Office of Solicitor General has been held by eminent men of the law, Lorenzo Tanada, Roman Ozaeta, Ambrosio Padilla, among others. They have given lustre to our system of justice.

Our experience in the past three years proves that there is no contradiction between submission to the law and the attainment of progress. We have been ably represented by our counsel, the Solicitor General and his solicitors.

Thus, the Supreme Court has sustained Executive initiatives to bring justice to the farmer, and to recognize the distinctness of certain ethnic and cultural communities and regions.

Thus also, the courts have recognized the need for more effective law enforcement, without derogating from those fundamental rights, by sustaining the arrests without judicial warrants in certain cases. The Honorable Court has also given a more generous latitude to the Secretary of Labor in the settlement of labor disputes that affect the national interest.

The courts have restored to the national patrimony some 2,000 hectares of foreshore lands in Batangas, as well as 138 hectares of forest land in Quezon.

The executive prerogative of appointment without confirmation for certain offices was also recognized. We will, of course, continue to assert the rights of the Executive, and the Court, we are sure, will see to it that the balance of power in the state stands nicely poised in the interest of freedom.

Most recently, the Supreme Court has sustained our determination of the national interest with respect to the return of my predecessor. As the decision is the subject of a motion for reconsideration, I will just reiterate what I have said earlier.

The return of this man and his minions poses a greater threat to the democratic constitution he ironically invokes, than denying him entry would tend to subvert the fundamental law. I accept the view of the Honorable Court that this is a special case, involving not so much the denial of a right as the recognition of a malignant power, still able to destroy the tranquility of the state and the progress we have achieved. This recognition implies a corresponding duty on the part of the Executive to protect the state.

The case is a delicate one. I am the widow of a man who had knocked on every door for the right to return to his country. The irony of my position cannot have escaped you. This is a case that I understand full well from both sides. I know the threat that this man poses to the country I am sworn to protect, yet I know the loneliness of exile and the pain of being struck by death without setting foot on one’s native soil.

I take the Court’s decision as affirming the Executive determination on a matter of national interest, and equally as an affirmation of the Court’s unwavering commitment to the Bill of Rights. I comprehend the Court’s message that it will not relax its vigilant guard for the rights of men, even as it joins us in preserving our communities from the clear and present danger of the ambition of some to destabilize the government so that they may seize power.

We have one country and one Constitution, and owe an undivided loyalty to both.

I thank the Office of the Solicitor General, and the Solicitor General himself, for the good work they have done for my Office and for our country. I am deeply pleased and honored to be a part of this anniversary celebration. We have here affirmed an important principle: the supremacy of the law and the shared commitment of Court and President for the good of our country.

I thank you all and may God continue to bless our efforts.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].