A DAY OF THANKS

The first anniversary of the EDSA revolution is a day of thanks not only for the peacefulness with which it was achieved, but also for the fact that it was achieved by no other nation except the Philippines. The revolution restored democracy. The plebiscite provided the bases for that democracy, and it is now in the people’s hands to make that democracy work. For this purpose, President Aquino exhorts the people to unite once more and to dedicate themselves to three economic goals: alleviation of mass poverty, generation of employment and equitable sharing of the fruits of development.

I greet you all on our first celebration of People Power at EDSA.

This is a day of thanksgiving. Let us be thankful for our freedom. We were granted freedom, in a peaceful way.

This peaceful revolution is an extraordinary event and because of this, the Filipino people were admired by the whole world. Why are we, Filipinos, the ones who learned to use peaceful People Power and why can’t other countries emulate our People Power?

In my belief, the first People Power happened when Ninoy was killed on August 21, 1983. Why did thousands of citizens go to our house on Times Street? Most of them didn’t even know Ninoy. But they lined up for many hours, sometimes getting soaked in the rain and sometimes sweating under the heat of the sun. They were often hungry. But I didn’t hear anyone complain. In fact, many returned two or three times to see Ninoy’s bloody corpse again. And we all know that millions of Filipinos joined the burial of Ninoy. On that day, what was written on the posters was “Ninoy, you are not alone.” Because of Ninoy’s sacrifice, the unity of the Filipino people began. When Ninoy was buried, we saw that the uniquely beautiful Filipino traits were revived. The Filipino’s fear disappeared. Filipinos learned to sympathize again. Filipinos learned to love again. Filipinos learned to help each other again. And many Filipinos learned to pray and appeal to God again.

We did not achieve freedom immediately after Ninoy’s death. We still needed enough time to reach out to our brothers and sisters throughout the country and to ask them to join our effort to restore our freedom. We also needed many of us to volunteer to work hard and risk our lives to fight the dictator in rallies and demonstrations in the elections.

None of us thought of or planned the EDSA Revolution. My colleague Doy Laurel and I were in Cebu campaigning for the boycott movement on February 22.

I only learned that night that former Minister Juan Ponce Enrile and Gen. Fidel Ramos had broken away from Marcos. I still remember telling Johnny Ponce Enrile on the phone: Johnny, all I can offer you for the moment are my prayers. And he answered: that is what I need. I returned to Metro Manila from Cebu on Sunday afternoon, February 23.

My brother-in-law Butz Aquino was one of the first to go to Crame and Aguinaldo. Cardinal Sin appealed to the people to go to EDSA. June Keithley and others managed the radio to give us news. Thousands flocked to EDSA to support the military.

I went to EDSA and Ortigas on Monday afternoon to ask our countrymen to continue guarding EDSA. And on Tuesday morning at Club Filipino, my colleague Doy Laurel and I swore allegiance to our country as President and Vice President. We also asked the people not to go to Club Filipino and not to leave Camps Crame and Aguinaldo.

The People Power at EDSA is an event that will remain alive and fresh in our memory.

Today let us recall why People Power at EDSA was successful. I think it was successful mainly for the following reasons:

We have restored freedom in this country. Now we have to continue with the same People Power spirit of selflessness and dedication in order to achieve our other goals, our economic goals. Let us dedicate ourselves to these three economic goals: alleviation of mass poverty, generation of employment and equitable sharing of the fruits of development.

For one year, we have faced many trials in our desire to achieve our goals. And we did this under the principle of democracy. And with the help and guidance of our Lord God, we were able to defeat those who tried to destroy our principles.

The peaceful Revolution of February 1986 gave us democracy. The Plebiscite of February 1987, approved by 76% of the entire country, placed our democracy on a stable and secure footing.

We have been rewarded with freedom. Now it is in our hands how to use it for justice and development.

Our future lies in our hands. Our success lies in our unity. Like the past peaceful revolution, let us together fight those who wish to return exploitation to our country. Let us together build the freedom and democracy of the Philippine nation. Let us also protect it together for our peace and development.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].