Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Coalition for Transparency

[Delivered on June 19, 1989]

WEEDING OUT CORRUPTION

The President reacts to the critics of this government. She cites the consequences of the past administration’s thievery in the foreign debt, the poorly-planned and bankrupt industries and the corruption that was institutionalized in every local government, civilians and military. With the help of the Coalition and its proposals to combat corruption, together with a long and meaningful cooperation between those who share the same spirit of service to the nation, she hopes the country will be able to attain its goals.

I will go straight to the point.

Many of those who are gathered here represent the spirit that believed it had put hope into power in 1986. You are gathered again because disenchantment has started to set in. And you wonder if 1986 was worth it.

Whether it was worth it or not, whether our freedom with the uncertainty it has brought is better or worse than the certitude of slavery, I leave for you to answer. The answer to that question I will leave to you. No one can tell you to think anything but what your honest thoughts and feelings dictate. Yet I believe I owe it to you to personally answer some of my critics.

Being who they were under Marcos, it would insult the spirit of this assembly and the memory of the Philippine struggle for freedom, to answer them directly. But you, who care for this country, deserve to hear the answers.

You have heard it all: the incompetence and corruption of this government, the violation of human rights that were the core of its political commitments, the sorry state of the economy.

Where these critics get the face to criticize on these points is beyond me.

They ask why have we come only this far in our economic recovery? I will tell you why. Because it has taken this long to just get out of the black hole they dug in our pockets when they were in power.

When I came to power, we wrote off P130 billion in bad loans to those who held positions of power and conflicting interest under Marcos in just two financial institutions: PNB and DBP.

Let me give you a few examples:

CDCP alone, over P10 billion lost;

Cresta Monte companies, over P2 billion lost – and taken by those who wax so indignant over corruption today.

I directed the Tanodbayan to prosecute these cases and expressed the hope that the Sandiganbayan would give them first priority. It was imperative that Philippine creditworthiness be re-established by the timely prosecution of defaulters.

To date, not a single case has advanced beyond the preliminary stage. It is said that this too is the Executive’s fault.

No, it is not. If I intervened in the judicial process, I would be accused of political vendetta. I have therefore left the law to take its course alone and the courts to face the judgement of the people. To that end, I have directed the PNB, the DBP, and other government financial institutions to release the complete and detailed list of all behest loans so that the people will understand the pernicious delay in the prosecution of those who plundered our country. The time-honored and constitutional protection of judicial independence is no excuse for inaction.

It is said that we must stop using Marcos as an excuse for the Aquino administration’s shortcomings. No, we cannot. The truth has rights that political convenience and the opposition’s desire for national amnesia cannot compromise. Justice, not amnesia, is not what we had in mind when we called for reconciliation.

Marcos and his cronies are not just symbols of the past, but the reality of the present.

We live and suffer the consequences of their thievery in the foreign debt which we are striving to pay without starving our children and choking our progress;

We live and suffer the consequences of their thievery in the poorly-planned and bankrupt industries that we can neither dispose of nor re-active without losing more money;

We live and suffer the consequences of the corruption that Marcos institutionalized in every level of government, civilian and military;

We live and suffer the legacy of our loudest critics.

Those who finished off the Philippine economy are the loudest in decrying the slowness of the recovery even they cannot deny because they are cashing in on it.

With strength borrowed from the money they stole, they have turned their weapons to reopen the wounds they inflicted on the body of our country when they were in power – poverty, insurgency, and debt.

Some will say that it is not who says it that is important, but what he says. No, it is important. Because the minute we allow the guilty to instruct the innocent on morals, all morality loses its force.

My critics have assailed the so-called corruption of my government, but these critics, not I, have the hidden wealth to conceal.

My critics call my government weak, but it is they and not I who spend their waking moments weaving plot after failed plot to overturn the government.

Yet, despite the fact that I have never imprisoned any political opponent nor ordered any ward leader to manufacture falsified election returns, there has been greater stability in the land than in the last five years of a dictatorship that stopped at nothing, not even murder, to impose it.

What is galling is not what these critics say, but that they dare to say it. That thieves should preach honesty. That the untruthful should counsel truth. That the ignorant should lecture on policy.

And that those who connived in the plunder of our country should prescribe the manner of its revival in their hands.

The future will not take instruction from yesterday’s men. Nor shall we take the truth from those who made a good living from lying. The spring cannot rise higher, nor be cleaner than its source.

That said, unquestionably something has gone wrong. Corruption has returned, if not in the same scale certainly with equal shamelessness.

This cannot be. It is not our intention to appear honest and competent only in comparison to our enemies.

We must – and I will – wage a relentless effort to weed out the corruption that has resurfaced in our midst. The campaign must spare no one – neither friends who helped in the campaign nor the enemies who abetted the dictatorship; neither those who drop our names nor those who malign them. No one will be spared.

The war on graft and corruption must be matched by a war on slack and indecision in government, on those whose reckless conduct has called the honor of this government into question. No one is indispensable. I intend to address not only the people’s dismay over corruption but their despair over inaction. Too much depends on the success of this venture. For what is at stake here is the people’s continuing faith in democracy, in the force of moral values and law.

I am aware that the values we seek to bring about through democratic method and honest example cannot produce overnight results. Yet, let there be no mistake on the score: we shall not lose by inaction and default what we have painfully gained by the most deliberate and strenuous efforts:

What we have won, we shall keep. And on what we have accomplished, we shall build higher. Yet the manner of building cannot be like EDSA. Not in a flash, but by unerring steps shall we build the future.

I am heartened that this is also how the Coalition intends to proceed: To build a moral order stone by honest stone, by the living example of each and every person converted to its vision of morality in government, in the community, in the family, and in himself.

Breaking down the task to manageable portions is how I like to proceed. When I called for a boycott, I targetted only a softdrink to test whether the will and means to accomplish little was there, before I made commitments to do more.

In the same vein, the Coalition for Transparency looks first to the moral renewal of its individual members before calling for the reformation of society and government. Before a man can preach, he must ask himself has he paid his correct taxes. Before a man can inveigh against influence-peddling, he must consider if he does not have a pending favor with any public official. Before a man demands transparency, he must be certain that he too can stand without fear in the light.

As a first step, I target the customs and importation. We made significant progress in facilitating exports, but the bottleneck in importation remains and smuggling has become so rampant that the labor-intensive textile industry’s very survival is in question.

First let me make it clear to quell all speculation. Customs Commissioner Mison is staying and has my full backing in any measures he cares to take, particularly those he has proposed to the Coalition, such as the non-stop processing in the release of shipments; and the organization of the Customs-Industry Consultative Council to bring in the private sector in the formulation of Customs policies and procedures.

I look forward to receiving specific proposals from the Coalition on the means to combat corruption. This meeting heralds, I hope, a long and meaningful cooperation between those who share the same spirit of service to the nation.

The path you and I shall take will not be easy. Friends will be lost and enemies will grow desperate. The reward for our efforts will not be praise but more villification from those who see no place in our tomorrow.

Our reward must come mainly from each other: in the confidence of our common sincerity, in the gradual attainment of our goals, and in the spirit of a shared enterprise for the common good such as we have not enjoyed since EDSA. Let the spirit of service return. The campaign against corruption will succeed only when society, moved to its moral core, will no longer have anything to do with it, and when wealth by itself can no longer buy our respect or a welcome in our homes. It is here, in this fundamental task, that you have the major role to play. With God’s help we can only prevail.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].