JUSTICE FOR EVERY FILIPINO

The 1987 Constitution gave the Judiciary the power and the responsibility to protect democracy by giving justice to every Filipino. President Aquino calls for a partnership with the Supreme Court in rebuilding the physical infrastructure of the justice system in the country. After having restored democracy, the government should now attend to the needs of improving the practical administration of justice so that the people can work in freedom for progress and with a reasonable expectation of a just and lasting peace.

When this conference ends, you will have said the last word in a long time on constitutionalism and justice.

I want to take this same occasion to say the first word on the practical administration of justice, to the improvement of which this Government now commits itself fully.

Justice, it has been written, is the first virtue of social institutions. Laws, however well drafted and well-meaning, are nothing unless they do justice to every man in the ordinary course of his life. That is my concern and my duty. For I am charged as President with the faithful execution of the laws so that every Filipino gets his due.

I stand here honored by the presence of outstanding men and women of the law, who contributed greatly to the understanding of the law. My own contributions to the field have been modest: 318 laws and the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines, in the year and a half of my extraordinary powers. These laws range from the renovation of the apparatus of State to the rectification of old injustices – in general establishing the framework and climate wherein our people can work in freedom for progress, and with a reasonable expectation of a just and lasting peace.

But the promulgation of salutary laws alone establishes merely the standards of right and justice. It is men and institutions that must realize them. In that respect, we have also made some progress. But how much progress remains to be studied. We must measure our progress in the daily administration of ordinary justice both by the standards of a reborn Nation’s high expectations, and by the sad conditions of the past from which we freed ourselves.

A year before the Revolution, a handful of brave and honest men prepared a study on the state of the justice system in the Philippines. Not just the system that legitimized an unconstitutional dictatorship, but the system that one expected to give justice, at least, to the ordinary man in his ordinary concerns as a trade-off for the liberty he had lost.

The group of Ricardo J. Romulo produced a White Paper outlining the faults of that system and proposing measures for its reform. It saw a system that was, in its words, “understaffed, underpaid, and under attack on grounds of lack of integrity, efficiency and competence.” A system where appointments waited on corrupt loyalties and motivations, where merit took a back seat to connections. A judicial system at the mercy of the Purse and the Sword – of theLegislative power and the Executive power – united in one I hand, for its subsistence. And finally a judicial system that I took on the moral tone of the society it served, a society that j had lowered its moral standards to the level of its fears and j its greed. Fear of the dictatorship, and greed for its favors.

“Once a judge bends the law to please those in positions of power, soon enough he will bend the law to suit himself or whomsoever he may wish to please.” The cure was clear, the same cure for the sickness of the nation: a sense of high purpose, a feeling of security to foster the habit of independence, and a sense of pride in the nobility of the calling, which is no less than the care and giving of justice to everyman.

The Revolution cleared the path to the reforms you sought. Men and women of honor were exalted in the Judiciary, and the corrupt were removed. Laws and practices that conferred privilege to a few, rather than parity on all, were abolished.

The Constitutional Commission I appointed took it from there, and laid the foundation for a system of justice that could do justice if it had the will.

The Commission came up with a constitution that established the independence of the Judiciary by securing the tenure of its judges and the certainty of its budget.

It protected its integrity by removing the selection of judges from the grip of politicians and by limiting the discretion of the appointing power.

It provided measures to assure the relevance of the Judiciary to the demands of Philippine justice by fixing deadlines for the resolution of cases even for the Supreme Court. For justice delayed, is not justice denied, but justice despised and finally despaired of — the germ of destruction of any government or order of society.

In a backhanded tribute to the tragic past when the Judiciary took refuge in dubious doctrine to escape its duty to protect democracy, the Constitution gave it the power — and therefore the responsibility — to call any branch of government to account for abuse of discretion.

Nearly everything that is required has been provided to give justice to everyman, given the will on the part of our judges.

My own responsibilities are not over. Justice in our country today, for all the infusion of new blood and integrity we have made, wears the sad aspect of its past neglect. Our courts are shanties, our law libraries are few and scanty, records are lost or improperly kept, and delay and ignorance still distinguish the Philippine brand of justice.

Here I offer a partnership with the Supreme Court in whom the administration of the courts is now lodged. We need a blueprint for rebuilding the physical infrastructure of the justice system in our country. The aspect of moral and intellectual improvement I leave to you. It would not be proper for the Executive to trench upon the authority to discipline and upgrade the courts. But the rest is our common duty.

I have instructed the Justice Secretary and the Secretary of the Budget to discuss with the Supreme Court the creation of a joint Executive-Judiciary Committee that will prepare an infrastructure plan for the courts. A plan that can fit in with the public works programs we are implementing to generate quick employment.

We have built democracy a worthy house. It is time we attended to the needs of justice.

The work of recovery will still be long and hard; the damage we inherited was that great. There can be no shortcuts. No instant solutions. No manna from heaven, no Marshall plan, mini or maxi. We shall rise only as high as our feet will take us up the steps that we must build with our own hands. Yet, we can make sure that tired as we shall be at the end of the day, no rankling sense of injustice will disturb the equanimity of our souls, the peace of our homes, and the tranquility of our society. It is for this peace that the Constitution would have us work for a just and humane society.

I wish you success in your conference. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library