Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights

[Delivered at the New York Westin Hotel, New York, New York, September 21, 1986]

HUMAN RIGHTS FOR ALL

The rule of law is the only human order. Its perversion, going by the name of “law and order” or “national security,” should fool no one except those willing to be fooled. To think of human rights at all, to be concerned about them, should be to think universally of human rights for all.

Exactly 14 years ago to the day, my predecessor proclaimed martial law, jailed my husband, deprived us all of our freedom and made us conscious of what human rights were all about.

It seems only fitting then that I should begin by paying tribute to some of those who helped us regain our freedoms.

The Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, was for many years, supportive of our struggle. In the dark years of the dictatorship, these lawyers would go to the Philippines to offer assistance and good cheer to the human rights movement there. It is one of several organizations world-wide which contributed to our liberation. These groups enabled the world to have a window on the gross violation of human rights in my country.

To speak of human rights to those whose Declaration of Independence holds the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness as unalienable, may be presumptuous as it is unnecessary. But, what is familiar is taken for granted, like breathing, until it is taken away. Then the heart stops. Then it is realized too late that one cannot live without it.

My late husband used to say, in moments of introspection, that one reason we have to be grateful for martial law is that, by it, we came to appreciate our cherished freedoms.

On August 21, 1983, the forces of evil violated my husband’s human right to life, as well as his right to return to live in his homeland. But the soil watered by the blood of our numerous martyrs – my husband was only one of them – soon reaped for us the blessing of freedom.

The spectre of “salvaging;” and disappearances, we hope, will soon be gone completely. We are committed to respect the right to human dignity, the right not to be tortured, the right not to be held incommunicado, of everyone.

We likewise guarantee the basic human right to take part in the political process, by way of free speech, free assembly, voting and being voted for.

Our government sponsors a liberal atmosphere. Here, you may have three or four newspapers. We have about two dozen back home.

I am confident that the whole world learned something from our peaceful revolution, a vindication of the principle that one can only continue to govern with the consent of the governed.

My predecessor arbitrarily imprisoned tens of thousands without charges, for merely opposing or criticizing him. For my part I have not caused to be arrested even a single person for merely espousing dissenting or critical views, no matter how intemperate or vulgar.

Where my predecessor thrived on secrecy, I have an open presidency. If I have taken steps that might seem to some remarkable, kindly note that I could not have just taken over as if the transition from a dictatorship to a democracy were the most ordinary, routinary thing in the world.

True, democracy is subject to pressure by all sorts of interests, some enlightened; many, if not most, grossly not. Lobbies are a democratic institution. In my country the gap between the rich, who are not many, and the poor, who are not few, remains, and it is the purpose of the new government to close or at least narrow it. It cannot be done in a few months or even years, but surely not never! In any case dictatorship cannot do the job at all. Terror supports greed.

The record of our government so far is mixed, given the complexity of the problems we inherited. Some things are however totally within our control without having to be bothered by objective conditions at home and abroad. Setting a high standard of public morality depends on us. Corruption at the highest levels permeated the previous regime. We have reversed this.

The vast majority of our people reject insurgency and have kept faith with the democratic principle. As President of the Philippines, however, I am the leader of all Filipinos. Therefore, I am obligated, while trying to eliminate the insurgency, to be careful about how rebels as human beings should be treated.

As has been said, one does not defend democracy by totalitarian means. And only last September 5, our Supreme Court once more cautioned the authorities against committing human rights abuses in its campaign against rebellion and subversion, saying that these do not help in solving the problem.

“A cavalier attitude towards constitutional liberties and protections,” the court said, “will only fan the increase of subversive activities, instead of containing and suppressing them.”

This has created some problems and tensions, but this too we will solve, in our own time and in our way.

The rule of law – not of one man, junta or party – is the only human order. Its perversion, going by the name of “law and order” or “national security,” should fool no one except those willing and eager to be fooled, perhaps expecting to profit from the cruel masquerade.

Democracy is the worst form of government except all others, as Churchill put it. We live as human beings, not as objects to be manipulated at another’s whim. We are subject only to impersonal law. We are not subjects but persons of inherent worth. But we may not enjoy this status all by ourselves. No man is an island, to quote John Donne. We are involved in mankind.

To think of human rights at all, to be concerned about them, should be to think universally, of human rights for all. I need not quote Donne again about the tolling of the bell. You know for whom it tolls.

Do continue your efforts then until your kind of human rights lawyering becomes almost unnecessary. But today, the struggle for human rights is far from over. A lot remains to be done all over the world.

Our Constitutional Commission now in session has an admirable Bill of Rights, containing lessons distilled from the bitter crucible of Martial Law. And we say, “never again.”

This we intend to insure with the help of all our golden friends like the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.

If I may be permitted, I would also like to take this opportunity to acknoweldge at the same time the splendid, continuing efforts of other groups and individuals who are helping us extricate ourselves from the mess we inherited.

In my first Executive Order, after the February Revolution, I created the Presidential Commission on Good Government. I tasked it with recovering the enormous wealth that had been stolen and concealed, not only in the Philippines but in the other countries of the world, including the United States and Switzerland. In this country, where a good portion of the ill-gotten wealth is located, we needed – and fortunately obtained – the pro bono services of distinguished lawyers connected with the Center for Constitutional Rights. They represent us with skill and vigor in various courts, without thought of material reward. In addition, we obtained the counselling service of an eminent group of international law experts associated with the best law schools and law firms in this country. These men and women of the law have sent a clear message everywhere: no dictator may pillage his country and retire unchallenged on the spoils of his corruption.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].