Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On IFW in Dallas

[Delivered on November 11, 1989]

A TEST OF WILL

Eleanor Roosevelt said, “What must be done, will be done”. This describes how Corazon Aquino approached the challenges that confronted her: running for the presidency against a corrupt political machinery and running a country beset with debt, insurgency, and a bankrupt economy. Nevertheless, under the country’s first woman president, the nation’s economy recovered dramatically and democratic institutions were established proving that “what must be done, will be done.”

Good morning. I’m Cory Aquino and I am very happy to be here today among people who have shown an interest in the Philippines. There is a great deal to talk about the Philippines, for many things have happened there. So we should get down to it immediately.

Eleanor Roosevelt said, “What must be done, will be done”. She was right. Necessity is the mother of action. As you know, I was “just a housewife”. What has set me apart now are the extraordinary challenges that fate threw in my path. They might have come to you as well.

Let us take one of them: the challenge of running for the Presidency. This is daunting enough in a free country, like the United States. Imagine how the difficulties are compounded when the election is intended to be a fraud, and you must expect to be cheated and to lose with a good grace – even if the majority of the people had voted for you.

This was the challenge I faced: the challenge of an unfair and dirty election. I took up the challenge because the election, despite the foregone conclusion of a fraudulent count, could make the first crack in the hitherto solid wall of the dictatorship.

If we took part in the election perhaps the breach would even widen and our people could walk through it to freedom.

The chances for this were small. But taking part in the elections was something that had to be done.

How did I approach the campaign? I campaigned for votes up and down the country, as though the votes would be honestly counted.

Some of my followers asked what was the point if we would be cheated, anyway. I said cheating in the election was the job of the dictator; getting the votes, even if they were ultimately counted only in the hearts of the people, was mine.

I figured before I worried about getting votes honestly counted, I had better make sure the people had voted for me. They say this is how a woman looks at things. First, to get done what can be done, and then to worry about those that defy execution.

As a result I got the votes. As expected, the dictator proceeded to cheat me in the count. The margin must have been so big that the cheating had to be massive, so much so that the official talliers walked out in disgust — straight into the arms of visiting US Senators and observers. That was the beginning of the end.

I knew that I had won, and so, around midnight of election day, before he could make his own announcement, I proclaimed my victory. The dictator was stunned. He spent the following days explaining that, No, it was he who had won. He had been put on the defensive.

What followed is history, in the images that now represent People Power: the people massing all over the country to protest the fraudulent count, my call for civil disobedience, and the rising of the military to join in the national outrage, and the flight of the dictator. I had become President.

The next problem was my leadership. Other people had problems with it. I was suddenly in charge of a whole country like a housewife having the whole house to herself to clean. But it was a bit more complicated. Some members of the military wanted to share my duties as housewife or caretaker of the country. This was, of course, out of the question. They didn’t look the part, and only I had been elected President.

They tried to crash into the house by staging five coups. Each of them was foiled; the last was crushed completely.

Some people were unhappy at the way I ran things. For instance, before I did something that affected many people, I would ask them first what they thought of it. This was regarded as a lack of leadership qualities. I thought it was only good manners, as well as the best way to educate the people on how to govern themselves and become a true democracy.

When a decision was called for, I let time pass before deciding. This was called indecisiveness. Others said it was the fickleness one would expect. I thought it was merely predicating action on careful thought. I think they wanted a cavalry officer and not a President because people kept urging me to rush headlong into this or that. I am surprised at the premium men put on recklessness, which probably explains why a woman finally became the president of the Philippines and why women run for great cities in Texas.

As you know, when you move into an old house, there are always things left by the last owner that you can’t abide; a grotesque planter, for example.

What I found were the friends of the previous tenant — the people who had helped him rob the country blind. I also found a communist rebellion in full swing, and a Muslim secessionist movement that wanted me to govern a house divided.

I also found a pile of unpaid bills, amounting to about $26 billion – our foreign debt. What would I do about these things?

The accomplices in the national theft have been charged in court. The communists, I offered a chance to lay down their arms and start life anew in a free country. And the Muslims I promised a measure of autonomy — but always within one, unified state. I would not be the President to preside over the dismemberment of my country.

The communists rejected the offer; so I called out the armed forces. My Muslim brothers were more reasonable and said they would give the autonomy provisions of a new constitution a chance to work before they did anything more.

The foreign debt I resumed paying because I did not want the lights and the water to be cut off, and the grocer to refuse me credit. In my opinion, I needed these things not only to pay the debt but also to improve the house and the lives of the people who live in it. I then proceeded to put the house in order.

It took three years to put things back in place. This wasn’t bad considering the 14 years that were spent taking it apart.

I also called in the night watchman and thanked him for keeping the house secure, but I admonished him not to beat up people who walked by the house merely on suspicion of wrongdoing. I told him firmly that I would not tolerate his rowdy behavior. Thenceforth, he himself would have to respect the laws he was fighting to uphold. The Armed Forces now are a force of the people, working for their security — where once they had been their oppressors.

My detractors said that I had no experience, so how could I possibly do the job of President. That job was getting done, and done rather well. So who was doing it, if not myself? I asked. Anybody else here President? The ones who raised this issue of inexperience had unquestionably the longest experience of government — they had been in office during the 20 years the country was run to the ground.

There is just no pleasing some people. But this, as you and I know, should never stand in the way of getting the chores done.

This simple narrative is how men think women do their jobs. We have tried to humor them by telling the story of a great national revival in the language they think we speak.

But you and I know that the problems of running houses, businesses, and countries, which increasingly are in the hands of women, are not simple. But that if anyone can cope with them, it would be us. Let me continue the story.

This therefore was the situation in which I found the country in 1986. It would need enormous resources to get it back on its feet. In the previous two years we had negative growth rates. The economy had contracted 10 percent. We had a foreign debt which was not represented by productive, paying assets because most of the debt had quite simply been stolen or wasted. As a result, nearly half the national budget has had to go to debt service.

Yet, with myriad other economic problems, including mass poverty that embraced 60% of the population, we turned the economy around in just one year, and by the second year were posting a respectable growth rate. We reduced the incidence of poverty by 10%.

In the international community, we were respected because, while we had good reasons not to, we have been faithfully paying the debt.

In that same year, we had a new constitution ratified. I reestablished all the democratic institutions and practices the dictatorship destroyed. And held the freest and most widely participated in elections of any modern Western democracy. We had voter turnouts of 70%. I believe this has not been seen anywhere else in perhaps a century. The Filipinos took to democracy like ducks to water.

These then were our accomplishments: an economy firmly on the road to recovery and sustained growth, and a fully established democracy. We had also stemmed the communist tide, had captured most of the insurgent leaders, and had an army fighting with a sense of moral purpose and therefore with a sharper fighting edge.

The Philippines has something even more valuable than its economic and political gains. It enjoys the respect of nations and of good men and women throughout the world. It is a voice of morality and reason in the affairs of the world because of the compassionate way in which it staged a revolution. It showed the way that is now being taken by dominated nations throughout the world — the path of non-violent protest and peaceful resistance.

I do not know how much of the credit for this remarkable political invention should go to the Filipino character or to the dominant presence of women, especially nuns, in the Philippine revolution. But compassion had won the day for us and would thenceforth constitute the hallmark of the Filipino.

I will end with that. I have been away from my country for over a week now and I should be getting back. Like all women, I plan for the future but work like there is no tomorrow. And there is a lot of work to be done today.

I want to thank you for the tremendous reception that you and the city of Dallas have given me. I hope you will visit my country. It doesn’t have the wealth of Texas but it has the charm of its people that comes out especially with visiting friends.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].