COMMUNICATION FOR COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

The EDSA revolution was nurtured right from its inception by communication in the most imaginative and resourceful manner. There is one other transcendental factor that spelled its victory – the Filipino’s faith in the Almighty. Communication has to be participatory, liberating and capable of developing culture for it to be effective and meaningful.

I am pleased to welcome you all to my country, to share my thoughts with you and to learn from you about communication the Christian way.

I am doubly pleased that you have chosen the Philippines as your conference’s venue, in recognition of my country’s contribution to communication. This occasion gives me another chance to thank communications specialists like you, whose effective use of media helped ensure our victory in the 1986 EDSA Revolution.

We in the Philippines believe that the EDSA Revolution is the Filipino people’s best gift to the world. It was swift: all of four days; it was bloodless; and it was without precedence in modern times. As it won for us our freedom and dignity, it also showed the whole world how a nation’s courage may be expressed without bloodletting. In many parts of the globe, it has been studied and emulated with varying degrees of success.

Some say that EDSA was the first revolution that utilized xerography – with reference to the suppression of media some years before it, to the lies that clogged our information channels then, and to the surreptitious photocopying of the truth by those concerned that the truth should out. It should not be forgotten that we also used less modern and rather traditional ways of reaching out to kindred minds.

The revolution also had its seeds in small group meetings where people exchanged information and where they later discovered other small meetings that sought the information they had. It was a pooling in of truths. In so desiring, the people discovered that non-traditional forms of communicating – through modern technology or other non-formal communication channels – could work for them. Right from its inception, our revolution was nurtured by communication.

Without diminishing the great contribution of modern technology to our cause, there is one other transcendental factor that spelled our victory – the Filipino’s faith in the Almighty. Without that faith, our revolution would not have succeeded.

It was our people’s faith that gave the church the moral authority to rally them, unarmed, to protect our rebel soldiers. Faith it was, too, that emboldened our people to kneel down in front of rushing tanks. And it was that very same faith that stopped misguided soldiers in their tracks when they found themselves confronted with civilians armed only with flowers, rosaries and statues of saints.

Our revolution, won by the deepest faith, was a miracle ably supported by Christian communicators specially the radio broadcasters, who played a key role in mobilizing the people, getting them to stay in their posts, spontaneously organizing them to follow strategies, and keeping their faith alive in the midst of danger. Faith, through people power, overcame the dictator’s firepower even as we recognize that EDSA was also a victory of Christian communication.

I am happy to note that your theme here is “Communication for Community”. And that you have emphasized the development of non-formal modes of communicating. I fully agree with you that the purpose of communication is to develop community. For we must freely communicate so that we can understand each other. We must understand each other for us to commune, to live together in harmony. And when traditional or formal means cease to provide us with capable channels, we should not be afraid to deviate, to experiment, in the spirit of effective communication.

Perhaps, you and I differ in our ultimate ends. Yours is to prepare souls for the Kingdom hereafter: mine is to win hearts and minds to attain peace and progress for the country. But I am not less godly for my mission, neither are you less patriotic for yours.

Your goals and mine are not incongruent. The peace I am working for is the same peace you strive to bring to men. We are one in pursuit of freedom and truth in this world; and, you and I use the same God-given tool – communication – to achieve our mission.

It is well that you have included in your sub-themes other principles of Christian communication that the EDSA Revolution had proven true. First, that communication is participatory. For real communication is a two-way process. A message is sent, and a response should be received. True communication necessitates freedom of expression. Where there is suppression, where responses are muzzled by fear, only a monologue by the oppressor can be realized. Circumstances in this country before the EDSA Revolution had proven this right.

The second is that communication liberates. Add to this the tenet that only truth can stand all tests. The truth liberates when it is communicated. EDSA has demonstrated that there is no true communication in an atmosphere of oppression, just as there can be no real freedom where there is no freedom of expression. But where conflicts arise, you may ask, whose freedom should it be? You will certainly agree with me that it must not be the freedom only of a chosen few. It must be the freedom of the majority. That is why you and I are all supporters of democracy.

The third is that communication develops cultures. This is a fact proven everyday throughout the world, through mass media and even through inter-personal exchanges. As Thomas Mann said – “Speech is civilization . . . It is silence that isolates.”

Almost four years after the miracle of EDSA, we in the Philippines are still haunted by the shadows that were with us for so long that they have almost become real to some. Shadows of persecution. Shadows of extravagant living. Of one-upmanship, of greed for power and wealth, of oppression. We are still struggling to rid ourselves of the Hydra-headed past. But we can now hope, for EDSA has abolished the deceit and the suppression that we were once forced to embrace. Each Filipino can now stand tall, confident in the knowledge that we are free once more. With the structures of democracy in place, we truly believe that progress is within reach.

May I, therefore, thank the communicators once more for boosting our courage, for leading the way out of our darkest night that preceded the dawn. On behalf of my countrymen, let me commit my country once again to the same ideals you espouse – freedom, truth and peace. And to the use of this God-sent talent of man – the ability to communicate – to seek no less than the truth.

Long live us all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].