Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the Rotary International Conference

[Delivered at the Philippine International Convention Center, April 23, 1987]

ALL SET FOR RECOVERY AND GROWTH

The President calls on the Rotary to participate in the economic recovery of the country, particularly the alleviation of poverty, the generation of productive employment, the promotion of equity and social justice, and the attainment of sustainable growth. With its vast reach and community service orientation, the Rotary is in an ideal position to keep the Government accountable to the people.

I am pleased to extend, on behalf of the Government, our sincerest appreciation to Rotary International for holding this three-day conference for development in the Philippines.

One of the pleasures that we in this Government enjoy is the enthusiastic – not to say overwhelming – reponse we have been getting to our call for deeper and wider involvement in the development process. Still. I find it specially gratifying that Rotary has likewise answered that call.

We have successfully hurdled many of the difficulties that beset us when we took power; yet our successes merely point up the great deal more that remains to be done.

When we set out last year, there was no question in our minds that our first task was the full restoration of democracy and an earnest start of our economic recovery. Today, just over a year later, we can collectively look back with pride at what we have accomplished. Because we are a democracy, the enemies of democracy can still criticize but there is no question they have been roundly beaten. All but one of the necessary institutions of democracy have been reestablished. In June, Congress will convene, thereby completing the circle of our country’s great political accomplishments. The political stage has been set for the recovery that is already beginning.

We have managed not only to keep the economy afloat but have accomplished what few had realistically thought possible: an economic turnaround. The stage has been set for sustainable growth, if only the debt problem will not send it crashing to its foundations. We need little more than look around us to see the signs of an economy that is finally beginning to take off.

Still, as I have said, our accomplishments merely underscore the great task that remains undone: giving a decent life to all Filipinos.

When we drew up our economic agenda for the next six years, we all agreed that it would focus on the following: first, the alleviation of poverty; second, the generation of productive employment; third, the promotion of equity and social justice; and, finally, the attainment of sustainable growth.

The economic crisis of 1983 hit the poor the hardest. In 1985, real per capita income was set back a full decade to 1975 levels. Real per capita consumption naturally fell. The incidence of malnutrition rose significantly, as did mortality and morbidity. In 1985, 60 percent of all Filipino families were officially considered as struggling below the poverty line.

This is not the kind of statistic that any country would like to lay claim to. But even more appalling is the fact that poverty was greatest in the rural areas, traditionally the refuge from urban blight. In the countryside, where the vast majority of our people live, 64 percent of all families live below the poverty line. For that reason, we have embarked on a rural-based development strategy. In the last analysis, our administration will not be judged by our people in terms of GNP increases or some such indicator, but by how far we have improved their living conditions.

This is why I am particularly gratified to note that this conference has been given a decidedly community service orientation. Let me assure you that there will be no lack of opportunities for such service.

While it is not my intention to preempt your discussions these next three days, there are quite a few areas of cooperation that come readily to mind.

We have, for instance, a project to provide financing to small enterprises, which are basically family business concerns. The idea is to extend to these enterprises financing on liberal terms through volunteer organizations that will monitor the loans.

With your extensive network, you are in an ideal position to keep this Government accountable to the people. I ask you to monitor public works projects throughout the country. Some Rotary clubs are doing this already with our Community Employment Development Program. As a result of this private sector monitoring, we have had a very high rate of timely completion of our projects.

Aside from monitoring, I ask you to help us identify projects relevant to the needs of your communities. No one can know those needs, nor how to meet them, better than yourselves. You can also serve as two-way information channels, helping Government understand the problems, needs and views of your communities, and helping bring Government’s programs to the people.

It is my hope that this gathering will forge a lasting and productive partnership between Rotary and the Government. As I said earlier, there is so much that remains to be done. Our partnership should get it done better and faster.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].