Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the elected leaders of the Local Government

[Delivered at the Philippine International Convention Center, March 4, 1988]

A BLUEPRINT FOR ECONOMIC RECOVERY

President Aquino urges all the elected local leaders to work together to give peace and justice a chance to reign. She stresses the institution of the following reforms to help in the national and local government efforts: CORD system, restructuring the RDC, creation of the LDCs. The kind of government we give turns on the kind of people we are.

First, may I welcome you all as partners with me in the task of government. Your election completed the structure of democracy. Everything that needed to be done to bring government to the people, and people to the government has been done. Except for the barangays, we shall have no more elections until 1992.

Now, let’s get down to business.

With the local elections, the national and local governments lost the last excuse for shortcomings and failures.

Now you have the mandate, now you have the authority, and you have my full backing. What you no longer have is any excuse for not delivering on the priorities that we have set:

The first and the most important, is law and order throughout the land. This calls for the curbing of criminality, and the destruction of the rightist and leftists elements in our society that are bent on the overthrow of our government and our democracy.

It means hunting down fascist killers and leftist terrorists, breaking up the gambling syndicates, and flushing out and shutting down the vice-dens.

It means a concerted and unrelenting military campaign against the fountainhead of Communist influence and power: the New People’s Army.

It means, simultaneously, the prompt and efficient delivery of the basic services for which governments are constituted on this earth and from which they derive the only reason for their expensive existence.

It means securing the property of our people, their ways of livelihood, their enterprises, their savings, their investments in the future of their children.

Needless to say, it means securing their lives. It means dealing punishment, after due process, to those who harm them or threaten their democracy, even to those who did not give due process to their victims.

It means justice for all, whatever the cost. No one above the law. One law above all. No excuses and no delays. That is why a few weeks ago, I chose to pay tribute to Constitutionalism not by uttering generalities, but by modestly ordering the improvement of the facilities and personnel by which the Constitution does justice to the people.

That is our first priority. Order. Law. Justice. Order according to the laws, the laws enforced in the spirit of justice. And in the hope that the vision for which the best of our race had died in the dark years of the dictatorship will be realized in our lifetimes: a just and humane society.

The second priority is economic development. The national government’s blueprint for recovery is being implemented. Its complete implementation, not to say success, depends on government’s ability to reach all Filipinos and make a difference in their lives. Beyond a certain point, the national government must depend on local governments to supplement its reach and increase its effective assistance and support to the varied efforts of our people to improve the economy and well-being of their families and communities.

The excuse before was that the OICs were not elected, were therefore not believed, and, naturally, were not being followed. Yet Bitay Lacson showed that you need not wait for an election to show how good a local chief executive can be.

The priority of economic development means in the plainest terms: improving the climate so that business may thrive, rather than be stifled. It means taking up your share of governmental responsibility in caring for the poor and helpless, encouraging industry and commerce rather than shaking it down, and protecting property rather than depleting it by improvident measures of taxation and needless expense. It means giving the people the best and most immediate example of the selflessness and total dedication of the true public servant. Before the people see us, who are in the national government, they feel the impact of your actions, good or bad.

We set great store by the role of local governments for we have always said that only the people can show us the right path and the right pace to certain recovery. And no one is better placed than the local governments to directly tap the energy and commitment of the people. To that end, we have instituted the following reforms that should facilitate the coordination of national and local government efforts:

Realizing that each region, not to say each province, has problems and potentialities for success that are peculiar to itself, I have set up the CORD system, or Cabinet Officer for Regional Development. I have appointed one Cabinet member to represent me in each of the 14 regions.

We have restructured the Regional Development Councils, which is meant to be the primary organization for regional progress, to give a more prominent role to local government. And we have created the Local Development Councils over whose undertakings you shall preside.

With these structures in place, we should have a wide channel for two-way traffic in ideas and feedback, and thereby enabling us to refine our programs and implement them better.

Improving the medium of communication between people and government is just the first part. Equally important is the clarity of government programs and directives. Unless local governments know what the national government offers, the best use of government resources cannot be attained.

The draft of a new Local Government Code requires all our departments and agencies to work out with the local governments comprehensive and integrated standards and guidelines for regular and recurring transactions between the national and local governments. The Departments and Agencies must inform the local governments of the central funds and services available to them. Within the Executive Branch itself, arrangements have been made for greater coordination among the various departments in order to bring services and assistance more efficiently to local governments and communities.

We are working on decentralizing the authority and functions of the Executive Departments to parallel the move towards the general decentralization of government which seems to be the spirit of the new Constitution. Thus, Departmental field units are now run by Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries, who have greater discretion and fiscal autonomy than ever before. Leading the pack of decentralizing agencies is the Department of Agriculture.

The autonomy of local governments must equally be reinforced. In the plainest terms, that means money: more funds and other resources for local governments. The Departments of Budget and Management, Finance, and Local Governments, in coordination with the Civil Service Commission, have been instructed to rationalize the salaries of local government officials to raise morale and improve performance. At this time, I am directing the Department of Budget and Management and Local Governments to review and recommend more realistic compensation scales and allowances for local government officials.

We are likewise working on a scheme to enable you to tap national funds more easily for your own programs. I shall request the Congress to increase the amounts of national assistance to local government units that can be released directly to local governments from P50,000 currently to P200,000. We are working towards a more equitable sharing with local governments of the proceeds and benefits from the exploitation of natural resources in their vicinities.

We are preparing a scheme to increase internal revenue allotments for local governments, based on their performance, particularly with regard to the efficiency and honesty of their current tax collection efforts under existing laws. The theory is, if local tax collectors cannot collect the right taxes under the old laws, there is no reason to believe they will do better under new ones. The key in this area is honesty.

We aim to relax the statutory contributions of local governments to the various agencies and programs of the national government.

In the first and most important task of local government, which is peace and order, I have approved the reorganization and strengthening of the Peace and Order Councils from the national to the local level so that we can bring to bear on the problems of criminality and insurgency the combined power of government and people.

I take this aspect very seriously, and will regard as critical to continued cooperation between the national and local governments the spotlessness of the local officials’ records, as well as their reputation for honesty and obedience to the laws of morals of our society. Without your good example, the fight against crime and insurgency will fail.

In areas of particular ethnic and cultural uniqueness, we have made great progress in laying the groundwork for their eventual genuine autonomy within the framework of the Constitution. The Regional Consultative Council members are being selected to help the Congress draft the organic acts giving and defining the autonomy of the Cordillera and Muslim regions.

These and other measures too many to detail here, will require legislation, such as a new Local Government Code, a new Local Tax Code, the organic laws of the autonomous regions, amendments to laws on revenue allotments and statutory contributions by local governments, and a law creating the Philippine National Police and defining the proper role of local executives in law enforcement.

Let me end on the dominant note of this address: in the end, the kind of government we give turns on the kind of people we are: if we are dishonest, it will be dishonest government. If incompetent, that will show in the economic and social regression of our communities and of our country as a whole. We rule effectively only by example.

The advice I give you is not a counsel of perfection. We are honored to have among us today former OICs who have shown that sincere and uncompromising public service need not spell electoral defeat. On the contrary. That this political pro: given the times, and the changes that have taken place in our people, the only way to re-election is not through empty image-making but through good government.

Let us work together. Not against each other. Our people deserve the best. Let us give them our best.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].