Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Philippine Medical Association

[Delivered at the Philippine Plaza Hotel, May 21, 1987]

PATIENTS DESERVE THE BEST CARE — AT THE LEAST COST

President Aquino calls on physicians to take initiative in making the national drug policy a success. She notes that the doctor is the key to the dispensation of quality, safe, effective and reasonably priced drugs. Doctors will truly serve their patients by doing their best to give them the best care at the least cost. To do this, they must first liberate themselves from pharmaceutical propaganda and rely on their informed judgment as true medical scientists.

Fellow physicians,

I use that greeting deliberately because the principal tasks of my government appear to be that of healing: of binding a nation’s wounds, of effecting its recovery, of restoring the strength and integrity of its body and spirit, so it can achieve the many things that we believe it to be capable of.

In likening the Government to a physician, I try to honor and give due recognition to our native capacity to be all we want to be. I am really saying that what we need is already in us and that we need not wait on the uncertain generosity of outsiders. To honor the work we do by likening it to the restorative work of a physician is also an affirmation of our faith in the Filipino.

Before continuing, let me first congratulate your new officers. The year ahead is going to be a year of hard work for all elected officials. I should also like to thank your outgoing officers for having served during the critical period that has just passed. Your officers have a major role to play in leading the medical profession towards the excellence and devotion we all expect of it.

Today I will talk about two issues. One is a review of your profession’s response to our call for deeper and more fruitful involvement. The other is about your further participation in national reconstruction.

Health and medical care is one of the key social services. The attention given to this area measures the sense of responsibility we have as a Government and a people. I am greatly heartened that your response has been wide, enthusiastic and sustained. Secretary Bengzon told me yesterday that the first three volunteer surgeons left for Palawan and Mindanao. He has told me also of the great efforts exerted by the Philippine Pediatric Society in controlling and treating the incidence of diarrhea among the children of the poor. Many PMA chapters, specialty groups and individual physicians have extended their time and talents to work with Government in delivering vital services to our people. For these, I thank you deeply.

I would like now to address the issues of the future. There are two of special importance. I am referring to the cost of medicine and the availability of doctors’ services, particularly in the rural areas. I shall address the first issue here, and reserve my comments on the second for some other occasion.

More than two weeks ago, I announced my national drug policy. That policy calls, among others things, for more information on the quality, safety, efficacy and cost of drugs. I would like to focus on this particular aspect and your role in making the initiative it calls for to succeed.

The doctor’s mind is the real battleground between the propaganda of the drug companies on the one hand, and the principles of drug and medical science on the other. Sad to say, science is losing to commerce every day. The pediatricians among you know that the Philippines is one of the biggest consumers of anti-diarrheals in the world yet many studies show the doubtful clinical usefulness of these prescriptions.

The ordinary patient trusts his doctor implicitly. So when he gets a prescription that costs, say, ten times his daily income, he complains about drug prices but never doubts his doctor’s wisdom and care in prescribing the drug. But me ask you now to examine yourselves. Do you carefully weigh the financial consequences of your prescriptions? Do you carefully consider the true merits of the drugs that are advertised and pushed on you by salesmen? By and large, none of them are harmful; but how many are really needed, and aren’t there cheaper substitutes? Have you truly served your patients by doing your best to give them the best care at the least cost?

Our national drug policy aims to make information available to the doctor and the patient to assure the more rational use of drugs. Government is doing its part to disseminate this information. I ask you to help out; and to help out first by liberating yourselves from pharmaceutical propaganda. I ask you to become true medical scientists by relying on your informed judgment rather than on the commercial hype of your suppliers. I ask you to consider both the merits of your prescriptions and the situation of your patients. There is much you can do to make a real impact on the prices and effectiveness of drugs and medicine. The PMA is particularly well-situated, in terms of organizational reach and resources, to be effective in this effort.

In the many countries where reforms in pharmaceuticals were undertaken, the doctors were a crucial factor in deciding the outcome. I am confident that it will be the same here.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].