Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippine To the National Research Council

[Delivered at the Philippine International Convention Center, March 14, 1987]

HARNESSING SCIENCE FOR DEMOCRACY

President Aquino says science and technology should address two concerns: alleviation of mass poverty and securing the future. The Philippines is rich in natural resources, which the scientist must tap to provide food and jobs. The scientist must address the needs of health, agriculture and industry in his work to ensure national progress.

The government in return will support the scientist through an increased budget for education.

It is a pleasure to be among you today, you who represent the best of our country in science and learning. I am told that the NRCP is the oldest and largest collegial body of scientists in our country, counting among its members the best minds in mathematics and the natural sciences, in medicine, agriculture and engineering, and in the social sciences and the humanities. Newspaper write-ups have made much of my concentration in mathematics and French during my college days. While these qualifications may have to be stretched somewhat to qualify me for membership in the divisions of mathematics or humanities, they do add to the pleasure and warmth I feel in being with you today.

In my first address to the scientific community during science week last July, I addressed myself to two concerns:

The first was for science and technology to respond to the urgent call of the present. I asked you to become involved in our first priority of alleviating mass poverty.

The second concern was for the future. While we are gripped by the present’s urgent demands, I said then, the government’s chief responsibility is to the future.

The events since July confirm the importance of both concerns. The urgency of the present, so painfully underlined for us by the ceasefire negotiations and the breakdown of the truce, is succinctly expressed in the formula of our beloved friend, Pepe Diokno: food and freedom, jobs and justice.

At the same time, the importance of building a strong foundation for future growth is enshrined in our new Constitution, which enjoins us to give priority to science and technology and their adaptation to our country’s needs and capabilities.

In our first year of government, we feel most satisfied with accomplishments in the areas of freedom and justice — values now enshrined in an overwhelmingly ratified Constitution and protected by the democratic institutions we have rebuilt. But we know that freedom without food remains fragile, and justice without jobs seems hollow.

You are men and women specially gifted in science and technology, the two powers that can transform the earth, make land and sea more productive, and give us the means to liberate our countrymen from their age-old bondage to poverty and fruitless toil. Many of you have left the security of ivory-tower research here or abroad to search for ways to bring the fruits of development to our people. But I must ask still more of you.

We have land and sea, abundant sun and rain, a hard-working population. Yet the formula that will transform these factors into progress remains locked in the science and technology to which you hold the key. You can unlock the future.

Our country’s struggle to produce more food and create more jobs deserve the best efforts from the best minds. Our people have suffered and waited so long. They deserve no less than the best that you and I can give.

At the same time I realize that your capability to contribute to these efforts depends on stronger structural support for science and technology. Much of the capability for science and technology depends on the strength of academic institutions’ of higher learning. Thus the government’s efforts to increase the budget for education, and provide tax incentives for new science high schools. These are modest starts, but they are what we can afford for the moment. I ask for your generous effort to make them succeed.

The NSTA, too, with its different sectoral councils and the research institutes under its umbrella, needs more support. My Science Secretary tells me that our support for R&D in science and technology is far below the UNESCO recommended 2% of GNP. Again the government needs your help to assure the relevance of such R&D support to the urgent concerns of food and freedom, jobs and justice. You must descend from your ivory towers and talk to the people, talk to the media, talk to the hardnosed planners in natural resources, industry and agriculture, and help us to see the crucial role of research and development in the future progress of our nation.

This brings me to my second concern: building a strong foundation for the future. Public Works Secretary Ting Jayme gave a talk on the financing of innovation and entrepreneurship. In that talk he outlined the role of NSTA in supporting and funding research and development activities. He pointed out the inadequacies of the present NSTA framework. He discussed other more daring ventures such as the Korean Technology Development Corporation. Such exchanges are useful. It is good to meet in this yearly assembly and assess how the NRCP can contribute to better science and technology. It is important to discuss the strengthening of academic institutions and the NSTA. But the future needs a firmer foundation than these things afford, and more daring than they involve.

A stronger Philippine industry may need more vigorous research and development, and a different organizational and financing scheme than we have hitherto employed. Can you help the government respond to this need?

Our efforts to give better health care to our people are greatly hampered by the lack of locally produced and therefore affordable medicines. Can you help the Department of Health build an affordable health care system for our people?

Higher agricultural productivity has not lifted the farmer out of poverty because of the high cost of fertilizers, pesticides, machines. Can your expertise link with the efforts of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform to break the cycle of productivity without improvement in the lives of our people?

The possibility of building a stronger foundation for the future demands a breaking of present patterns and paradigms. Perhaps the NRCP of the future will be divided not into disciplines but into concerns: health, industry, agriculture. Scientists from various disciplines bringing to bear their various expertise on each of these pressing areas of concern. These are but first steps into a more radical restructuring of the future role of scientists in the development of our country. As with the first steps of democracy, there will be mistakes and a great deal of uncertainty and hesitation, but, we are at least assured that in the eminently rational pursuit of science there will be nothing rash like a coup. It is both the burden and mission of our generation to take these bold steps into the future. That future is already pressing hard upon the present, and will soon add its burden to that which we already bear. The future cannot wait and cannot be disappointed. With your support behind our commitment, and God’s help, we shall succeed.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].