Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the National Laity Week

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, August 17, 1987]

A 2,000 YEAR-OLD REVOLUTION

Two thousand years ago, a Man chose suffering, humiliation, and death to save humanity. It was a revolution far more sweeping than EDSA, the President declares. As for our own revolution, it began from within and must continue within.

The peaceful, almost joyful, February Revolution that made us free had its seeds in a darker, sadder time; in lives of solitary suffering.

Ninoy’s part in the Revolution was fated not to be at EDSA, but to make EDSA possible. It began in the solitude of his cell, where, as he put it, Christ “stood me face to face with myself and forced me to look at my emptiness and nothingness, and then helped me to discover Him who has really never left my side.” At that moment, Ninoy found his peace and his strength, and began the journey that ended in our freedom.

In the rest of the country, things were not as wretched, but, in varying degrees the vast majority of Filipinos lived lives of shame and desperation. It was a time like no other in our history, apart from the War, when moral choices were made so clear and yet so difficult: between a life of submission and spiritual integrity; between bondage and life, on the one hand, and danger and the promise of freedom, on the other. Between despair and hope, and the price of working to realize that hope.

It was, in the last analysis, a choice made by an even earlier and more sweeping revolution, begun and completed 2,000 years ago – by One who chose humiliation, suffering and death for himself to overcome humiliation, suffering and death for us all. That one solitary victory continues to change our lives today more than, as a poet wrote, all the armies that ever marched, all the navies that ever sailed, all the parliaments that ever sat and all the kings that ever reigned.

One of the great proponents of democracy said that governments should be of the people, by the people, and for the people. But all nations having “a new birth of freedom” must be first “under God.”

We are now free and are enjoying the fruits of freedom to the full. We are also paying its price in grave responsibilities and in mistakes committed, and in the abuses that freedom encourages. But the chief price is continuing labor and eternal vigilance to keep freedom alive and make it meaningful for all; the chief price is heeding the call of our first Liberator.

Ninoy, quoting Thomas A’Kempis, sought to understand the demands of that call. In Laur, Ninoy wrote: “And when He sent His disciples into the world, He sent them not to have temporal joys but to meet great battles; not to have honors but injuries; not to be idle but to labor; not to rest but to bring forth much good fruit in patience and good works.”

We in Government, all of us the laity, are fully aware of how much we have yet to overcome. The past will always dog our footsteps, as the debt burden, as corrupt values, as continuing hunger for power and undying thirst to return this country to slavery, deceit and death.

The freedoms we enjoy can be used as levers for their own destruction. In the law and justice we respect, we create the space for conspiracies to destroy the law and deny justice. Though we seek to do right, and work with all our might, there will still be those who by indolence, indifference, malice and violence, seek to undo our best efforts.

As we labor to improve the quality of our lives, let us remember that our Revolution that began from within must continue within, where the search for God’s light can alone succeed. As a wise man wrote in Proverbs: “Trust in the Lord with all your heart and lean not on your own understanding; in all your ways acknowledge Him and he will make your paths straight.”

On the occasion of National Laity Week, may more of us walk with Christ along straight paths.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].