Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Civil Service Week Awarding Ceremonies

[Released on September 15, 1989]

A TRIBUTE TO THE CIVIL SERVICE

President Aquino pays tribute to an 89-year old system that has stood for continuity and stability through decades of political change. This recognition is expressed in concrete measures — right to form unions and to collective bargaining; increase in salary levels four times since 1986; standardization of compensation; and many others. She remains committed to the decentralization program and devolution of authority so that services may be delivered speedily to areas where these are needed. At the same time, she intones that commitment to fighting graft and corruption has not waivered as she enjoins everyone to be vanguards of moral change in their respective agencies.

My experience in the past three years has taught me that looking at government performance is always a tricky affair. What is known about it is only a small part of what really goes on. For the most part of the year, we characterize government by its exceptions: the occasional failure, the misjudgment, the difference of opinion.

One day in the year, however, we are reminded that there is more to government than bad news. Beyond the headlines, the contentious debate and the privilege speeches, government works. There are hundreds of thousands who labor daily, who work steadily and well, who contribute their own little share to helping build this country. That one day in the year is today.

Today, we honor our 1.5 million civil servants whose exemplars we have just awarded and recognized.

More importantly, we pay tribute to an 89-year old system that has stood for continuity and stability through decades of political change.

The Civil Service is far from perfect. Many of the criticisms levelled against it are true. Its shape and form, its pace, performance and values have undoubtedly been influenced by the nuances of political history. Accordingly, it is political will that we will bring to bear so that the Philippine Civil Service may get back on its proper track again.

The signals we have given are clear.

At the start of my term, I said that there will be institutional consultation and participation. For government employees, this found concrete manifestation in the 1987 Constitution which, for the first time in Philippine history, gave them the right to organize, collectively negotiate and participate in peaceful concerted activities in accordance with law. I am told that there are 116 government unions already registered, many of whom are involved in negotiations with their respective office or agency heads.

True to the Constitutional mandate that at the earliest possible time, the Government shall increase the salary scales of employees of the National Government, we have raised salary levels four times since 1986. Less than a month ago, I signed into law the “Compensation & Position Classification Act” anchored on the principle providing equal pay for substantially equal work, and basing differences in pay upon substantive differences in duties and responsibilities – this again, in response to the Constitutional directive for Congress to provide for the standardization of compensation of government officials. From 19 different pay scales which served to exemplify the patronage and cronyism of earlier years, we have established only one pay scale for all government workers from the laborer to the President. We have even provided for merit and longevity increases so that loyalty and performance may be given their just rewards.

I have committed myself to endorsing to Congress reasonable wage extenders for government employees to help cushion whatever erosion in income may result from inflation.

I am awaiting the report of the Civil Service Commission on this following their recent workshop with unions and concerned government agencies.

A national incentives and awards program is now being discussed at the Cabinet Assistance System just as a schedule of penalties for violations of Civil Service rules has recently been promulgated. I note that the said schedule of penalties now impose dismissal for dishonesty, grave misconduct, gross incompetence and neglect of duty. I hope that our employees will take this to heart just as I hope our officials will impose these sanctions consistently and with an even hand.

I have endorsed to Congress for its action the proposed Civil Service Code which will hopefully insulate the career service from political influence, power struggles and changes in leadership.

I am committed to a program of decentralization and eventual devolution of our powers and authorities so that services may be delivered more speedily to the areas where these are needed. Additionally, I will support moves to locate more of our manpower and materials in the field instead of the traditional bias for Manila-based operations and decisions.

All these expressions of support are geared towards exacting a similar commitment from the rest of the bureaucracy towards better performance and greater productivity. Towards integrity and honesty that will restore the public’s trust and the bureaucracy’s credibility.

Let me dwell briefly on graft and corruption. Because we were elevated to this country’s leadership on the basis of moral ascendancy, our critics have pounced on every instance of graft, real or imagined, to rake us over the coals. It is the easy way out to take offense, particularly when it is obvious that the ambitious and the opportunists among us use these to promote their own interests. I take this, however, as an opportunity to demonstrate our earnest desire to rid this country of those who will wield power for self-aggrandizement, heedless of the greater interests of the people.

I repeat:

My friends and relatives are not above the law. Should any of them show inclinations to the contrary, you have my blessings to expose their activities.

I am inviting all government employees, including government employees associations to be the vanguards of moral change in their respective agencies. Likewise, I call upon our citizens. Please report all instances of graft, corruption, incompetence, misuse of government funds and facilities so that those who have been given the prerogative to manage will realize that management requires rigorous accountability and transparency of transactions.

There are no political debts so big that they must be paid in terms of public disaffection for or mistrust of government. I have served notice to the Cabinet that they must perform, or else. Let that be notice to all, friends and foes alike, that the only yardstick for continuance in this government is performance and integrity.

Finally, on this 89th Anniversary of the Civil Service Commission, let me congratulate Chairman Patricia Sto. Tomas, Commissioner Mario Yango and Commissioner Samilo Barlongay for their singular achievement in having put together in the proposed Civil Service Code all the scattered laws and policies on public service, and also, for spearheading the revitalization of the Commission. My congratulations too, go to all the employees of the CSC, for having restored the people’s faith in public service.

We cannot, however, rest on our accomplishments. There remains much to be done. Let us forget self and with renewed vigor and dedication, offer our best efforts for country and fellowmen.

To all the awardees and the respective heads of their offices, congratulations and thank you for exemplifying the best that this administration has to offer. May your numbers increase with the years.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].