Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the people of Basilan

[Delivered on November 16, 1989]

AN AUTONOMY BASED ON THE PEOPLE’S WILL

Both the Philippine Constitution and the Tripoli Agreement agree that a plebiscite is necessary for the creation of an autonomous region. A Supreme Court ruling that the majority vote in each of the prospective constituent units shall determine which unit will in fact become autonomous – has reaffirmed this condition. It has also made the people’s vote more important. Basilan, as the battleground of the secessionist rebellion in the 70s, must realize that their first test of fitness for autonomy is to conduct the plebiscite in an orderly and peaceful manner.

The next challenge is for autonomy to translate into the more effective delivery of basic services.

It has been some time since my last visit to Basilan. In many respects, the circumstances then and now are quite different. But once again, I come to call on you at a time of great political ferment to ask you to exercise your right and responsibility as Filipino citizens.

On November 19, only three days from today, the people of Basilan will have the chance to decide whether or not to belong to an autonomous region.

The Constitution mandates the creation of autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras. But it preserves a safeguard contained in our earlier constitutions. It requires, as earlier constitutions did, that the people of the affected areas give their consent to fundamental changes in political structure.

Even the Tripoli Agreement accepts the principle that the grant of autonomy by the national government must follow the country’s constitutional processes. These constitutional processes include the conduct of a plebiscite.

What both the Constitution and the Tripoli Agreement accept as a condition for the creation of an autonomous region, the Supreme Court has only recently reaffirmed. Only a few days ago, the Supreme Court ruled that the majority vote in each of the constituent units – the 13 provinces and nine cities proposed for autonomy – shall determine which specific province or city shall in fact become autonomous under the terms provided for by the law Congress has enacted.

The Supreme Court decision has given greater importance to the vote you will cast in the plebiscite on November 19. The Supreme Court has placed the power to determine the future development of Basilan where it rightfully belongs – in the hands of the Basilenos themselves, in your hands.

The right of the people of Basilan to choose whether or not to belong to an autonomous region, was never in doubt. But some groups had argued that Basilan could not enjoy autonomy unless the majority of the people in the other provinces and cities also agreed to become autonomous. The Supreme Court decision has demolished this argument. It has denied to the other constituent provinces and cities the right to block Basilan from autonomy, if autonomy is what Basilan desires.

By its ruling, the Supreme Court has proclaimed and protected the right of Basilan and the other constituent units to self-determination. It is not necessary, according to the highest tribunal of the land, for the majority of voters in all 13 provinces and cities to choose autonomy before an autonomous region can be formed. A smaller number of provinces and cities can combine to compose an autonomous region.

On this constitutional issue, all three independent branches of government have reached consensus. I had always maintained the interpretation that the Supreme Court has now upheld. I felt that entrusting the decision on autonomy to the constituent units would best carry out the spirit and the intent of the Constitution. As early as April, the Executive Branch had presented its position to Congress, and Congress had concurred with our views. The judgment of the Supreme Court makes the verdict on this question unanimous.

I have spoken at length of the Supreme Court ruling because it is obviously of crucial importance in determining the meaning of the vote you will cast in the plebiscite on November 19. But also because I find in it support and vindication for the stand of active neutrality I have taken on the autonomy issue, a stand that political opportunists have willfully misunderstood and persistently maligned.

On an issue as far-reaching as autonomy for an area as diverse as Mindanao, the surest anchor is the sovereign will of the people. The law crafted by Congress is complex enough to administer and implement. Autonomy can work only if the people stand solidly committed behind it. That commitment must be explicitly and freely expressed in the plebiscite. My efforts to implement the mandate for autonomy has been guided, above all, by an abiding faith in the ability of the people to decide what is best for them.

We had witnessed the people at EDSA defy formidable odds to topple a detested regime. We now see people power in Germany bringing down the Berlin Wall. All over the world, we can sense new waves of freedom, as tightly controlled dictatorships yield to the demands of people power. There is, therefore, no reason for us in our democratic system to deny to the people of Basilan and the other affected provinces and cities the right to receive or reject autonomy without dictation.

Basilan was a battleground in the secessionist rebellion of the seventies. A significant segment of the community has manifested in blood and tears its demand for greater control over its own affairs. Its sacrifice, by itself, has earned it the right to render judgment on the autonomy it is being offered. But whether favorable or hostile to the Organic Act at issue in the plebiscite, Basilan’s experience of secessionist violence in the seventies must surely argue against the use of violence on November 19. What benefits would more victims of violence bring to Basilan? The first test of Basilan’s fitness for autonomy may indeed be its ability to conduct a political exercise in a peaceful and orderly manner.

To the people of Basilan, then, and to those in the other provinces and cities proposed for autonomy, I convey a simple message. Let the guns stay silent particularly on November 19 so that the people may vote freely and peacefully. We do not need any more martyrs.

I shall not venture to predict the outcome of the plebiscite. But whatever the outcome, I can say with almost absolute certainty that the world will not end nor will all our problems magically disappear after November 19.

Thus, as we head towards the plebiscite, we must keep our perspective by also looking beyond it. The Supreme Court decision has improved the chances that an autonomous government can in fact be created.

But autonomy answers only one of Mindanao’s concerns. A new political structure will not automatically address other, more basic needs: safe drinking water, medical care, educational and livelihood opportunities. To be truly meaningful, autonomy must translate to the more effective delivery of these services. Making autonomy work for the benefit of the people will test our resolve and our commitment.

In passing the law for the proposed autonomy, we have embarked on a journey of many miles. We have already taken many steps. The plebiscite is the next milestone. But we have many more miles to travel to attain the peace and progress we all desire for Basilan, for Mindanao, and for the entire Philippines.

I pray that we shall march on steadfastly together, guided by a genuine respect for each other’s values and beliefs and by a deep concern for each other’s welfare.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].