Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Seminar on Peace and Order

[Delivered on July 3, 1986]

NOT A THRONE OF BAYONETS

The Second Principle of counter-insurgency states that “The government must function in accordance with law.” Where this principle was observed, as in Malaya, insurgency was defeated. The principle is clear, we must be better than our enemies. We cannot fight a good cause with evil weapons.

I am happy and reassured to see this particular mix of participants in this seminar on peace and order. I say reassured because I notice the presence not only of members of our military and the national police, but also of our ministers, acting governors, mayors and other OICs in government.

If peace and order were merely a military problem, the task of government would be easier by a significant percentage, in one sense, but also desperate and tragic in another. We would need only to fan out our divisions in the fields and cities of our country and leave the matter to the courage of our soldiers and the tenacity and generalship of our commanders. But, thank God, things have not come to such a pass. For if they had, then the fate of this government and our democracy would be decided on a throw of the dice. It would mean that the insurgency had attained the confidence to meet our forces head-on, or, in another area, criminality has increased to the level of anarchy and the social order has broken down. It would mean that military might alone would decide the outcome. If it comes to that, then all is lost. For a throne of bayonets cannot serve comfortably as the seat of government.

But things have not come to such a pass.

Our rights and liberties have been restored and a government is in place that is bent on justice for all. True, there are places where the insurgent forces continue to hold their own.

But the people, whose indifference if not hostility to the former government had sustained the insurgent forces, have found new hope in the new government. We have a chance to start afresh. And we shall be working with a people who have reaffirmed their faith in the ways of peace and the promise of democracy. It was, in fact, and as we all know, the direct intervention of the Filipino people that restored democracy in our land. Contrary to what some quarters say, we don’t have to sell the idea of democracy to the Filipinos. I can tell you now that nothing hurt my image more during the campaign among our people, especially in the rural areas, than the false charge that I am a Communist. Nine-tenths of the battle for the hearts and minds of the Filipinos has been won, and won by the Filipinos themselves. With these advantages, it is unforgivable to fail. We can fail only by betraying the principles of democracy, justice, human rights, and the rule of law for which our people fought with such distinction. I will not let that happen. I stand at the head of this government that was installed by the people, for the people, to make sure that the faith they have reposed in it is not betrayed.

The military and the national police forces, the local governments, the agencies and instrumentalities of government will defend this democracy, and defend it in a way that enlarges rather than diminishes its meaningfulness for the people. When we say that we shall fight to preserve our dignity as free men, it will be done in a way that will not detract from that dignity or reduce that freedom. This government will not tolerate the practice of torture. That hideous practice has no place in a democracy and no justification in the accepted wisdom on counter-insurgency. You know the classics in that field better than I. Minister Enrile, who advises me on the insurgency, gave me a book on the subject in which I read the following passage:

The Second Principle (of counter-insurgency) states that “The government must function in accordance with law.”

”There is a very strong temptation in dealing both with terrorism and with guerrilla actions for government forces to act outside the law, the excuses being that the processes of law are too cumbersome, that the normal safeguards in the law for the individual are not designed for an insurgency, and that a terrorist deserves to be treated as an outlaw anyway. Not only is this morally wrong, but, over a period, it will create more practical difficulties for a government than it solves. A government which does not act in accordance with the law forfeits the right to be called a government and cannot then expect its people to obey the law.”

Where this principle was observed, as in Malaya, insurgency was defeated. The principle is clear, we must be better than our enemies. We cannot fight a good cause with evil weapons.

We have a chance to start afresh. A chance like this may not come again. It is imperative therefore that we think the matter through carefully before we address the insurgency problem again. Let us review the record for the errors and abuses that fueled rather than finished off the insurgency, as they were perversely meant to. This seminar is a good and substantial beginning.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].