Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the International Assembly on Human Rights

[Released on October 9, 1987]

AN UNCHANGED COMMITMENT TO UPHOLD HUMAN RIGHTS

After a respite, the country is again being challenged by extremist forces. Yet her Administration, President Aquino says, remains steadfast in the quest for unity and peace. Its record of adherence to human rights remain true to the ideals of the February Revolution.

When someone said long ago: “Love your neighbor as yourself; and love does no harm to its neighbor,” thus might have been born the human rights movement as we know it today.

Even at the time, it was not a Commandment men easily adhered to. The Author Himself suffered from the rage and violence that have continued to perplex, plague and divide communities of men from age to age.

We in the Philippines had our respite of peace and a momentary reaffirmation of our brotherhood. Yet 18 months hence, we are challenged again, and again violently, by forces of the Left and Right. Yet we hope and persist, and will, God-willing, prevail in our quest for unity and peace because that was how we began our journey towards new nationhood. And in our country, we have a saying: “Those who lose sight of where they came from will also lose their focus on where they intend to go.”

Our third Philippine President Ramon Magsaysay, viewing the great majority of Filipinos stricken by poverty, immediately prescribed the least that was due them. “They who have less in life,” he said, “should have more in law.” Today our resources remain scanty and thinly spread out among us, but we have restored our judicial system and ratified a Constitution that defines and defends the right of every Filipino. Nineteen sections of that document uphold the tenets of social justice and human rights. Our center forces have been victim to travesties by extremists, but our government’s record of adherence to those human rights remains true to the ideals of our popular revolution.

I have no absolute answers on how the flood tides of exploitation, destruction and oppression that periodically wash over so many societies worldwide can be stemmed. I know only that men also have a tendency towards peace and brotherhood, for I observed it in my husband during the last years of his life, in a brief but shining moment in our nation’s history, and in the convening of this international assembly of men dedicated to the upliftment and protection of the rights of men.

“Who is my neighbor?” someone had asked the Author of that second Commandment. And the answer, following the telling of a parable, was – the man who had mercy and compassion. The world we dream of inhabiting will be created yet by such men. Many of you, I trust, will be among them.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].