AT LAST, A NEW CONSTITUTION

Presented with the draft of the new Constitution, the President declares that democracy is safe with this document. It is a Constitution which distributes wisely the powers of government; it is the framework for the house of democracy that we hope to build.

The last time I stood before you was on your invitation to witness the opening session of your Commission to draft a new constitution for our people. I stood there and declared the absolute independence of a body I had appointed, an independence I would respect but for two pieces of advice I offered for the Commission to take or leave as it chose. First I said, be quick. For the people are impatient to have a full-blown democratic republic, with all its necessary institutions and safeguards in place, in the shortest time possible. I reiterated my promise when the Freedom Constitution was promulgated that the draft would be ready within three months. My promise was, of course, in no way binding on you, and that is obviously how you took it. But I have heard of the great investment of time and energy that you made to come out with the draft by today. I had received appeals from Commission members to intercede for lenity with Cecilia Muñoz Palma, who was not among those who dropped like flies, to use the words I heard, from the exertions she demanded. Well, she’s a woman. So what else is new? I, of course, refused all appeals. Fortunately for the Commission she relented. And so now we have a document after four and a half months of effort whose worth the people will soon judge. And among the standards they will apply, and this was the second advice I gave, is whether the document fits the general conception of a constitution that is broad enough to meet every exigency that arises and yet is specific enough to protect the essentials of a true democracy.

We have here a Constitution that meets these needs. Democracy is safe with this Constitution, safe in regard to its necessary institutions and in regard to the inalienable rights of our people. The powers of government are wisely divided in the time-honored fashion of enduring democracies, where the energy of the single hand, to use Jefferson’s reference to the Executive, finds its counterpoise and guidance in the collective wisdom of a representative legislature and in the strict accountability of all elected officials. More than safety, democracy finds in this Constitution the firm ground from which to step upwards to the other goals of our nation: its material progress and the well-being of our people.

With this Constitution, we have the framework of the house of democracy that we hope to build, a house worthy of the great collective act that made it possible: the rising of the Filipino people to vindicate their voice, a rising that continues to be the wonder of the world.

To the Commission members the country expresses its thanks. I said when I called to the task that yours would be no easy task. Those words fail to convey the tremendous investment of time and energy, the sacrifice that went into the making and the timely completion of this draft. In the short span of time it took, you compressed the idealism, the dedication, the patriotic fervor that I said would be the necessary elements of any attempt to give enduring form to the victory of the Filipino struggle for freedom and to our aspirations of a better life for all our people. It was no easy task indeed, but, on the other hand, yours would be no small glory. You have truly deserved it.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].