Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Year of Liberty

[Delivered in New York, September 19, 1986]

YEAR OF LIBERTY

The Statue of Liberty holds the torch in her hand and scans the horizon for refugees in search of freedom. The Filipinos also hold a torch that shines as bright in their hearts.

It’s good to be in New York.

I regret that I am two months late for the spectacular celebration of the hundredth anniversary of the Statue of Liberty and its physical restoration. But I was able to watch that dazzling affair on Philippine television. Filipinos understood and shared your mood of jubilation. I told myself, if the struggle for Filipino freedom was still going on, we would have used your celebration of American democracy as a symbol of our desire and struggle to get back our own.

But just eight months ago, Filipinos, too, were dancing in the streets, celebrating the restoration of their Liberty. That celebration, the night the dictatorship fell, had no fireworks. Thank God for that. But as you know the Filipinos won back their freedom in a unique way.

I was last here in New York as a tourist with my husband, Ninoy, and our children. I wish he could be with me today to revisit your city which he admired for its energy and creativity. But in a way he’s the reason why I’m here – to complete the mission he started, and to convey our thanks.

Your Lady holds the torch in her hand and scans the horizon for refugees in search of freedom. We hold a torch that shines as bright in our hearts as we seek ways and means to make that freedom more meaningful for masses of Filipinos still huddled in poverty.

I’d like to take this opportunity to convey a personal message of thanks from Ninoy, myself and our children. Six years ago, we sought asylum from tyranny here in the United States and it was granted to us. Your Lady Liberty was true to her words.

And that’s why I say I’m happy to be here in New York. You and I, and here I speak for the Filipino people, sure know how to celebrate freedom. From nearly opposite ends of the earth, we made 1986 the Year of Liberty.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].