Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the PSG Anniversary

[Released on March 1, 1987]

PROTECTORS OF THE CHIEF

The Presidential Security Group (PSG), one branch of the Armed Forces, is charged with protecting the seat of Government and its leader, the President. Under the new Constitution, the PSG is charged with protecting only one branch of the government but since the February 1986 Revolution, it has had the burden of protecting practically the whole government because the President has been both the executive and the legislature.

During its first anniversary, President Aquino commends the PSG for the exemplary performance of its members.

To our people goes the credit for the restoration of democracy in our country, but to the Armed Forces go the credit for its immediate defense against its armed |foes. Within the Armed Forces, however, a special force is charged with the difficult task of protecting the seat of Government and the person of its leader. That force is the palace guard, which in our country today is called the Presidential Security Group.

In the normal constitutional set up that we shall soon have, presidential security would have the important duty of protecting one branch of the three branches that compose the government. But in the set up we have had since the restoration of democracy last February, 1986, the Presidential Security Group had the even more onerous duty of protecting the entire government itself in the Office and person of the President that combined all its powers. Since the Revolution, I have been both the legislature and the executive of the government. Any threat to me was literally a threat against the State, and the democracy it upheld. That made me an inviting target of all the enemies of democracy. During all this time, however, I always felt safe. Safe because I trust in God to dispose of me according to His will, and safe because I trusted in the Presidential Security to make sure that I did not go before the time He has appointed. Oliver Cromwell told his soldiers to put their faith in God but to keep their powder dry. The Presidential Security has been my gunpowder, kept dry and ready in every season.

Today is the first anniversary of this special guard. One year seems too short a period to honor it. But the past year witnessed an unprecedented number of threats to the Presidency. The work of the Presidential Security Group for the past year compressed the work of protecting a President for the whole of his term in office.

May I therefore express my appreciation and gratitude to the Presidential Security Group for its outstanding performance in this first and critical year of democracy in our country and for the protection it gave not only to my person but to the unity and stability that the Presidency has represented in this period of transition.

The Armed Forces as a whole are the shield and sword of the Republic, but the Presidential Security Group has been the breastplate protecting the Heart of the Republic.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].