FOCUS ON WOMEN

The President in her declaration of Women’s Week and the whole month of March as Women’s Role in History Month honors the women who preceded us in shaping our nation. She calls for the support of all concerned agencies to ensure full implementation of the programs and projects outlined in the Philippine Development Plan for Women. She thoughtfully adds that men should not be threatened by these stirrings for equality and development; they should instead encourage and support the efforts to elevate the status of women.

Greetings to all of you on International Women’s Day. The Philippines also celebrates Women’s Rights and International Peace Day today. I have also declared this week as Women’s Week and the whole month of March as Women’s Role in History Month. These meaningful celebrations demonstrate our solidarity with women all over the world in our common struggle for equality, freedom and peace.

As we celebrate, we also honor the women who preceded us in shaping our nation like Teodora Alonzo and the women of Malolos. All those who resisted traditional confines and restrictions to assert themselves. The peasant rebel women who fought side by side with the men like Gabriela Silang. The early suffragettes who were the forerunners of today’s feminists. Above all, we pay tribute to the women who played a crucial role in the People Power Revolution at EDSA.

Many have told me that the greatest single event that projected the image of Filipino womanhood the world over was when a woman ended the country’s 20-year subjection to a dictator. Given the opportunity to serve that I had, I am sure other Filipino women can also prove that they are indeed equal to Filipino males.

The past decades bore witness to the international awakening of women to their rights. Credit this mainly to the global women’s conferences in Mexico, Copenhagen and Nairobi. In our country, the direct fruits of these consciousness-raising sessions were the creation of the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women and the drawing up of blueprints to focus national attention on women’s concerns in the fields of education, law, health and nutrition, labor, agriculture and others.

More recently, the persistent lobbying of women’s groups succeeded in including a provision in our Constitution that ensures fundamental equality of women and men before the law. Its direct offshoot was the Family Code which should go a long way in eradicating the pockets of discrimination against women still existing in our society.

We have to admit that educating our people, to think of women as individuals who are entitled to rights and respect as much as their menfolk, is a tough problem. It is heartening, therefore, to note that we now have academic offerings on women’s studies. My own alma mater, St. Scholastica’s College, is leading the pack, as it were, in opening the eyes of women to their great potentialities. After my term, each one can aspire to become President.

Since I assumed this office, I have appointed more and more women to high-ranking and policy-making positions. Without exception, they have proven their mettle.

In my trips to the provinces, I have met very competent women managers who had been at the helm of their enterprises for several decades. I have met professional and technical female managers who perform as effectively as their male counterparts. We have many female decision-makers who can hold their own in the board rooms of predominantly male corporate boards.

Because many of our women in the rural areas are involved in the so-called underground economy, I am happy that the House of Representatives has passed on third reading the bill I certified to Congress that gives various kinds of incentives to countryside business enterprises. If enacted into law, these family enterprises will be encouraged to come out in the open. As you may know, we have entered into an agreement with J.C. Penney for the export of $20 million worth of goods to their outlets all over the United States. Much in demand are the artificial plants, papier mache, shell products, RTW and jewelry Accessories that our women are so expert at manufacturing.

At this point, we have to confront two vexing problems.

First, we must recognize and acknowledge the “invisible” Filipino woman. The ordinary woman in the farms and fishing villages, in the factories, the streets and in the homes. We must give value to the actual contributions she makes for the survival and well-being of the family, the community and the nation.

Having acknowledged her present contributions, we must then give the ordinary woman the opportunity to improve the quality of her contributions by liberating her from narrow stereotyped roles and broadening her options for growth and service.

In other words, we must recognize and give value to the work of the “ordinary housewife.” Then give her the necessary support to develop her other potentials.

Now the Philippine Development Plan for Women which we launch today is the major instrument for government action on the equality and development of women. I have issued Executive Order Number 348 approving and adopting this plan. All government departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations are enjoined to take appropriate steps to ensure the full implementation of the programs and projects outlined in the plan. An appropriate focal point for women’s concerns or any other similar mechanism shall be constituted in these agencies.

The National Commission on Women, in coordination with the National Economic and Development Authority, is tasked with monitoring the implementation and periodic assessment of the plan.

Firmly believing in the importance and urgency of the Philippine Development Plan for Women. I call on all concerned to cooperate fully with its implementation. I also call for the support of non-governmental organizations in the private sector which are our allies in all aspects of our work in government. For my part, I will follow its progress closely through my regular meetings with the National Commission on Women. I do not want it said with any degree of credibility that under a woman President, the situation of Filipino women did not improve significantly.

A word on the vital role of media in combatting the prejudices against women. Oftentimes, they permeate the consciousness of the unwary through subliminal messages beamed through different forms of mass media. Advertisements sometimes depict women as objects of pleasure not as human beings. As second-rate citizens incapable of decisions beyond her kitchen and her wardrobe. To add further injury, media perpetuate these biases as frequently as they show these ads.

I urge the women’s groups, therefore, to enlist media’s support in their unremitting campaign. And I ask media in turn to police their ranks, particularly the ladies, lest they lend themselves unwittingly to the cause they seek to destroy.

It is difficult for me to speak on the development of women without reflecting on my own life. I spent a lifetime as wife to Ninoy and mother to my children, willingly and lovingly performing the responsibilities of the wife of a politician, a political prisoner and, finally, a martyr. I bore and reared five good children of whom any mother would be proud and who have now begun to give me the pleasures of grand motherhood.

While I sometimes look back on that season of my life as a housewife with affection and nostalgia. I am sure that I would not be disloyal to the memory of Ninoy and my children if I admit that despite its obvious burdens, I value this stage of my life with its many challenges. For it has given me the opportunity to serve my country more directly and more fully. I believe that every Filipino woman deserves similar opportunities for growth and service.

As we celebrate now, let us remember that the support of our men is crucial to our efforts to elevate the status of women. To all Filipino men, I say: Do not be threatened by these stirrings for equality and development. The women are not anti-men. Nor are they governed by a destructive spirit of competition. However, they do want to be recognized for what they are and what they can achieve given the necessary encouragement and support from you.

Finally, let us remember that to fully realize our development, each has to realize her own self-worth first. The efforts start from us, ourselves. Government and other basic institutions in our society can only be supportive of our aspirations. And our efforts will bear fruit only to the extent of our sincere commitment – not just on paper, not merely in words, but more in deeds.

Let me hear you pledge that you will couple your support for this Plan with action.

Above all, we need to unite. Not only the women, but the entire nation. On our shoulders rests the hope of the country to achieve peace, and prosperity and development.

Thank you all very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].