GROWTH WITH EQUITY

The President says the government has always been active in laying the groundwork towards labor empowerment. She cites a number of measures to help the work force of the country, among them the empowerment of unions to increase their access to policy and decision making. She butts for economic growth with equity, an economy that creates employment opportunities, increases family incomes, and a future for children. Labor, she states, must be assured of its dignity and just reward.

Today we honor in a special way the men and women on whose toil our nation moves.

As I said last year, we must follow a course that translates real economic growth into addressing the social and economic needs of our workers. The task is to build an economy that creates employment opportunities, increases family incomes and ensures the delivery of social services that will give our workers the essential requirements for health, for housing, and for education.

From the day our people entrusted me with the Presidency, I have made this vision clear. I want economic growth with equity. I want the worker to be its direct beneficiary. This means food on his table, a roof over his head, and a future for his children. For while government must assure the investor the proper climate for business, with greater reason must it assure labor of its dignity and just reward.

Last year, the incidence of strikes went down by 39% compared to the 1987 figure. With the relative calm in the industrial front, much was gained. For this, I pay tribute to the responsibility and maturity of the labor movement. Yet no gain is ever enough. We must preserve what we have achieved. We must sustain the momentum.

This is possible only when industrial peace prevails. Peace, not apathy. A peace by involvement and consensus, not by force and imposition.

I am encouraged by your action of promoting the welfare not only of your members but that of their families as well You have set up credit and multi-purpose cooperatives, extended emergency loans and housing assistance, provided health services, and conducted labor education and specialized training. I would like to see more of you involved in these projects that complement government’s thrust to provide employment opportunities and augment incomes.

Encouraging as these developments are, your achievements underscore the need for more responsible organizations and less of individualism and self-seeking. Records of the Department of Labor and Employment show that only 10 percent of our 9.3 million wage and salary workers are organized, and of this number only 4 percent are covered by collective bargaining agreements.

Pro-labor laws alone cannot and will not guarantee protection from exploitation and abuse. Not even a pro-labor government can shield workers from oppression. Unions can serve as a formidable counter-force against social inequities and injustices. What labor needs is empowerment that can only spring from the genuine support and involvement of the working masses, even as the exercise of their rights must be within the responsible and disciplined framework of the law.

This government has always been actively laying the groundwork towards labor empowerment. In 1987, I issued Executive Order 111, which abolished the one-union, one-industry policy and lowered the membership requirements for union registration. This year, to further hasten unionization and encourage collective bargaining, we have provided for automatic certification elections, and in unorganized firms, a mere petition of a legitimate labor organization is sufficient. A worker can now become a member of the union on his first day of employment.

Empowerment of unions also means increased access to policy and decision-making. There will be stronger labor representation in the proposed regional wage boards and in the restructured National Labor Relations Commission. And as soon as the question is finally resolved by the Supreme Court, I shall appoint more sectoral representatives from labor in Congress.

The alleviation of poverty, by creating job opportunities and keeping the prices of basic goods and services at affordable levels, continues to be the principal thrust of government. Within this context, we continue to be guided by a wage policy that considers most importantly, the interest of the poorer segment of our working class who do not, as yet, enjoy the benefits of unionism and collective bargaining.

Much as this government would have wanted fully to accede to your demands, we are, at this time, unable to do so. Legislating a minimum wage that will drive up prices beyond our control and reduce prospects for employment will deprive most workers of the opportunity to enjoy the benefits of growth and negate the gains we have so far achieved.

A P15-increase for Metro Manila and a minimum increase of P6 for the rest of the country is the most viable option available.

I would like to see the day when trade unions shall be able to organize a significant number of our workers so that they can themselves negotiate for even higher wages and greater benefits. I am concerned that by regularly legislating minimum wage increases, we may erode the gains trade unionism has made in the field of organization. The future lies in less dependence on government and more on self-organization and collective bargaining.

We are likewise concerned about our fellow workers in government. For them, we have budgeted P4.7 billion to cover salary adjustments. And I look forward to the passage by Congress of the proposed salary standardization plan for a longer-term solution to this problem.

Let me now take this opportunity to redeem the pledges I made to you last year. While the unemployment problem continues to stagger us, we were able to provide jobs for more members of our labor force. The unemployment rate averaged 9.7 percent last year, down from 11.2 percent in 1987 and slightly lower than the projected 10.6 percent.

The number of Filipinos looking for additional work decreased from 33.6 percent of the labor force in 1987 to 32.5 percent by end of 1988.

We made inroads in solving these problems as a result of increased investments, which placed our economic recovery on firmer ground, and increased assistance for people-based businesses, and small-and medium-scale enterprises in the countryside.

To disperse economic opportunities to rural areas, we launched a national livelihood program. Now being carried out by eight of our departments, it accounts for 35 livelihood projects. As of today, these projects serve 162 groups and benefit 450,000 persons most of whom are farmers, fishermen, rebel returnees, out-of-school youth, disabled persons, displaced domestic and overseas workers and their families whose incomes fall below the poverty level.

A total of P28 million from the National Livehood Support Fund has been made available to the DOLE to finance livelihood projects of workers and their families as part of the department’s social investment project.

I would like to meet with you again to discuss how the unions can best pursue these programs and the manner in which government can best assist you. I would like to get project proposals from you for which we can make funds available. I am directing the Department of Labor and Employment to provide the necessary support services for the early submission of such proposals for my action.

While the focus is on economic recovery and employment, we did not waiver from the pledge to bring about improved social conditions through the delivery of social services:

(a) Phase I of the CARP, a pillar for rural transformation, is already being implemented. Since 1986, 132,253 land emancipation patents covering 116,441 hectares have been given to farmer beneficiaries. This represents a 535 percent increase of the total land area distributed during the entire 13 years of land reform under the previous administration. Last year, some 16,000 farmworkers in Del Monte and DOLE plantations were awarded about 20,000 hectares. In Agusan del Sur, 1,368 farmworkers were awarded 7,266 hectares from the NDC-Guthrie estates and plantations.

(2) From the increased budget for 1988, we set aside a record P17.9 billion for education. This allowed us to implement the free secondary education program. The program brought enrolment in public secondary education to over 2 million. DECS also implemented a service contracting scheme for public high schools. For schoolyear 1988-89, a total of 52,249 students were enrolled in the 1,130 participating private schools.

I have also approved in principle the proposal to provide tuition subsidy in lieu of another round of tuition fee increases. The DECS is now studying how the subsidy can be funded.

(3) We also passed the Generic Drugs Act. Together with the national drug policy, this will effectively reduce the cost of medicine and medical services. And even as malnutrition, malaria, tuberculosis and schistosomiasis continue to disable many of our countrymen, the NEDA Board has approved for funding the Philippine Health Development Project III. This will provide our low-income communities with effective health services.

(4) Total government housing assistance last year resulted in the construction of 56,405 units, up by 110 percent over that registered in the previous year. We have expanded housing benefits for marginal and low-income groups. 17,648 units were completed in 1988. Interest rates for housing loans were also cut from 12 to 9 percent. For non-members of the GSIS, SSS, HDMF and PAG-IBIG, the government launched the community mortgage program in Manila, Cebu and Davao. This is to help 120,000 family beneficiaries attain security of land tenure. Furthermore, on-site services and basic facilities, such as public faucets and electrification, will continue to be provided to low income groups.

(5) Last year, we rolled back the price of petroleum products three times to keep inflation down to 8.7 percent. Following these price cuts, we obtained the commitment of manufacturers and traders to freeze prices till the end of the year. I must tell you, however, that oil prices abroad have gone up, putting pressure to increase oil prices in our country. I have therefore tasked a committee composed of the NEDA, the DOLE, the Department of Finance and the Energy Regulatory Board to postpone any such hikes by looking at the limited options we have on hand. I cannot promise that there will be no price hikes. But I shall seize every opportunity to cushion the adverse impact of any price increase on our people.

One of the topics that divides and troubles us is the Letter of Intent and the Memorandum of Economic Policy that we presented to the International Monetary Fund. This LOI has been given all sorts of interpretations that disturb the hearts of our countrymen. I want to emphasize that I will never allow our development to fail just to please our creditors.

We will not turn our backs on our responsibilities, but our first responsibility is to our nation.

As a final point, I issue a challenge to all of you – Strengthen the labor movement further so that it becomes a more effective force in our society. The safety of our freedoms, the vitality and progress of the workers, and the defense of their rights depend on a strong, democratic, and responsible labor movement.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].