Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the National Chamber of Commerce Brunei

[Released on August 30, 1988]

A NEWLY-FOUND PARTNERSHIP

The President expresses her deep appreciation to the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Negara Brunei for making this meeting possible. She expresses confidence that Brunei and the Philippines will be good partners in business as she encourages investors to come to Manila not only for the conference but to see for themselves what the Philippines has to offer.

May I begin my expressing our deep appreciation to the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Negara Brunei Darussalam; and to all of you here for making this meeting possible.

About eight months ago, His Majesty the Sultan was in Manila for the Asean Summit. The Asean heads of state approved in that meeting economic initiatives that are very relevant to your business activities.

For example, the member countries agreed to raise intra-Asean investments to at least 10 percent of total foreign investments by the turn of the century. They also hoped to increase manufacturing value-added by 8 percent annually.

In trade, the member countries agreed to increase substantially the number and value of traded items within Asean preferential trading arrangements.

To implement these initiatives, we are counting upon the entrepreneurial drive and spirit of the Asean private sector. Although these are formally goals of multilateral cooperation among the six ASEAN states, they translate in practical terms to bilateral trade. Expanding intra-Asean trade means expanding trade between pairs of member states. Likewise, raising the level of intra-Asean investments means increasing capital flows between any two ASEAN countries.

In short, what Brunei Darussalam and the Philippines can do together in terms of trade and investments would all be in the spirit of the regionwide objectives of the Summit last year and the spirit of ASEAN since its inception.

Over the past 2½ years, dramatic improvements in the political and economic situation in the Philippines have enhanced our capability to trade with and to provide a hospitable climate for investments for foreign investments, particularly from our immediate neighbors.

The GNP growth of 1.5 percent in 1986 almost quadrupled to 5.7 percent in 1987, and increased further to 7.6 percent in the first quarter of 1988. The industrial sector contributed significantly to this performance with its growth rates of 7.9 percent in 1987, and 9.67 percent in the first quarter of this year.

After two consecutive years of decline, investments last year reached $420 million, the highest level registered by our Board of Investments in 20 years. At $575 million, investments in the first semester alone have already surpassed the level for the whole of 1987.

We have also achieved substantial progress in international trade. From a 14.1 percent decline in 1985, our exports have grown by 4.6 percent in 1986, by 17.6 percent in 1987, and, in the first 6 months of 1988, by 25.4 percent.

We have also been able to stabilize our foreign exchange rate and hold back inflation to 3.8 percent last year.

As I said in my address for the opening session of our Congress last month, there’s no denying that “the economy has taken off, it is on the move – not fitfully anymore but in firm strides on the path of sustainable growth”.

And the key to this has been the free rein we have given to the private sector, and its involvement in the preparation of our policies for growth – both domestically and intertionally.

To widen the foundation of economic growth, we identified 13 regional agro-industrial centers to draw the forces of development to the countryside, and enlist the energies and creativity of the small and medium entrepreneurs who have sustained our economy thus far. This strategy calls for the pouring of substantial infrastructure in the regions outside Manila to make them hospitable to investments. We will see to it that these areas will have what they need in power, water supply, telecommunications, transportation network, security, and other government services.

One of the centers we have chosen is Zamboanga, which is quite near Brunei Darussalam. This will bring the two private sectors closer to each other and hopefully enhance trade between our countries.

It is heartening to note that trade between our two countries, which had steadily declined from 1981 to 1986, improved almost four times in 1987. However, because our imports from your country consist almost entirely of petroleum products, while our exports have not yet made significant inroads into your market, the balance of trade between our two countries has been heavily in your favor over the past decade. We hope that our private sector, which has been quite enthusiastic about doing business in Brunei Darussalam, can enter into more contracts with many of you so they can help reduce our trade deficit.

I know that one of the reasons for the low volume of trade between Brunei Darussalam and the Philippines is the lack of shipping services between our two countries. To address this problem, we are trying to secure commitments from shipping lines to introduce regular direct shipping services between our two countries. Whether these lines will be established or long survive will depend on the volume of trade.

A most encouraging framework for such trade was laid in the revised Basic Agreement on Asean Industrial Joint Ventures. Under the Agreement, products of any industrial project with equity participation from at least two member states like Brunei Darussalam and the Philippines, will be entitled to a 90 percent tariff cut when exported from the host country to other participating countries.

With the signing of the Memorandum of Agreement on Trade, Investment and Shipping between our two countries, we can now look forward to stronger business ties between the Bruneian and Filipino private sectors.

The accompanying Philippine delegation will answer your other questions about trade and investment opportunities between our countries. May I take this occasion to invite you to an investors conference scheduled for the first week of November in Manila. I hope to see many of you there.

Community of race, community of commercial interest, community of security concerns in the ASEAN region, and the particular proximity of our two countries – these factors argue most strongly for a special relationship between our two countries. I hope that this visit will mark its beginning. Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].