Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the 3rd ASEAN Meeting of Heads of Government

[Delivered in Manila on December 14, 1987]

NEW INITIATIVES FOR ASEAN COOPERATION

The new initiatives on regional cooperation of the 3rd ASEAN Summit signal a renewed vigor in avowed commitment to ASEAN objectives.

I have the honor to speak on behalf of the Philippines in this Third Meeting of ASEAN Heads of Government.

The key to ASEAN’s strength, to its increased recognition as a respected force in international affairs, is the economic progress of each and every one of its members. It was hoped, by the founders of ASEAN, that the regional cooperation of its members, the gradual integration of their economies, would enable them to achieve the full measure of progress that none of them could achieve alone.

In my speech to the 19th ASEAN Ministerial Meeting more than a year ago, I expressed the view that “after 19 years of existence, ASEAN should already be evaluating the impact of regional economic cooperation instead of endlessly discussing how to get it off the ground.”

This created quite a stir in ASEAN circles with, I should like to think, silent admission.

Today, at this third ASEAN Summit, I am pleased to hear that our Ministers and officials, in consultation with our private sectors, have completed new initiatives on ASEAN cooperation. Their proposals signal a renewed vigor in our avowed commitment to ASEAN aims. There is a greater willingness to cooperate, to share opportunities, even in areas that continue to promise exclusive advantages to those who choose to go it alone.

Our Ministers have recommended expanding the scope of preferential treatment to intra-ASEAN trade, and deepening the margins of preference for the products to which we extend preferential treatment. The agreement to freeze non-tariff barriers and negotiate their elimination or reduction should help in further expanding the ASEAN market for ASEAN products. The proposal to encourage the use of equal commitment to the security of the region, the hemisphere, and the world.

Your presence here underscores our collective determination to measure the progress of ASEAN only by the individual success of each and every one of its members, and to found its security on the strength and stability of each and the solidarity of all.

May I express once more our deep appreciation for your presence and our great pleasure in welcoming you all to the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library