90th Philippine Navy Foundation Day June 27, 1988

MULTIPLE ROLES OF THE PHILIPPINE NAVY

The President lauds the many roles played by the Philippine Navy in securing the nation from internal and external threats. She urges them to continue their innovative work in building a self-reliant navy and commends its institutional adaptibility in the employment of indigenous watercraft.

As Commander-in-Chief of all Armed Forces of the Philippines, I am delighted to join you, the Philippine Navy, in celebrating the 90th anniversary of your foundation.

Anniversaries are milestones in one’s life. They are occasions for festive affairs. They are also occasions for reflection: to take stock of the past, ponder on the present, and scan the future.

In my talks before the commands of our Armed Forces, I have stressed the constitutional principle that civilian authority is, at all times, supreme over the military.

I have emphasized that policy making is the province of the civilian government. Consequently, military policies should flow from the directions and priorities set by the civilian authorities. The defense institutions should pursue programs consistent with these national policies.

I have directed the various commands, in our collective task of removing the elements of insurgency from our midsts, to unleash the weapons of war. Force must be met by force.

On the other hand, I have asked them to receive, with temperance and compassion, those who wish to mend their ways and return to the fold of the law.

We are aware that insurgency, with its ideology of violence and anger, must be met by implacable force. At the same time, we must also win our people’s support.

In this way, we will then be able to deprive the insurgents of the substance that sustains their mindless and destructive pursuit for power.

I am happy to note that Commodore Carlito Cunanan, has instilled these principles in the Philippine Navy.

We are all aware that, in view of our archipelagic geography, maritime affairs are of prime importance to our people. Through the highways of our seas, goods, ideas, and people sail from one island to another. Through these sea arteries are woven the threads that now bind us in our nationhood.

These sea routes and marine resources continue to serve our country’s current efforts for progress and development. Our seas continue to produce bountiful yields to feed our people and earn precious foreign exchange.

But the expanse and bounty of our seas have attracted the unwanted attention of fleets from other countries. Meanwhile, our own fishing fleets have been endangered in our own waters by the activities of other nations.

I am aware that, in our pursuit for peace and a better life for our people, the Philippine Navy performs multiple roles. It assists in the tasks of national development. It helps in securing the nation from internal and external threats.

And, in the current insurgency problem, it carries its share in the twin-pronged effort of facing up to the forces that threaten national security and inculcating hope and confidence among our people.

The Philippine Navy has been performing a yeoman’s job in these tasks. When one considers the constraints imposed by our country’s limited resources, your performance is even more commendable.

The expansion of the Philippine Navy is not only desirable but also necessary. I wholeheartedly support this intent.

Our Navy has many needs. This situation is quite widespread among our government institutions. The fact is that we need much courage and more resources to address the many social and economic needs of our people. And as we are still in the process of recovery, we have to replenish our coffers.

Thus, the present circumstances of the economy exhort us to tighten our belts, and spend less today so we may have more tomorrow.

There are indeed many demands on our government’s scarce resources. It is fortunate that some of our friends from across the seas have been generous in their concern for us.

For the present, therefore, I would urge you to continue in your creative optimization of available resources.

I urge you to continue in your innovative work. I certainly applaud and appreciate your efforts to do more with less.

I commend the present efforts to build a self-reliant Navy. As in many large endeavors, the initial steps must be taken. Our demonstrated capability to produce our own patrol craft should be further enhanced.

I commend your institutional adaptability in the employment of indigenous watercraft. This is a clear example of using innovation to enable us to face the enemies wherever they are.

We should have more of these innovations. These are proofs that we have not allowed ourselves to be imprisoned by the limits of the present.

Rather, the Filipino people has built on the strengths of the present to expand the horizons of the future.

Thus, through the exercise of our collective intellect, and a strong abiding faith in the Almighty, we have converted the difficulties of the present into opportunities to innovate, to seek new ways of doing things. We have surmounted the limits of physical resources to achieve not only higher levels of productivity and efficiency, but our ideals and aspirations as a people.

Accordingly, I am inspired to ask Commodore Cunanan, along with his gallant officers and men, to prepare plans for the Navy’s future expansion.

It is an expansion that should be reflected not only in the size and variety of the vessels in its fleet. It should take into account the additional tasks the Navy has to perform, as required by the demands of national security and national development.

These plans should serve as the recommended blueprint for the growth and development in our Navy. They should be consistent with the anticipated growth and recovery of our economy. They should be suited to the particular and specific conditions of our country.

These plans should cover a number of years. The plans should indicate the gradual modernization of our fleet and the acquisition by our Navy of the technology required in shipbuilding, repair and maintenance.

The plans should indicate an optimum mix of the use of indigenous watercraft and technology, alongside with the technology to be transferred from other countries and their adaptation to our local and specific requirements.

It should, likewise, anticipate developments now brewing in the southwestern frontiers of our country.

The plans should also consider the need to protect our waters from poachers. It should include measures that will enable us to police our waters.

We must maintain our vigilance against the smugglers and other nefarious elements who seek to undermine our nation’s political and economic stability.

I will look forward to these plans.

Meanwhile, I urge Commodore Cunanan to persevere in his programs to establish and maintain a professional, decentralized, streamlined and welfare-oriented Navy.

The way may be arduous. The needs are many. And the resources are few. But we, as a people, accomplished in the EDSA Revolution what was deemed impossible.

Through a deeply-rooted faith, unity of spirit, and dint of effort, we succeeded in restoring democracy in our country. It is a feat that continues to inspire the admiration of many peoples from other countries.

Let us tap into these veins of creativity and determination to produce a Navy that can, as an instrument of national policy, hasten the attainment of our national aspirations.

Such a Navy will help ensure that the democracy we restored with so much hardship and sacrifice will stay rooted in our land.

To all of you, officers and men of the Philippine Navy, my warmest greetings and best wishes on your 90th Anniversary.

Congratulations again and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library