Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 1989 National Convention of the Municipal Mayor’s League of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Folk Arts Theater, June 16, 1989]

ACCELERATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT THROUGH DECENTRALIZATION

The President commends several municipalities for the outstanding performance of their respective People’s Economic Councils (PECs). Since the mayors are the leaders representing the countryside, the President urges them to develop the countryside and be accountable for the delivery of basic services and facilities in their areas. She stresses that the increase in their authority would require improved performance and greater accountability to their constituents.

When we met a little over a year ago, I proclaimed that your election had completed the structure of our democratic system. Then I said . . . “Now, let’s get down to business.” Today, I would like to commend those of you who really did so.

Last October, during the National Convention of the People’s Economic Councils (PECs), I personally commended the municipalities of Alfonso (Cavite), Porac (Pampanga), Rodriguez (Rizal), Tarlac (Tarlac) and Tiboli (South Cotabato) for the outstanding performance of their respective PECs. Likewise, I would like to laud the municipalities of the National Capital Region for exhibiting an 80.69% over-all tax collection efficiency. You have done well indeed!

Today, we meet again to strengthen our resolve to achieve our common vision: develop our country by developing your areas – the countryside – where most of our people live.

The program that heralds this is clear: Accelerated Rural Development . If we are to reduce underemployment and unemployment and distribute our gains to the greatest number, we must push for social and economic development in all our towns. The rural masses should not wait any longer for the gains of urban development to trickle down to them. No, the process must be renewed and we must act swiftly and with firmer resolve than before.

Here is where each of you plays a crucial role in this priority program. You are in the forefront of government’s fight to conquer poverty. For you are the leaders representing the countryside. You have been elected to provide your respective constituencies with better roads, adequate water supply and power, basic health and educational services and facilities, ample livelihood opportunities, and easy access to other basic services. You are, therefore, accountable for the delivery of these basic services and facilities.

I am aware that for so long, much has been asked of you but so little has been given in terms of authority and resources to enable you to carry out your programs. Let me make it clear to all of you this morning that I do not intend to ask you to help fight poverty and insurgency without giving you the wherewithal to achieve them. I am convinced that if this country is to move forward, to grow at a rate and pace consistent with the aspirations of our people, we have to decentralize much of that authority wielded by the national government. And your national government is taking steps to remedy the overly-centralized system we inherited from the past regime.

If you recall, the last time we met, I promised you that the national government shall strive to provide “a wide channel for two-way traffic in ideas and feedback between the people and the government.” This past year, you saw a real grassroots presidency at work. I have directly consulted the local governments through my regional and provincial visits as well as during my regular meetings with the Regional Development Council Chairmen, Provincial Governors and City Mayors. Just recently, another link has been established between the national and local leaderships – the Presidential Action Line System (PALS). The PALS is designed to provide immediate and expeditious response to the requests and concerns of local government units which are sent to the Office of the President. Under this system, senior officials are designated as action officers to directly act on local requests in behalf of their respective departments. Thus, you can now be assured of faster reaction time from the national government with regard to your letters.

However, that singularly difficult task of greater devolution and deconcentration still eludes us. We must continuously move towards making every municipality a self-reliant community with the local Chief Executive empowered and provided with enough resources to truly manage on his own. To this end, I have filed and will be filing vital legislation which will bring about genuine decentralization.

A little over a month ago, I submitted to Congress a legislation which will increase your share in the Gross National Internal Revenue collections. Specifically, the bill provides that local governments will get 20% of the total Internal Revenue collections. On top of this, an additional 5% is set aside as incentive to local government units that can demonstrably increase their Real Estate Tax collection efficiency. The Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA) will be distributed and automatically released within the first 10 days of the month, as follows:

– 30% to provinces – 25% to cities – 35% to municipalities – 10% to barangays

The municipalities will get the biggest share of the IRA. In fact, when your share is added up to that of the barangays, this adds up to a full 45% of the total Internal Revenue alloted to local government units.

The same Bill abolishes the mandatory contributions which eat up much of your limited funds and which you have always been asking to be rescinded. The proposed Bill abolishes the 18% contribution to the PC/INP and the 7% contribution to hospitals, and to the Mayors of Metro Manila, the tax accruing to the Metropolitan Manila Commission under PD No. 921.

The Special Education Fund Tax is converted into a purely local tax, the proceeds of which shall accrue entirely to local government units, and divided as follows:

– 50% for the local School Board – 50% for the local General and/or Infrastructure Fund

What do all these mean in terms of additional revenues to you?

When the Bill is approved by Congress and implemented by January 1990, and I have high hopes that this Bill will be approved this year, you may expect an increase, as your share of the IRA, of at least 100% over what you have received this year. For some of the local government units, the increase could be as high as 200%.

In absolute terms, for 1989, the budget for IRA and LGRSF/STA is P5.42 billion. For 1990, the budget for IRA is P13 billion, an increase of P7.58 billion or 140%. The share of the municipalities is P4.55 billion while the barangays is P1.30 billion.

Adding that part of your budget which used to be released to the PC/INP and to hospitals, you will have substantive increases in your budget which will be at your disposal.

I would also like to inform you that all of the abovementioned provisions relative to the IRA of LGUs have also been incorporated in the CY 1990 Budget which I will soon transmit to Congress.

Therefore, we will soon have two mechanisms in which to achieve our mutual goal of providing greater national revenue shares to local units.

The revenues you need are provided for in this legislation as well as in others, like the legislation increasing your share of the fees imposed on the exploitation of natural resources. But increasing revenues is not enough. You also need the authority to effectively and efficiently carry out your programs, as you have cited in the resolutions you submitted to me this morning. In response to some of these resolutions, I will be endorsing the proposed Local Government Code as an administration measure. In this connection, I would like to acknowledge the contribution of Senator Aquilino Pimentel, whose Bill, S.B. 155, was the source of many provisions of the proposed Code.

Three of your Resolutions are already addressed in the proposed Local Government Code, namely:

* The Omnibus Resolution containing specific requests for greater devolution of powers to local units;

* Second, requesting for certification of a proposed Local Autonomy Act; and,

* Third, regarding the Philippine Constabulary and the Integrated National Police.

I shall deal with the rest of the Resolutions later.

Meanwhile, let me cite to you other features of the proposed Code:

* The National Police personnel assigned to your municipalities shall be under your operational supervision and direction;

* You shall have appointing power over all local government personnel whose salaries or whose operating expenses are mainly paid from local funds, except for treasurers and assessors who will be appointed by the Department of Finance from a list of eligibles nominated by the Local Chief concerned;

* You shall exercise administrative supervision over field personnel of the Executive Departments involved in the delivery of basic services. Moreover, within 18 months from the effectivity of the Code, said Executive Departments shall transfer the corresponding appropriations and funds (other than those from programs and projects) to the local government unit concerned;

* You, as members of the local Prequalification Bids and Awards Committee, shall have an active part in the construction, operation and maintenance of projects which are funded locally and/or receive funding or financial counterpart assistance from the National Executive Department, subject to the specifications, cost standards, and performance audit as may be prescribed by said National Executive Department;

* The Local Tax Code has been updated to allow local government units to have more discretion in deciding as to the subject of local taxes and the amount of such taxes. Specifically, the Local Tax Code has set only tax floors in order to allow your respective municipalities to decide the appropriate amount to impose for your own needs.

These last three address portions of your Omnibus Resolution for increased authority at the local level.

The other major provisions in the proposed Local Government Code will empower you – as political leaders and as Area Development Managers – to perform your duties smoothly. But, as your authority and resources increase, so does your accountability to your constituents. Hence, we have in the Code provisions on Initiative and Referendum on Legislative Matters and the recall of elective officials. Just as your authority is increased, so will I exact improved performance from each of you. I will not hear of the highest town official utilizing his powers to benefit a few favored men. And I will expect that this devolution of powers will be felt immediately and equally by all.

I have been told, that some, if not most, of local officials are not ready and prepared to assume greater responsibilities. But if we do not implement decentralization now, then when will we do it?

I am convinced that only through decentralization can we truly achieve peace and progress. The over-centralization of powers in the government during the past regime was prompted by the craving for power and the material greed of those in the central government then. My administration has wisely learned from the past, and now foresees a stronger and more effective management of government services that will truly reach the grassroots.

I will now respond to your other requests:

I shall refer your requests for the adoption of local government innovations, as well as the allocation of P40 million for the construction of a Mayors’ Center, to the concerned Departments for serious study and consideration.

On your proposal for the removal of Congressional Privilege of Realigning Government Projects, let me clarify that this provision in the General Appropriations Act (GAA) does not in any way diminish the authority of the Executive Branch to plan and implement projects, both at the national and local levels. A provision in the GAA provides that any realignment should be made within 30 days.

Regarding the proposed amendments to existing laws on the implementation of Barangay Road Projects, this matter is still being studied by the Department of Public Works and Highways.

The standardization of mayors’ salaries, as well as those of other local government executives, is already included in the proposed Standardization Bill now pending in Congress.

On your request for a 30% discount on plane fares and preferential accommodation treatment with discounted rates in Hotels, I must tell you that I cannot grant such a request. I have repeatedly assured our people that no one serving the people under my administration will be granted special favors or privileges that will set them apart from everybody else.

Finally, regarding your request for quarterly meetings with me, I think you all know that I am regularly meeting the Provincial Governors – once every quarter – and the City Mayors – once every four months. I am extending my invitation to the officers of your League to attend my meetings with the City Mayors. The next meeting is scheduled on Tuesday, June 27, 1989.

Allow me now to reiterate my determination to continue adopting measures to increase your powers. This commitment to decentralize is also an unequivocal expression of my confidence in your ability to be my partners in steering the country towards a better future. Our people have great expectations. And I share the expectations of our people. You will fulfill our hopes for a better life.

We have the policies and structures in place. Let me now end by saying . . . . “Let’s get moving – and fast!”

Thank you and Good Morning.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].