Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry

[Held at the Philippine Plaza Hotel, March 10, 1989]

PIONEERS OF ENTERPRISES

The President enjoins the Federation to assist the government in its rural development program particularly in industry dispersal and livelihood generation to hasten the overall economic growth of the country. She also challenges the Federation to be more involved with the affairs of the nation by effectively generating investments and exports from their foreign counterparts to promote countryside development.

I am pleased to congratulate the members of this Federation on its 17th Biennial Convention. I am also pleased to note that your theme echoes my call for a more aggressive countryside development program for 1989. With the 169 Chambers of Commerce and Industry all over the country affiliated with your federation, I know that you can be a potent force as government’s partner in the task of reenergizing our economy.

Let me refresh your minds with the past year’s economic accomplishments in which the private sector had played a key role. Our GNP’s growth at almost 7 percent in 1988 is a continuing improvement over the 5.7 percent we achieved in 1987 and the 2 percent in 1986.

Industry has been the leading sector of this growth with its gross value added at almost 9 percent, an improvement over the 8 percent in 1987.

1988 was also a banner year for investments and exports. For the first time in our country’s history, investments in 1988, as registered with the Board of Investments, reached an unprecedented P31 billion in total project cost – eclipsing the P11 billion record breaker of 1987.

Also, for the first time in the country’s history, Philippine exports broke through the US$ 7 billion barrier to reach US$ 7.07 billion in 1988.

We can now paint a rosier picture of our economy even as we open new opportunities for growth.

But we need to build on top of the gains we have so far achieved. We need to redistribute the growth that so far has been felt mainly in the cities. We have picked out rural development and livelihood generation through countryside development to hasten our overall economic growth. And it is in this area that I will primarily ask your help.

Allow me to point out that in the recent past, we have been encouraging legislation that would offer incentives to draw out investments by small and family-based enterprises. You are, of course, aware that the House of Representatives has passed the Countryside Business Enterprises Bill which I certified to it. The many small and family industries now operating underground will be encouraged to come out into the open and expand, after all the incentives in the Bill shall be operational.

We are also supporting public and private sector programs aimed at rural development such as industry dispersal. We have recently established Regional Industrial Centers aimed at providing the infrastructure that business needs to operate.

Our campaign for countryside investment has effected last year a 55% flow of total investments into the rural regions. Then, too, our “Tulong-Sa-Tao” program as of February 1989 has approved the loan application of 125 private voluntary organizations amounting to P36 million, to benefit 7,801 micro enterprises all over the country. From this, P32.5 million will be channeled to small businesses in regions outside the National Capital Region.

The Chinese in the Philippines have a long history of being forerunners of economic progress in the country. Of being pioneers of enterprises that still flourish today, I am asking you now to continue playing that role.

Additionally, I urge you to encourage your Taiwanese counterparts to invest here and avail themselves of duty-and tariff-free privileges that the Philippines enjoys under the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences. With Taiwan’s having graduated from the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences privileges, our country’s duty-free privileges should present the best incentive for Taiwanese investors to manufacture GSP-covered items in the Philippines.

As you are aware, Taiwan today is one of the Philippines’ most important investors with P2.31 billion or US$ 109.3 million investments in 1988 comprising 22.8% of total foreign investments. For 1989, we hope to increase Taiwanese investments by 50%.

The approval of the Board of Investment’s Board Resolution No. 046 last February 23 which spells out the basic rights and guarantees of Taiwanese investors in the country will enhance the attractiveness of the Philippines as an investment area.

Corollary to this, our BOI will put up a one-stop shop investment center in Taiwan to offer services that will help the Taiwanese save time. This center will provide information, counselling, pre-processing, information completion, identification, investment mission, travel assistance and coordination services.

The Department of Trade and Industry is closely coordinating with the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Immigration Office to grant multiple access visas so that Taiwanese investors will have ready access to us.

Lastly, as you know, I have appointed a new BIR Head in the person of Commissioner Jose Ong. He has pledged to improve collections, for taxes are the lifeblood of our nation’s progress. In turn, I have assured him of my full support in the exercise of authority and powers vested in him. Help him with this task, and you shall have helped me and our country.

I take this occasion to announce that your government will not tolerate citizens and residents who sap the strength of the country by their refusal to pay taxes or by paying way below what is due from them. I am determined to put a stop to all these. If persuasive efforts will fail, I will be constrained to apply the full force of the law on them.

Let me close by challenging you to be more involved with the affairs of the nation. How you can effectively weave together the national concerns of generating investments and exports from your foreign counterparts to promote countryside development is the challenge which you will address in this convention. I am sure that your sincere commitment will bring about significant results. I look forward to hearing about your resolutions to assist countryside development.

I thank you and bid you a very fruitful convention.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].