We will make tourism grow.

The President calls upon international travel agents to bring more tourists to the Philippines and “witness this miracle of democracy and progress.” She reminds them that the Government is committed to divest itself to the private sector.

First, let me thank you for coming here. I have read the papers abroad, and know the bad image that recent events have painted. Your coming just the same shows that you can still see the fundamental improvement, beneath the continued attempts of ambitious men to overturn what is this country’s greatest selling point: its freedom and democracy, and, the people who made it happen and keep it going.

The chief virtue of this country is not just the scenery, or the beautiful things its skillful people make, but the people themselves – and the experiment they are making in their lives and society. It is an experiment whose beginnings you shared and cheered as you watched the triumph of democracy unfold on television screens and across the headlines of your countries’ newspapers. You were with us in spirit and I know you are still with us. That is why you are here, to help make our dream a reality. The dream of a nation progressive, prosperous and strong in democracy, a country whose physical beauty should match the happiness of its people.

You can help us greatly in bringing more people here to witness this miracle of democracy and progress, and in your own way help make it happen.

This Government is pledged to do its part.

Last week at the Manila Hotel, I told the gathered businessmen that I want the Manila Hotel and all other government owned or controlled hotels to be sold at the earliest possible time. Similarly, I pledged to sell the Philippine Airlines – which is plainly too costly for the Government to support and manage properly, according to the principles of free enterprise.

I said that Filipinos and foreigners shall compete equally in bidding for these facilities. None of these enterprises and facilities being essential to national security, I should like to see them all sold, immediately, and fairly. There are areas of development in any country that must be strictly nationalist, but tourism is one important aspect of development that must be international, that requires the hands of friendship and cooperation stretched across the skies to make it happen. So there will be no excuses, no long-term studies, no dilly-dallying in carrying out this commitment to make tourism a growth industry in this country.

The sale of these hotels and other facilities, and especially of the Philippine Airlines, to entities with extensive international networks or chains, will increase tourist traffic to the Philippines. In this way, Philippine tourism will have a secure place in the flow of international tourism. You can help us right off by spreading the message that Government aims to divest swiftly to those in the private sector, both local and foreign, who are most capable and committed to making the tourism industry grow in the Philippines.

Much of this traffic, I am told, stays briefly. It is logical therefore to develop tourist facilities now easily accessible from Manila. While we do not mean to neglect the other potentially great tourist spots in more distant parts of the Philippines, our objective is to make the most accessible areas attractive to tourism immediately. We shall therefore emphasize projects with the shortest payback times in areas now already accessible. So, the tourism campaign we are waging today is not meant to bear fruit in the distant future. We shall try to realize it as soon as possible.

Aside from public works construction, there are less costly but equally effective ways to bring and keep tourists here. That is why I gave the mayor of Manila the authority and sole responsibility to clean up Manila in one week. That is also why I have given one-week deadlines to the Department of Public Works to fix up the streets of Manila. You will see results very shortly.

I welcome you here also because I would appreciate your own insights and observations. I am sure there is much we can learn from you on how to improve tourism prospects in this country. I shall pay close attention to your discussions here.

Your being here shows your commitment to grow with us in prosperity. I deeply appreciate it and look forward to a long and mutually beneficial partnership. For a start, you can help me spread the message that the tourism business in the Philippines is going to be played by the book the book of free enterprise, where there shall be no favors to a few, but opportunities equal for everyone.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].