Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the Armed Forces of the Philippines’  National Reservists Association Conference

[Delivered at Camp Aguinaldo, April 24, 1987]

FOR A CONSTRUCTIVE USE OF CIVILIAN FORCES

Toward the Constitution’s goal of truly people-based defense, President Aquino defines the challenge before the Government: to get the people involved in defending their values and communities, but to make certain that there are adequate safeguards to prevent abuses.

Our Constitution provides that the “Armed Forces of the Philippines shall be composed of a citizen armed force which shall undergo military training and serve, as may be provided by law. It shall keep a regular force necessary for the security of the State.”

In recognition of the long process that will be required, the makers of the Constitution stated the ideal and provided for the Congress to implement it. For the matter will require deep study and much discussion. I am pleased, however, that the AFP National Reservists Association has called this conference to study the means by which we can come closer to the Constitution’s goal of truly people-based defense.

I have already referred for study to the appropriate Departments other Constitutional provisions regarding our nation’s defense forces. I refer in particular to the provision for a National Police Force, in lieu of all other police and paramilitary forces. I am awaiting the study being prepared by the Defense and Local Government Departments. I realize that our people must be assured of their security. The challenge is to mobilize people and involve them in the defense of their values and communities, but with all the safeguards that will prevent the abuse of this great power.

Another area of reform involves closer cooperation between the civilian population and our military forces. Both sectors are most effective when they are mutually supportive. I saw this when I visited the Lopez-Catanauan Road in Quezon. The area is heavily infested with Communist rebels. The lack of infrastructure, particularly a farm-to-market road, has kept the area extremely underdeveloped. The road construction project being undertaken there by our military engineers will probably do more to solve the insurgency in the area than any number of battalions we pour in. I felt the great trust that now existed between the farmers and the Government, and realized how little our people ask of the Government. I was also pleased at the great efficiency of the work being conducted. Although 12 percent of the road project has been completed, only 10 percent of the budgeted amount has been spent. This is how I would like to see the great potential of disciplined forces used: constructively rather than destructively, and with the natural efficiency and honesty of our common people.

I see the same great potential for constructive service to the people in the million or more AFP reservists that this association represents. I have studied your proposals for the effective utilization of this force and have referred them to the Secretary of Defense for further study. The results of your conference, I can assure you, will be given equally serious consideration.

Even before this conference announced its theme, the essence of effective national defense as the mobilization of the power of the people was acknowledged by me. I have said again and again, I have never been safer than in the affections of our people. The gravest threat to my life and the stability of our democracy was made in a military camp. The greatest sense of security I ever enjoyed was in the midst of our people, even in the darkest days of the dictatorship.

People power is the force that is most feared by the enemies of freedom, of the Left and the Right. And well they should, for it is always in the people’s name that they commit their abuses. Today marks the start of another effort on our part to give institutional and abiding expression to another facet of people power: its potential for national defense and reconstruction. I commend the initiative of the association in this respect and wish you all every success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].