Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the people of Davao

[Delivered in Davao City, May 23, 1986]

KEEPING PROMISES IN THE LAND OF PROMISE

As she promised, President Aquino came back to Davao now as the President of the Philippines, to once again appeal to the people of Davao and the whole Mindanao to help her government in the harder task of national recovery.

She believes that the best way to achieve the government’s goal is consultations with the people on their problems and working out with them the solutions.

She tells the people of Davao to resort to people power again in order to achieve the goals of the new nation.

It is three months to the day when I should have arrived here to fulfill my promise to the people of Davao to visit again this land of promise and blighted performance. I was to come here to start, from the South, my northward campaign to bring the power of the people to bear upon the dictatorship that stole the election of their President and destroyed their democratic expectations. I was to tell you and the rest of the people of Mindanao to steel yourselves for a protracted struggle with an uncertain outcome. I was to ask you to cultivate the virtues of patience, perseverance, courage and self-reliance, for we would need them in the extreme.

Now I have arrived: already your President and in a land to which democracy has been restored. But my message has not changed. I have come to ask you still to call up those virtues for the longest task of national recovery, a task made only lighter by the freedom and justice in which it shall be carried out.

I said during the campaign that mine shall be a government of consultation. I have come to consult with you about your problems and to work out with you its solutions. I said during the campaign that consultation is necessary because no one can know better than the people directly affected what their problems are and how they should be solved. This is especially true when the main burden of the solutions must be borne by them. As you know, we have inherited a bankrupt government. But while that government is poor in material provision, it is rich in the strength of its will to recovery and in the power of the people who support and identify with it.

I have come to call on that power once more. The world stood amazed as we pulled off an unprecedented revolution. And it has been unstinting in its praise. The Filipinos swelled with pride as they stepped a little forward of the front rank of freedom-loving people because of the way they achieved their freedom.

For the world’s praise and for its moral during the dark days of our struggle we are truly grateful. Now the world is intent on being amazed again to see us pull off another miracle: recovery, from near total devastation with no resources and a multitude of debts.

We are alone again in this second struggle to rebuild. We shall be cheered on by the rest of the world and helped a little by special friends. But we alone will bear the burden of recovery. This is fine with us. We are never better, as we recently demonstrated, than when we have our backs to the wall and with nowhere to go but forward.

I like it this way. This is how it was when I campaigned for the freedom and the Presidency of the people. This is again how it should be when our people, in their new freedom, march alone to progress. As in our struggle for freedom, we alone will pay the price but we alone will have the credit and the honor. From this second struggle we shall emerge a still prouder and truly independent nation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].