Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Philippine Constabulary-Integrated National Police Anniversary

[Delivered on August 8, 1987]

PROTECTING THE PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

On the occasion of Philippine Constabulary-Integrated National Police Day, the President assures the people that the government will protect their cherished rights and liberties through democratic methods. She also announces sweeping measures to eliminate the alarming proliferation of firearms.

Yesterday we buried a champion of democracy, and a friend of order and liberty. He was a soldier-veteran of one war of national liberation, and of another struggle for democratic restoration. He was a friend of the Armed Forces and one with us in our commitments in the military. He was raised to be a soldier, and died a member of the President and Commander-in-Chief’s official family. Yesterday, we buried one of us.

His killers are still at large. That is a fact. It is a fact that has been shoved, since last Sunday, in our faces: in your faces and mine by our critics. You would think from their griping that my only duty as President is to ride shotgun for my Cabinet Secretaries. And that our soldiers and police all but exhaust their usefulness when a brutal crime happens. And then they are useful only as the butt of insults.

But you and I know that nothing can stop an assassin’s bullet, that there is no sure protection against treachery and deadly cowardice. If there were such protection, our enemies would choose other means to strike at us, and at the liberty and political order we represent and are trying to uphold.

We are blamed for every murder that happens and forgotten for the many more crimes that have not been committed; for the definitive reverse that the insurgency has suffered since we reconstituted the Armed Forces and the police as forces of integrity for democratic order.

But let us not complain at the treatment we have received. For we are not in office, and you are not in uniform; for compliments and flattery.

We are here for a job whose demands will increase with every success we meet, for our enemies will grow desperate and more cruel with every defeat, every failure of their persistent efforts to sow division among us.

We are confronted by a challenge that grows in difficulty with each day of liberty that our people now enjoy.

That challenge is to protect democracy by the methods of democracy, to fight a war for enduring liberty and permanent peace with methods that will enrich the life and dignity of the democratic society that you and I and our people have created.

Thus far, the casualties have largely been our own. Scores of soldiers and public officials have been killed.

We will take our losses manfully.

I have said that there will be no Constitutional shortcuts to public safety for as long as the victims are largely from our ranks. We shall protect our people’s cherished rights and liberties by methods that will honor and not diminish them, even if they help the guilty escape as often as they protect the innocent. For the overriding aim is to protect and enhance democracy, not to preserve it as an inviolate memento in a garrison state.

Still, we must show that democracy is not defenseless. That, with all due respect to the guarantees of the Constitution, we can strike at our enemies with the vigor and effect that will overcome their traditional treachery.

In the next few days, the Armed Forces and the police will adopt sweeping measures; measures aimed at eliminating the alarming proliferation of firearms and impunity of crimes in our society.

Checkpoints and searches will be increased and intensified.

The Supreme Court has rationalized the procedure for obtaining warrants.

Let me make myself clear to you, the forces of order: no one is to be spared, specially public officials.

A public office is a private risk. If an official cannot stand the heat, he should get out. No one shall be allowed to plead his office as a ground for exemption from the rigor of the security measures you will undertake. We have directed the Customs to crack down on all persons bringing in firearms from abroad. The more you catch, and the more important the person, the more you will rise in my esteem, and the greater will be my gratitude and that of our people.

Our people, I assure you, will back you up all the way. Because they know, and your conduct will prove it, that you are here for their safety.

These directives are addressed to the military, police and civilian authorities, whose close coordination and unstinting cooperation are indispensable to the success of this campaign. Work together. The success of one is the success of all. We are one Government; one force for order.

Today we celebrate the 86th anniversary of the Philippine Constabulary and the 12th anniversary of the PC-INP. Let us celebrate them as the people expect us to: with action.

Again, so there is no ambiguity, let me give you the standard by which we shall judge success. As I have said, there are no points for mere effort or good intentions. The standard will be mathematical: the more you catch, the more you confiscate, the better. Go now, and do your duty. You have our people’s fullest support.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].