Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the DAP Graduation

[Delivered at DAP Tagaytay, June 9, 1988]

SERVANTS OF THE PEOPLE

The reorganization was meant to promote performance, not to create anxieties. Those who remain shall constitute the face and substance of this government. We must serve with all dedication the Filipino people – our master.

According to the Bible, two are better than one, but a multitude is not necessarily the best. Since then government has been a search for ways to resolve the tension between the efficiency of less and the necessity for more to cover all the work of government. Is the bureaucracy bloated? Or is the size appropriate to the government of one of the most populous countries in the world – a country with tremendous problems and tasks? Is the bureaucracy in fact one of the principal reasons for the many problems we face? Is its reform one of the most important tasks we must set ourselves? This government’s reorganization policy is the first sincere effort to resolve that tension since the birth of the Republic.

We are called civil servants. “Civil” to denote the public character of our duties and “servants” to underscore the master we must serve, with all civility and dedication: the Filipino people. And, as with servants and other wage workers, we are entitled, as the parable says, to no more than the just wage of the worker in the vineyard, with no right to complain of the amount or the justice of its distribution. In the last analysis, our reward is the conviction, which not all may share, that we have served our country well.

When I took power two years ago, I knew of course that government is not a one-woman affair, and that its success would turn on the competence, dedication and cooperation of the government bureaucracy that would translate my policies into operational realities. I discovered quickly enough that there is never any lack of ideas, only of honest and capable men and women with the pragmatism to know what needs to be done, what can be done, and the competence and dedication to do them, and do them well.

I have found many such men and women in our civil service. I found also how poorly they were regarded by the past government they had served. I immediately ordered salary increases in order to keep and properly recompense their invaluable services. In addition, I instructed the Cabinet Committee for Energizing the Bureaucracy to prepare, together with the Civil Service Commission, an integrated program of rewards and incentives. A full report on the status of this program is expected by September of this year.

Respecting as we all should, the contributions of the civil service, I insisted that it be accorded the rights that workers in the private sector have long enjoyed. I enjoined the heads of offices to encourage their personnel to exercise the constitutional right to organize. Further to that, I signed Executive Order 180 into law. A year has passed and yet the Public Sector Labor Management Council which I created under that Order has not issued its implementing guidelines. It is against such inaction and complacency that I have again and again issued calls for greater energy in government. I view the organization of government workers as a further demonstration of this government’s preference for consultation and transparency, and as an added mechanism for uncovering corruption and incompetence in the public service. The CSC will soon begin a nation-wide education program on the rights and responsibilities of government workers. I urge everyone concerned to avail of it.

The first training and development program for government managers, called “Managing the Bureaucracy for Results,” ends today. We shall start another session next month. This signals the revival of the program for government career executives. I am announcing also the reactivation of the Career Executive Service Board whose members I shall soon appoint.

Finally, let me say that reorganization, as one of the first acts of this government, was meant to promote performance, not to create anxieties. I am confident that the value of that exercise – the reform of institutions to conform to need and the matching of jobs with the right people – will eventually be evident. But I don’t want to prolong the agony. I am giving all reorganizing offices 30 days from today to end the process. Those civil servants who should go, must be notified within that time. Phased-out government workers may register with an inter-agency committee that will train them for work in the private sector, as well as provide soft loans for their transition to private life. When that is done, let us close ranks and get on with the task of government.

Those who remain shall constitute the face and substance of this government. Let us hope the new face we present will not be just a leaner visage of incompetence and delay. To avoid this result we must truly energize the bureaucracy. The question is how to do it.

For a start, let us look at the most efficient private firms and model our expectations after their operations. There are similarities and differences, of course. The bottom line of the private firm is profits for the stockholders. For the public institution, the bottomline is service to the people who support it with their taxes. The first is driven by the profit motive, the second by civic virtue. This is the fundamental difference that accounts for the disparity in their performances. That difference can be eliminated by instilling in the bureaucracy both a new spirit of public service and a just apprehension that they will be fired if they fall short of the public expectation. The bottomlines, however, are essentially the same: an advantage to the stockholder or the taxpayer – cash or stock for the former; public services, security, and national honor for the latter. I want the public income statement to show a profit, a just return on the tremendous investments in taxpayers’ money that is being made.

Next, let us focus on our activities. Each department should focus on its mandate. Between now and year’s end, I want each department to review its mandate and channel its energy and resources exclusively to that If its mandate is agriculture or natural resources, then clearly it should involve itself with nothing more than promoting agricultural productivity or conserving the national patrimony. I am asking the Department Secretaries to submit a list to me of the things that their Departments should stop doing, continue doing, or go into – in line with their respective mandates. We shall judge their performance against it, which is fair. I expect that list a month before I deliver my next State of the Nation message. I want you to clarify your mandate, define your appropriate functions and thereby justify your continued incumbency.

Third, let us make it easy for our clients to avail of our services. Graft and corruption grows with discretion and regulatory functions. I support the initiative to Do Away With Red Tape, in which the public will be asked to rank each department according to the complexity and length of their procedures, and its insistence on regulating the private economy. The most complex will be the first to be trimmed on the chopping block.

Finally, let us take accountability seriously, because I am. I represent the people you are obligated to serve. Fail the people, disappoint their expectations, and you fail me. I need not say more.

I close my speech with the expressed hope that you will meet my high expectations of your improved competence in public service and your heightened sense of patriotic duty. Congratulations on your graduation and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].