AFTER THE PLUNDER

Under a National Forestation Program, the government intends to establish 600,000 hectares of forest plantations by 1992 and 1.4 million hectares by year 2000.

This land which should be green and lush is brown and dry when seen from an airplane. There was a time when the world looked to us for its timber needs. Southeast Asian timber was known by the name Philippine mahogany. It is well known but is is a fact that wealth of our forests was the foundation of Philippine agriculture, commerce and industry. It is a little better known that the wealth of our forests also served, and continues to serve, as the capital base of many a political fortune. Is it any wonder then that our lands are denuded and our people suffer radical alternations of drought and flood? But we could have had all the gifts that our bountiful forests contain indefinitely, even if we had wasted them, if we had the prudence to provide for the renewal of our forests. It is here that the lack of political will, combined with public corruption, conspired with private sector greed to deprive our nation of one of its most important natural advantages: rich forest lands.

I hope the private sector will cooperate with this government in preserving and renewing our forest resources, but one thing I can assure you, the political will is finally here. This government gives its fullest support to those natural resource managers who share our deep concern about the state of our forests.

We are launching today a National Forestation Program which will be the framework for our forest conservation efforts. We intend, under this program, to establish 600 thousand hectares of forest plantations until 1992, and we intend that by the year 2000 we should have 1.4 million hectares of protected reforested lands.

This objective cannot be achieved by the government alone. We shall need the cooperation and support of Filipinos, acting individually or in concerted efforts through organizations and communities. I think we shall have that cooperation. Our people have come through again and again in more desperate and perilous cases. They will in this case also. We have only to bring to them the problem of our forests and they will respond. I am hereby instructing the Minister of Natural Resources to immediately prepare a plan to increase public awareness of the plight of our forests and the means whereby the government hopes to alleviate it with the public’s cooperation.

The old government stripped us of much of our resources and the world is in no position to extend its assistance, despite its liberal compliments. But we have one last resource that nothing and no one can take away from us: and that is the power of the people and the will and confidence of this government to call it forth in the face of any challenge that may arise. To the people of the Ministry of Natural Resources, your frustrations are over. We shall succeed in our objective, you will have the satisfaction of serving a government and a people who will give to the effort to rescue and restore our forest wealth, their all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].