REVOLUTIONARIES OF LOVE AND CHARITY

President Aquino lauds projects of love and charity. Among these projects are those of the Diocese of Malolos, which help the orphans and the homeless aged. As surely as a revolution, these peaceful endeavors will change the face and destiny of the nation.

Bulacan is known as the home province of many heroes, fighters for Filipino freedom. There is one hero from Bulacan whom I hold specially dear. His name does not appear in history books, nor was he associated with any historic movement or cause. But he was, to my young mind, a real leader, a great teacher, and a source of inspiration and strength. My father, a true son of Bulacan, was my hero.

Like many other Bulakenos raised in more peaceful times, his love for God, country and countrymen did not find unusual dramatic expression. But he was firm in his faith, true to its values, and determined to put its teachings into practice whether in his place of work or at home with us. His patience, gentleness and steadfastness were to me a form of heroism that had a profound effect on my thinking and behavior, just as the deeds of Bulacan’s well-known heroes deeply affected the attitudes and destinies of many Filipinos.

Bulacan today enjoys a greater measure of peace and prosperity than do most other provinces. The sons and daughters of Bulacan are indeed blessed, and for that we must give thanks. But, as my father demonstrated to me, your traditions and reputation for revolutionary fervor have not dimmed or died, they have simply been rechanneled into everyday expressions of charity, self-sacrifice, industriousness, fairness, and care for the poor.

Jesus Christ, who preached and practiced these values, was a gentle, patient, living and forgiving man; a man of love and peace. Yet He was God and author of the revolution that changed the meaning of life itself and set all men free who cared to follow him. His Mother, though set apart by God as blessed among women, led no great battles for her race but lived a simple, quiet, humble life, calling herself “bondservant” of her Lord.

The Diocese of Malolos reaches out and supports orphans and the homeless aged, and involves itself in other civic community activities.

These are acts that will not make our history books, yet are great acts of Faith and Love, and will change the face and destiny of our nation as surely, and even more profoundly, than some of the great battles for freedom in our past. Let us continue with such endeavors, and trust that in time, we will reap the harvest. My father after all did not raise me for the Presidency, but only to be his good daughter and a Christian. And for my present work, I find that serves me well enough.

Let us pray for the continuing progress of this diocese and province that he called home.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].