Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 10th Anniversary of Department of Transportation and Communication

[Delivered on July 24, 1989]

MATCHING A NATION’S GROWTH

DOTC has had many achievements in the past: the construc tion and privatization of the Manila International Container Terminal, the organizational restructuring of DOTC, and the computerization of the issuance of drivers’ licenses, among others. However, many things remain to be done by the DOTC. The transportation crisis in Metro Manila demands drastic measures. The provinces, too, need better means of transportation and communication. In spite of these difficulties, President Aquino is optimistic that the DOTC can meet what is expected of them.

Ten years are good enough a yardstick to measure a group’s achievement, but certainly not long enough to determine a government organization’s impact on a nation.

But then, throughout these years, you have unfailingly rendered the services expected of you. So, I join you in celebrating the 10th Anniversary of the Department of Transportation and Communications. To Secretary Reyes and to all of you go my warmest felicitations.

You are now all aware that the services your department provides are crucial to our economic development. The DOTC’s role was not as well-defined nor was it given its due importance in early years, perhaps because its creation was falsely perceived as an exercise in gerrymandering. The years have vindicated your department.

I am pleased to hear of your recent successes. The construction and privatization of the Manila International Container Terminal has made cargo handling more efficient and has certainly created better opportunities for Manila to become a major transhipment post of ASEAN.

I am likewise glad that you have proven that your take-over from the DPWH of transport and communications infrastructure was a wise move. I understand that you have now completed over 38% of the P700 million infrastructure projects you are handling.

I have noted that you are undergoing organizational restructuring, trimming off excess bureaucratic fat, while progressively decentralizing your field operations. Let me tell you that your decentralization dovetails with this Administration’s blueprint for bringing democracy closer to the grassroots.

The profitable operation of your service agencies, particularly the Metro Manila Transit Corporation, the Philippine Ports Authority and the Manila International Airport Authority, pleases me. It proves that government’s delivery of vital services can be reconciled with economic viability.

I note further that you have effectively computerized the issuance of drivers’ licenses, thus cutting down red tape and potentials for corruption. And since you are for continuing past projects that have been effective, I hope you can equal, if not surpass, the speed and reliability that our postal service had earned for itself some years ago.

With regards to transportation, it is ironical that on the eve of the 10th Anniversary of DOTC, there should be this distressing accident where one of our airplanes overshot the runway, killing and maiming several people, both in and out of the aircraft. This and other recent accidents on the land, air and sea underscore the need to stress the importance of the constant maintenance of equipment and the implementation of procedures to assure the public’s safety.

Let us all be reminded that public carriers, from the very nature of their business and for reasons of public policy, are required to observe, not merely ordinary diligence, but according to law, extraordinary diligence to assure the safety of the passengers they are transporting.

In other words, they are, and I quote, “bound to carry the passengers safely as far as human care and foresight can provide, using the utmost diligence of very cautious persons, with a due regard for all the circumstances.”

It behooves the DOTC, therefore, to impose stricter standards to the end that transportation may not pose a menace to the lives and limbs of our people.

The severe transportation crisis which has hit Metro Manila recently is harming our people while robbing our economy of many precious manhours and much productivity. It distresses me to see our people waste time and take risks to crowd into inadequate and often unsafe public transport vehicles in pursuit of their livelihood and their studies in spite of the fact that the Light Rail Transit (LRT) transports some 320,000 Metro Manila commuters daily.

I am pleased to see that the DOTC is taking steps to ease this situation.

Now you also need to look into the transport needs of the provinces, where government services are acutely needed. And, if it should take multi-agency coordination to effect long-range results, I assure you that the other departments will be sensitive to your implementation concerns.

Our transportation shortage is not limited to land vehicles. We have problems in sea and air transportation as well. I have time and again said that we have to involve the private sector in solving these problems. Investment requirements in these industries are simply too costly for government alone to absorb. I have frequently called upon private investors to take advantage of the opportunities open for them here, and I am glad that they have been quite receptive.

We also need better communications facilities. Our telephone services at present can stand much improvement. I was informed that our country has the second lowest telephone density in the entire ASEAN region. Such a sorry state is discouraging investors, both foreign and local. I am, therefore, directing the DOTC to speed up the implementation of the National Telephone Program to link up the entire country through the establishment and operation of a nationwide trunk line.

Complementary to this national program is the rural telephone project which aims to install at least one telephone in every municipality. Just very recently, we announced the NEDA Board’s approval of the Misamis Oriental Telephone Expansion and Modernization project based in Cagayan de Oro City in Mindanao. The MISORTEL project will be funded by the South Korean Economic Development Cooperation Fund. We should have similar provincial level expansions in the near future.

Likewise, we need to rationalize the development of the telecommunications industry, whose growth has not matched the speed of technological development of other industries.

The problem areas I have cited may appear to you as a tall order. But I am confident that you will meet, or even exceed our expectations, as you have done in the past.

As our country faces the next decade aiming for a slot among the Newly Industrialized Countries of the Asian Pacific region, I share with you my vision for a much improved transportation and communications system servicing a prosperous nation, a nation reborn, energetic, productive and ready to compete with the rest of the world. You have fared well in difficult years. Your President expects you to perform harder in these less-troubled times.

Once more, my congratulations and a very pleasant day to everyone.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].