STRENGTH OF A NATION

“Pagkalinga ng madla, lakas ng bansa”. “Support of the people, strength of the nation.” This, President Aquino states, is the strength of our victories in the past. What the past failed to achieve, we have accomplished by the intelligent use of force, and by the unfailing respect for civil and human rights. We are winning the war of democracy because we are living its promises — liberty, justice and progress.

General Dula Torres, Tell the troops “ Tikas Pahinga “.

On this joint anniversary celebration, we have much to report—a great deal to be proud of—in the PC/INP.

It has been a year of achievements for you, achievements we have recognized in a small way today. I would like to congratulate the awardees and extend to them the thanks of our people, the gratitude of the government for the services they have rendered. Police, Constabulary and civilians have been given due honors-today. This underscores the unity of the PC/INP and the close cooperation of police and society since the EDSA revolution. This close cooperation is the theme of today’s celebration.

“Care of the media, strength of the nation” — “Support of the people, strength of the nation”.

That is the secret of our victories in the past year. What massive applications of force, general suspension of civil rights, and wanton disregard of Filipino values in the past failed to achieve — we have accomplished by the intelligent and firm use of force, and by unfailing respect for civil and human right rights. We are winning the war for democracy because we are living the promises of democracy – liberty, justice and progress.

A key element in our success has been the PC/INP under General Ramon Montano, to whom we have constantly turned to achieve the next to impossible, whether it is to track down the renegade military or to prove what we have confidently stated in our State of the Nation Address: we have turned the tide against the Communists in their war to destroy democracy.

There are figures to prove our success, but I prefer to rely on the following facts:

Fact number one: the communists have turned savagely against the people, and have embarked upon a ruthless campaign of assassination.

Fact number two: the communists recognize that our military and police forces have penetrated their defenses and infiltrated their ranks. As a result, they have turned with even greater savagery on their own people.

And, fact number three: the top leadership of the Communist movement are falling into our hands.

There is a downside to these welcome developments: the Communists will launch an even more deadly war against civil society as they try to substitute a new basis for their fading power: the fear of the people instead of their support.

In that respect, we yield to them. Let the Communists enjoy our people’s fear; we shall triumph through our people’s respect, affection, and all-out support.

The support is growing as a result of the accomplishments of the PC/INP.

Thus, the PC/INP took part in 477 missions this year, in addition to 835 last year. The maximum application of pressure in the Communist heartlands led to the surrender of some 1,300 of them this year, in addition to the 3,400 who turned themselves in last year.

As a result of the PC/INP’s clean-up drive, civilian government services—such as health, education, and infrastructure building—can now reach outlying areas and improve the lives of our poor and neglected communities.

The measure of success, we have noted, is the increased violence of the Communist movement, and the channeling of its energies into urban terrorism. Our casualties have been great. We grieve with the families of the police, Constabulary, Marine and army casualties in the brutal war that the Communists have brought to our cities.

But this strategy of terror, for all the pain it causes our families, will be the final undoing of the Communists.

Now they have shown their hand: they have given up trying to win the hearts and minds of the people and are content to just destroy human life.

Now they have shown their true colors: red, like the blood they have spilled in our streets; black, as the sorrow they have brought to many a family.

Because of the war they now openly wage against the people, the people have made war on them. Most recently, the people turned in two top leaders of the movement. This cooperation is repeated throughout the land and accounts greatly for the success of our campaign.

Thus, in addition to the capture of Malay and Ocampo, 11 regional and provincial leaders were arrested this year, and eight central committee members, nine staff officers, and 16 regional leaders last year. The same cooperation from the people made possible the capture of military renegade Reynaldo Cabauatan earlier this year.

The PC/INP has been equally relentless in its anti-criminality campaign, although here the fight is even harder. Still, some improvement has been remarked in the crime rate, which is down by 2.6% from last year. Carnapping is down from five vehicles stolen daily last year, to less than 2 per day this year.

The PC/INP is determined to be worthy of its achievements by purging its ranks of those who are an insult to the uniform.

Last year, I ordered the slack, the incompetent, and the crooked purged from the Constabulary and police. I am happy to note the progress you have made. Since I delivered my warning last year, 1,557 PC/INP personnel have been purged.

This is only the beginning, I am sure. For as I said in my State of the Nation address, the peace and order situation remains nothing less than terrible. And what compounds it is the prominence of military and police elements in the worst criminal activities disguised, including the killing of fellow military and police. This shame will stop, for it detracts from the honor that is due our dedicated men in uniform, many of whom have met their deaths in the line of duty.

The casualties of the PC/INP, particularly in the anti-insurgency campaign, have generally been the highest among the services. This is because their mission requires them to reach out to the smallest communities, and close in with the enemy that torments them.

We note with sorrow the many who have died among your ranks; we remark with pride the heroic disregard for self that marked their service to the Republic. The achievements we salute today are further ennobled by knowing the price we had to pay in the lives of the best among us.

I urge the PC/INP to continue its good work, to pile even greater victories on the many for which it is hereby congratulated.

The government will do its part. We shall push harder in pushing logistics to the field. We shall improve communications, mobility and firepower. In particular, I expect that every police station in the country will have at least one patrol vehicle before the end of the year—with provision for fuel, of course.

The work of the police and constabulary, which will soon be formally consolidated, will never end. Insurgencies can be defeated, wars come to an end—but the work of keeping order in civil society must be the unending mission of the civilian national police that will soon be created out of the elements we have so highly commended today.

Now that Congress has come around to our views on a national police force, this will probably be the last time we shall celebrate a joint Constabulary-Police anniversary. Instead, we shall inaugurate the Philippine National Police. Let us prepare well for this event. I address these parting words to the leadership of the PC/INP today:

Don’t give me laggards, cowards, carnappers, and hold-uppers — give me your best for this new force for peace and order. Give me your brave, your intelligent, your dedicated men and women in uniform. We are going to make a new start and I will accept only the finest. Congratulations on your anniversary.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].