Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Convention Integrated Midwives Association of the Philippines

[Delivered on October 21, 1988]

THE MIDWIFE AS INFORMATION OFFICER

Aside from maternal and child care, the midwife’s responsibilities include seeing to it that primary health care services are delivered to the community. In the annual celebration of Midwifery Week, the President reminds the members of the Integrated Midwives Association to continue collaborating and linking with their organizations in the field of health care so that they can serve a greater number of people.

I thank the officers of the Integrated Midwives Association of the Philippines for giving me the opportunity to meet with midwives from across the nation.

To the public mind, midwives are generally seen as assuming two major roles: helping deliver babies and being surrogate mothers. In a sense, I too, have had to play the role of midwife, but in the areas of statecraft and governance.

Your job has certainly expanded beyond that of maternal and child care. The professional midwife is now tasked with the immunization of our children against polio, measles and diptheria. You are also responsible for delivering micro-nutrients like iron and foodstuffs for our malnourished children. You advise couples on family planning methods which is a take-off from your traditional roles. These services are more often than not delivered twenty-four hours a day to communities that are largely inaccessible, remote and even dangerous.

In a recent survey in Cebu on the control of diarrhea, it was disclosed that the incidence of diarrhea in a barangay or town went up or down depending on the capability of the midwife assigned there.

With the recent passage of the Generics Act, I urge you to add to your public relations work that of disseminating information on the benefits to the people of this law. How can you do this? Everytime people consult you on their medical needs, turn this into a forum for explaining the use of generically named drugs. When dispensing drugs and medicine, refer to their generic names. During immunization sessions, devote a portion of the session to enlighten mothers on the use of generics. In effect, you turn your barangay health station into an information center on the use of generics. In time, your efforts shall equip people with the needed information to make right decisions on the use and cost of medicine.

Aware of the many roles of a midwife, the Department of Health has thus recognized the need for your professional growth. It is now in the process of formulating guidelines for the position of supervising midwife at the provincial level. Being a supervising midwife, however, entails more responsibilities. For those of you who are willing and capable of supervising health service delivery in a larger area, this is an opportunity to prove your mettle and serve a greater number of our people. Ability, intelligence and integrity are virtues which field personnel, no less than professionals, should be gifted with.

As you close your annual celebration of Midwifery Week, let me remind you that the role of the Integrated Midwives Association will be made more meaningful if it could collaborate more closely and link up with other organizations in the field of health care.

Thank you, and I wish you success as you go forth to implement decisions made in this Convention.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].