Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 5th Asian Parliamentarians’ Conference on Population and Development

[Delivered on February 17, 1989]

CHALLENGE TO PARLIAMENTARIANS

The President notes the issues to be tackled in the Conference that have a direct bearing on our respective countries’ progress and prosperity. The challenge to Parliamentarians is to strengthen the population programs so that people may be fully aware of their options in attaining the desirable population levels in accordance with their conscience and moral beliefs.

It is my pleasure to welcome all of you to the Philippines for this 5th Asian Parliamentarians’ Conference on Population and Development.

When Parliamentarians meet, it is but to be expected that the substance and processes of law will dominate the agenda.

This time it will come as no surprise if the high-flown rhetoric on the floor is heavily spiced with socio-economic and demographic jargon instead of legalese.

For you are gathered here, not to wrestle with the abstract but to address issues that have a direct bearing on our respective countries’ progress and prosperity.

Those of you from highly industrialized economies have much to share with those of us from the developing countries in terms of how we can push up our GNP and pull down the levels of population. Japan, Singapore and even Malaysia have, through the years, managed to stabilize their population growth. So have other western nations that now seek a turnaround to raise fertility rates from estimated zero population levels.

On the other hand, policy makers in developing countries continue to be challenged by high birth rates that have outstripped the resources at hand.

This imbalance in the ratio between population growth and resources has resulted in low income levels, unemployment and underemployment, malnutrition and inadequate housing, education and health facilities.

In the Philippines, our task in government has been mandated clearly enough in the constitution in these words: “The state shall defend the right of spouses to found a family in accordance with their religious convictions and the demands of responsible parenthood.”

As I see it, the challenge to parliamentarians is to strengthen the population programs adopted in their countries by appropriate legislative action. At the same time, the different governmental agencies and non-governmental organizations, taking their cue from such initiatives, can complement these programs by conducting broad information programs so that the people may be fully aware of their options in attaining the desirable population levels in accordance with their conscience and moral beliefs.

I wish all of you a most fruitful and meaningful dialog.

Good day and thank you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].