Speech of Her Excellency Corazon Aquino President of the Philippines To the Philippine media

[Delivered on November 13, 1986]

RESTORING CONFIDENCE IN THE PHILIPPINES

President Aquino informs the Philippine media that Japan, “inspired to respect by the drama of our liberation,” received her with warm hospitality and concrete expressions of support for Philippine progress.

The President reports that Japanese assistance, in the form of credit and grants-in-aid, could total at least 100 billion yen, a significant increase from the aid Japan extended in the past.

Mine have been voyages of discovery. And I think it has been the same for you, my countrymen in media, as you followed me in my trips as head of state. We have discovered facets of other nations that were concealed from us in the recent past, during the shameful years of the dictatorship. In our frantic efforts to find allies in the fight against the dictatorship, in our embarrassed attempts to explain the things that were happening back home, we overlooked the wealth of experience to be found in disinterested friendships with other nations, in international efforts of cooperation towards our mutual advantage and in pursuit of goals rising above our purely national concerns. But now, we see the possibilities for all these – now that we can look at the world with eyes of pride, and feel the world look at us with some measure of the respect that is our birthright. It is different when you are free, when you are looked upon as being well on the way to regaining mastery of your fate.

And strangely enough, it is only then that you find genuine friends who are more willing to help. I suppose this has to do with respect as the only firm ground for friendship, and with the need of the friend who gives to be honored by the gift as much as the recipient is helped and honored by it.

Japan, an old friend and longtime supporter of Filipino efforts to achieve progress, has started a new chapter in the history of our friendship. Inspired to respect by the drama of our liberation, and encouraged by the spectacle of Filipino courage, determination and self-reliance in the reconquest of freedom, democracy, and the control of its destiny, Japan has received us with warm hospitality, tangible expressions of support for Philippine progress, and every mark of honor that one could wish.

My talks with Prime Minister Nakasone were frank and enriching. I told him about the problems we continue to face, and the measures we have thus far taken to solve them. I outlined the program of action we intend to take to recover for ourselves a measure of progress and equity commensurate with our political achievements to date. He listened with great attention and deep concern. I feel we have a dependable friend and ally in him and his government. I believe he has found in the new Philippines a dependable friend and ally as well in the common task of assuring the stability of the region and the shared progress of all who live in it.

From my talks with the Prime Minister and other members of his government, as well as from the talks on the ministerial level, I can confidently say that Japan stands ready to help us, even more than she has done in the past. We are confident that assistance, in the form of credits and grants-in-aid, could reach at least a hundred billion yen. This represents a significant increase from the 49.5 billion yen she normally extended in the past. This assistance package includes the Calaca Power Project Financing, the 14th Yen Loan, as well as specific projects in the form of technical assistance and transfer of know-how, especially in agriculture at which Japan has excelled, as well as a much needed infusion of funds to our rural employment program.

One must, with grace, leave the details of this package to be explained in time by the Japanese government itself. The Philippine side must still do its part in drawing up the specific projects to which assistance will be directed.

There are other dimensions to the renewed friendship between Japan and Philippines that one must not fail to mention. There is, as I said, a new feeling of mutualrespect. There is also her unequivocal support for the new government and our new democracy, and a strong desire to see that it succeeds.

From my talks with the emperor of Japan, I have come away feeling enriched by acquaintance with a great and good man, who embodies the civility and wisdom of Japan. In him and the imperial family, I see what has inspired Japanese progress, the center that has held together and directed the tremendous energies and far-reaching enterprises of this great nation.

To His Majesty, the Emperor, to Prime Minister Nakasone, to the government and people of Japan, I would like to express, on behalf of the Filipino people, our deepest gratitude for the hospitality and honor they have extended to us on this visit. Our ancient ties of friendship have taken deeper root as a result of it.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].