POST-REVOLUTION BATTLECRY: INDUSTRIAL PEACE

Answering critics on the alleged pro-labor stance of Government, President Aquino declares that in fact her government is pro-labor and pro-capital; in short, pro-Filipino. She aims at industrial peace to bring about a climate of stability, thus encouraging domestic and foreign investment to result in more jobs and better living standards for the masses.

President Aquino appeals to labor, to use their right to strike as a last resort and to capital, to give labor decent wages and desist from unfair labor practices.

It warms my heart to be here in Cebu today. Cebu will always be very special to me. Cebu gave me refuge, the day our revolution started. It was here on that day where I felt the vast reservoir of genuine Cebuano love and affection.

More than its special personal meaning to me, Cebu enjoys an equally special role for the nation. It is the hub of commerce and industry in this part of our country.

And Cebu is what it is largely because of the entrepreneurial drive and business acumen of many of you here today. It is indeed a distinct honor to address you, the businessmen of Cebu.

In a very real way, you wield a magic wand in your hands. By the stroke of that wand, enterprises rise, factories grind to life, jobs are created, and profits are hopefully realized.

You will quickly remind me, however, that it is not as simple as that. I fully agree. We are all aware of the numerous problems, we face, coming as we have from a dark age. The challenge is clear, we must boldly embark on a second revolution of economic development.

In this regard, I must confess a measure of dismay. It seems that following my Labor Day speech at the Luneta, many have seen my government as pro-labor and anti-capital. Ironically, others in the labor sector see government’s stance to be exactly the opposite– that is, pro-capital and anti-labor. Truly, a glass is half empty or half full, depending on how thirsty you are.

I would like to assure all of you that my government – your government – is a government of the entire Filipino people and not of only one sector or interest group.

My government is both pro-labor and pro-capital; in short, it is pro-Filipino. The fundamental concern is for industrial peace. Industrial peace breeds a climate of stability. This encourages domestic and foreign investment, which results in more jobs and better living standards for the masses. And that leads, to a longer lasting industrial peace. We must all work together to begin this cycle – this process of growth and development. Magtulungan po tayo.

I gave to the labor sector only that which was denied them during the repressive Marcos years – their right to organize, to seek redress of grievances, to seek a better life for themselves. I also asked them to cooperate in the stabilization process by using the right to strike only as a last resort. I have been assured by the major labor groups that they will abide by this request.

I reiterate this appeal to labor. Help keep industrial peace. Use the right to strike only as a last resort and not as your opening salvo in seeking better employment terms. I call on the labor sector, particularly in Cebu, to heed this call.

On the other hand, I call on you – the businessmen, the entrepreneurs, the owners of enterprises – to do your part. Give labor a decent wage and sufficient benefits that you are able to afford. Do not obstruct labor’s right to organize and desist from unfair labor practices.

I appeal to both of you: Let us temper ourselves in these trying times when our collective battlecry, must be stability and industrial peace . Keep your communication lines to each other open. Talk to each other in the spirit of openness, dialogue, and consultation – in much the same way I have tried to govern the country. Yesterday, in Davao, we proved that a process of dialogue between seemingly divergent sectors and positions is possible if people are willing to listen to each other – to respect each other.

Together with the challenge to keep industrial peace is an equally important appeal – an appeal addressed specifically to you, the businessmen and entrepreneurs: It is the challenge to unleash the long-restrained Filipino entrepreneurial drive. We no longer have the time to wait and see. Waiting for better and more stable times is a less risky but equally uncertain posture. Better times are made by those that take the risk. Release your capital, your creativeness, your entrepreneurial spirit. Help us rebuild our ravaged country. While we seek the help of foreign countries, to help fund our growth, we must be prepared to do it ourselves. And if we have to, we will. And when we do, our new-found pride in ourselves as Filipinos will increase a hundred fold.

Government will do its part in trying to provide a climate conducive to investment and growth. We will mediate between disagreeing parties when we have to. We will set clear policies and enforce them without fear or favor. The tripartite approach will be pursued – with government, labor, and capital sitting together to set directions and resolve issues.

I would like the local governments to become more active in our drive to rebuild our nation. Consistent with my desire to decentralize the operations of government, I would like your local governments to take the active lead in their areas. While local officials must coordinate with the national government, initiative must, for the large part, come from local government. The local governments, for example, must deliver such public services to their constituents like water, drainage, electricity and many others. While I challenge your local officials to act expeditiously to address your needs, I ask you in turn to support their efforts to do so.

Lastly, Cebu has one of the largest potentials for tourism in our country. Do not waste the gifts that God has given you – the countless scenic spots of Cebu, your bountiful natural resources, and endearing cultural heritage. If you respond to the challenges I have just given you and the situation stabilizes, then Cebu can be one of the primary tourist destinations in our country. I will ask Minister Gonzalez and the Ministry of Tourism to help you to do this.

Truly Cebu and the Cebuanos have a wealth of resources that, if properly tapped, will make a significant contribution to our country’s rebuilding.

I ask you not to hesitate to use these resources. Let us move forward boldly to make our future one that we can all be proud of.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].