Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the First One Hundred Days of Freedom

[Delivered on June 4, 1986]

COUNTING THE FREEDOMS (Culled from a television panel discussion)

Freedom regained is the government’s greatest achievement in its first 100 days. But President Aquino warns that it might also be its greatest danger since some sectors are taking that freedom for granted. “Let us remain vigilant,” she urges.

Minister Ramon Mitra of Agriculture cites liberalization of credit for small farmers as another achievement of Government. NEDA Chairman Solita Monsod cites the removal of export taxes on agricultural goods, an import liberalization program and an emergency employment scheme. Minister Augusto Sanchez of Labor states that the incidence of strikes in the industrial sector since he took over has decreased and these are of short duration. Minister Jaime Ongpin of Finance lists the 85% build lip in foreign exchange reserves as a result of people selling their dollar holdings to the Central Bank, reflecting a return in confidence in Government; the stabilization of the peso at a P20.50 to $1 exchange rate, the decrease in interest rates for loans, and the offers of foreign assistance.

During the election campaign, I gave a speech outlining what my government would do in the first 100 days. It was wildly applauded, even if not completely believed. How could there be a first 100 days of an Aquino Administration? That today we should be assessing what we have achieved in our first 100 days; that, far from being dreams, it has been a down-to-earth reality of how to deal with a legacy of debt, a bankrupt government, poverty, corruption and insurgency should not be forgotten. We have come a long way very quickly.

The first 100 days were entered into with so much expectation and with so much to be done, 14 long years of a seemingly irreversible slide to disaster had ended in a snap. Reversing it was the work of brave people committed to our freedom and whose example finally drew the millions to that cause. The events of February did not happen by magic and from nowhere. There is no instant revolution nor, I must tell you are there instant answers. We had a snap election; then, we had a snap revolution but I never promised you snap solutions.

Our country needs your hard work, your patriotism, and your faith more than ever. Your government can, and is, creating the conditions for recovery but that recovery can only be carried forward by your efforts. Our revolution taught us two truths: first, that what the Filipino people want they must seek on their own. Others are not going to save us. Second, People Power is exactly that: it is people acting together, not government alone, to press through change. Don’t sit back and think that because there is now a People’s Government the nation’s problems are taken care of. That is a dangerous delusion. Now let us look not to government but to ourselves for the next step.

Are we prepared to put aside differences and commit ourselves to the common task: national revival? In this first 100 days you have rightly asked the question: “What has government done for you?’ Today I shall try to answer that, but may I also put a question to you: “What are you going to do for your country7 in the second 100 days?”

My Presidency was an invitation to everybody to bury their differences and work together. I fear some have seen this new freedom, not as the privilege of a common commit­ment to rebuild the nation, but as a license to rake up old, or light up new, quarrels. Let us all be sure of the highest standards of honesty and accuracy in what we do and say. Perhaps the greatest achievement of the first 100 days is also its greatest danger: we are taking freedom for granted.

I am particularly anxious that there should be no abuse of our precious freedom because ours was no ordinary revolution. We rejected the revolutionary’s normal course of change: violence, because that was not our way. Where others would have pointed a gun we held out our hand in peace and reconciliation. The price of that restraint is that we must remain vigilant.

The other price of a peaceful revolution is that it appears to raise questions about how far we mean to go. It is almost as though a revolution without violence is not to be taken seriously. The blood in the streets is the test of political determination. Well, let me give this assurance. We will go all the way it takes to build a society free from corruption, oppression and poverty, where every Filipino has the chance to fulfill his or her potential. There will no longer be one Philippines for the rich and one for the poor, one for the strong and another for the weak.

Let me turn to what we meek revolutionaries have already achieved: the record of the first 100 days. This has been a 100 days of freedom:

* First, freedom under the law. We have freed our courts from political interference; restored habeas corpus, and released political prisoners. Under the present temporary Freedom Constitution, as it is known, we have guaranteed full protection of human rights and the authority of our courts.

* Second, freedom of the press. In this short 100 days. We have seen the blooming of the freest press in our region. Amongst none of our neighbors does media enjoy the same unlimited free speech.

* Third, freedom for our farmers. Seventy per cent of our people live in rural areas. They have been enslaved by government imposed cartels that have kept down the prices for what they grow at the same time that they have had to pay inflated prices for inputs such as fertilizer. We have dismantled the cartels and lowered the price of fertilizers. Above all we must free our farmers from the cycle of indebtedness, poverty, underemployment and landlessness that has been their lot. We are examining how to make more cheap credit available to the farmers themselves. The DBP is establishing a P500 million facility for small and medium-scale industries in the countryside and for agriculture. And we are implementing land reform in the poorest areas. The rural sector is the focus of our concern. It is where we must make our principal investment for recovery. The oil price cuts, amounting to one peso per liter, that I have ordered have had particular impact on the rural economy. This year the price of oil has been cut by 27 per cent.

* Fourth, freedom of labor. I have repealed those aspects of the labor laws that are repressive and aggravate rather than enhance labor relations. I have sought to lay the foundations for a system of labor relations that is compatible with our people’s vision of a just society and the imperative of a swift recovery before the justice in progress that we seek recedes completely beyond our reach.

* Fifth, freedom of the military. We have freed the military to play their proper role of protector of the Filipino people. By the brave actions of their leaders in starting the revolt, the military began the process that is enabling them to recover the nation’s respect. Both through the retirement of overstaying generals and through the extensive program of military reform that is being embarked on we are restoring our military to top fighting form.

* Sixth, freedom from the hills. For those insurgents who now want to take advantage of it, there is the possibility of returning to normal life. When I was in Davao I met the 168 insurgents who had recently sought amnesty and rehabilitation there under the so-called Davao project. We will expand such regional initiatives and I still hope the insurgent leadership will respond at the national level to my offer of a negotiated amnesty.

* Seventh, freedom of our economy. You know the magnitude of our debt problem and the bankruptcy of our government following the previous regime’s election fraud but let me today tell you the good news. Our foreign exchange reserves have increased by 85 per cent since the revolution; the value of the peso has strengthened. Our inflation rate which was 50 per cent in 1984 and 23 per cent in 1985 has now come down to a rate of 2.1 per cent. Interest rates have fallen sharply. Our economic problems remain huge. Indeed one reason inflation is so low is because there is so little demand in our economy. One can only hope that private investors will soon take the initiative and show confidence in the power of the people, of which they are a part, to transform our country. It is clear that recovery will be through our own efforts or not at all. We must help ourselves. So our 1986 budget is a budget for growth. It is aimed at job creation in the rural sector, particularly by an effort to use labor intensive methods in infrastructure programs. There is a 60 per cent increase in capital expenditures. This will allow large-socio job creation.

There are many further freedoms I could name. Those that come from the improvement in medical services; or from the revived tourist industry or our emphasis on protecting the natural environment. By stopping illegal logging and launching on June 6th a national reforestation scheme we are determined to preserve and restore our natural habitat.

I have kept until the last constitutional freedom because the writing of the constitution lies immediately before us. My part is done. After wide consultations I have named the members of the Con-Com and it has started work. We kept to the tight timetable to ensure that as soon as possible we would again have an elected legislature, and constitution we can all honor and respect. It alone can provide the permanent framework for our freedoms.

I have laid out today how your government has used the first 100 days to restore and guarantee freedoms and remove obstacles from our national progress. But a People’s Government could not have done all this if the people had not, in the first instance, overthrown the dictatorship in its path. So much was achieved by the power of the people. And it is that power I wish to summon again in the revival of our economy and the establishment of peace. The freedom you have won requires unflagging responsibility. May I end by repeating my earlier question: What are you going to do for your country in the next 100 days?

And now I would like to ask the four ministers whom I invited here to tell you what their respective offices have accomplished during the first one hundred days. Since the main thrust of our economic recovery program is agriculture, I think it’s fitting to ask Minister of Agriculture Ramon Mitra to start the discussion.

The farmer today enjoys more opportunities to earn. In the past there were too many regulations; the farmer was at a loss. He didn’t know where to begin, whom to approach. All that has been changed. In the past, farmers didn’t know where to borrow money to buy, say, a carabao or fertilizer. Now they know where they can get credit. Not only that, they know where to get advise as to what they should plant and where they could bring their produce after harvest. In relation to the latter, the President has mentioned that the government is improving farm-to-market roads to enable farmers to move their goods with greater speed and ease.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].