Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Palanca Awards for Literature

[Released on September 1, 1986]

HONORING THE COUNTRY’S WRITERS

On the occasion of the 36th awards night of the Palanca Memorial Awards for Literature, the President pays tribute to the country’s writers, recalling that writers had a special place in the heart of her husband Ninoy (who started his career as a journalist). She declares that writers are the people’s conscience, and that they must look deep into their hearts and speak truthfully about what they see. Filipino writers today, she concludes, have a great advantage because they are writing for an audience committed to truth and freedom.

Tonight we honor our writers and celebrate the 36th year of the Don Carlos Palanca Memorial Awards for Literature. I congratulate this year’s winners for their creative works and join them in paying tribute to Mr. Carlos Palanca. His unwavering support for Philippine literature since 1950 bears a bountiful harvest every year in fiction, poetry, and drama. It can truly be said, after more than three decades, that the Palanca Awards are the hallmark and pillar of our flourishing literature.

I am honored and happy to be among writers tonight. Writers occupied a special place in Ninoy’s heart. His first job, as you know, was as a newspaperman trying to recapture Filipino heroism in Korea. I myself find among my happiest moments those times when I find solace and inspiration in a writer’s work.

Today, we enjoy the blessings of our new-found freedom and face the daunting task of rebuilding our country in order to preserve that freedom in which literature flourishes best. I know that you as writers cherish our country’s freedom, and that your works glow with love for our people and our way of life. Behind you is a noble and stirring tradition going back to the first Philippine Revolution, when sword and pen went hand in hand. During the long dark night preceding the February Revolution, our writers were at the forefront too, wielding pens for lack of swords, and unwittingly prefiguring the unarmed revolution that succeeded, where weapons could not, in restoring our freedom.

I am confident therefore that you as writers will continue the good fight, for it is not over. Your first Muse, as with Rizal, is Inang Bayan. You are sensitive to issues of justice and human dignity because all great works of literature rest on the inestimable worth of the human spirit.

Where writers are free, there is the truest freedom. There is no surer sign of a true democracy. People often think that the writer is a non-conformist, an individualist, someone, therefore, whose life and work cannot be relevant to real events and pressing issues. The conclusion is wrong. The premises are necessary. A writer does not write for any particular group or ideology, for otherwise he is not free. He writes for himself, he writes for that part of himself that all men have in common whatever group or ideology has them in its grip. The writer must distance himself even from the very things he loves and believes in, so that he can see clearly and dispassionately the truth about them. It is only by this temporary solitude that he is able to rediscover or create values and weave them into the thread that really binds a people together, the thread of their triumphs and disappointments, their griefs and their joys; that make us recognize each other as brothers.

As all men of good will now join forces in rebuilding our country, you as writers have a very important part to play.

You are the memory of the race. Your stories, poems, and plays endow the history of our nation and the lives of our people with form and meaning. You mourn our failures and celebrate our victories. This is an uncompromising task, for a people is only as wise and strong as its memory.

You are our people’s conscience. You look deep into our hearts and speak truthfully of what you see. Your vision is not distorted by dogma or prejudice, not even your own. In this, you are selfless. You speak for those who are speechless and powerless, be they rich or poor, but whose lives could speak volumes.

Finally, as a conserver and creator of values, you serve our future. You work in the present because that is all that is within any man’s grasp, but you draw from our people’s memory and conscience a vision of the future by which our lives in the present are strengthened and enriched.

As the leader of a people trying to rebuild their country, I would like to think that, tonight, I am with one of my most important partners in this task. I would like my presence here tonight to be seen as an indication of the importance I place upon that partnership.

Much has been said about the relationship between the writer and the state, but for all the passion and ink that have been spent to define it, the relationship remains murky and fraught with suspicion on both sides.

All our Constitutions, except that of Malolos, guarantee state patronage of arts and letters. This guarantee remains in the Freedom Constitution and undoubtedly will be preserved in the new constitution. This simply stated guarantee, I believe, describes the ideal relationship between writer and state, and provides the proper measure for evaluating and adjusting reality.

It will be my Government’s measure. I am convinced that writers offer a gift to the nation and none should stand as an obstacle between them and the people. I know that the state, wittingly and unwittingly, has sometimes been such an obstacle. There were many instances when the state met the writer with the heavy arm of antagonism or the thick wall of indifference rather than with the hand of assistance.

The cynicism, if not outright hostility, with which many writers view the state was therefore inevitable. I work against that inevitability when I issue my call for their helping hand. The Government now asks writers to help in undoing what Government, with the help of some of their own brethren, has done to the partnership between writers and the state.

This Government hears the many voices that speak of the present plight of writers. It accepts its responsibility to create those conditions, material or otherwise, congenial to the writer’s exercise of his craft. My Government acknowledges that freedom to write must be accompanied by conditions that encourage creativity.

The writer must have easy access to the works of literature that are being produced both here and abroad. For a writer belongs to two countries: his own and the world of literature against which he tests his mastery of the craft and the validity of his vision. A tariff reduction measure has been adopted to improve this access but it is not enough. Further measures to enhance it will be seriously studied. Along with them will be measures to encourage the publication of local works of literature. In this respect, media can help, for traditionally the media have been the first door that gives the writer access to his audience. I refer not only to the print media but to radio and television as well.

The writer must have some assurance that his needs as a human being will be met. He must, through his craft and without any violation of its integrity, be able to acquire the means whereby he lives and the recognition which gives fulfillment to his life and labors. Not as a special privilege but as a matter of justice.

If support and assistance to writers and artists in general shall be the orientation of my administration, respect for their autonomy shall be one of its hallmarks. I fully understand the jealous sense of independence of writers because I share it, along with the millions of our people who refused to take any more dictation and did something about it.

Writers today are working with already one great advantage over writers of the past, they write with certainty that they are reaching men and women whose commitment to truth survived and triumphed over 14 years of lies. This is a great consolation, I am sure, and an equally great challenge. And I am sure you will be equal to it.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].