Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Law Day

[Released on September 21, 1989]

JUSTICE FOR THE POOR

President Aquino sounds out once more her call for a new moral order in government service, particularly in the judiciary. She bewails the enormous backlog of cases, the slow pace of justice and the situation of justice being beyond the reach of the poor. She urges lawyers to practice their profession honorably, prosecute the guilty and set the innocent free regardless of wealth and power.

The irony of celebrating Law Day today does not escape me. Exactly 17 years ago, a tyrant completed his travesty of our laws as he usurped all the powers of the land in his hands and deprived everyone else even of that basic right to think for oneself. Majority of the Supreme Court upheld his move, and many of our lawyers, including those from prestigious and reputable law firms, applauded. To cap the insult, the whole nation was made to celebrate the day as Thanksgiving Day.

I did not come here to harp on past misdeeds. Only to remind you that the law, though it seeks to make us all equal, may be manipulated to suit one’s ends. And that the bottom line of real justice are an unsullied integrity and an obsession for fairness and truth.

Perhaps, though, we can see added significance in celebrating Law Day today, if only to remind us that liberty ceases when we let go of the rule of law. And also to remind our lawyers that they are the guardians of the laws of the land, and necessarily, of our freedoms.

In my State of the Nation Address this year, I sounded out once more my call for a new moral order in government service. To my fellow government workers, I said: “Unless the public sees results soon, it will be goodbye for you.” I also urged the Department of Justice to take stronger measures against the inept who have caused so many cases at the initial preliminary stage to languish in limbo.

The feedback I am getting now is heartening. Very recently, you heard of several prosecutors of the Department of Justice who were terminated or suspended for various offenses. This is just the beginning. The Secretary of Justice has assured me that in the next few weeks, more substantial results will come in response to my directive. Let me just say that I am very hopeful.

Many a time, too, I have nudged the judiciary for its inability to move the mountains of cases that pile up in the country’s “salas” — only to be told that the lawyers contribute in large part to the enormous backlog. Postponements are sought by counsel at the slightest excuse — stomach upset or traffic jam, if not indisposition of clients or witnesses. And more often than not, these are granted by over-lenient judges.

Given such “companerismo” between lawyers and magistrates, what is a poor litigant to do? I speak from my own experience as a complainant in a long-drawn out libel case and as a very much interested party in a criminal case whose end is nowhere in sight after six years.

I know that others who are short on patience end up cursing the government that has placed justice beyond their reach. Should we then make common cause with Shakespeare and cry “Let’s kill all the lawyers!”? More to be taken as poetical hyperbole if not license, I would not wish such a hapless fate on the profession I would have been part of had I not yielded first to my heart.

Happily, the Supreme Court has come up with a less gory scheme. Mandatory continuous trial, no longer a pilot program, is, I understand, ready for implementation on a wider scale. To be successful, it will take lots of hard work and sacrifice on the part of the Bench and Bar, not to speak of the entire justice system. Before the experiment was launched in 84 branches of the Regional and the Municipal Trial Courts, many predicted resistance from the lawyers who would stand to lose their “per appearance” fees.

But I am told by the members of the Philippine Women Judges Association who paid a call on me before their Conference, that the lawyers in the pilot areas were very cooperative — preparing thoroughly for a more meaningful pretrial and even cutting short the litigation period where the outcome on the basis of evidence disclosed was already predictable. And they seem to have come to terms with a more realistic fee structure. Moreover, for the six-month period of February 1 – July 31, 1989, there was a marked increase in the number of cases resolved in the salas of the participating judges.

To be sure, additional administrative reforms pertaining to personnel, equipment and procedure have yet to be introduced but, I daresay, all these will be ironed out in due time.

This innovative device, for all its good intent and features, will not, however, rid the system of its age-old malaise of corruption. Even more than I, you all know that the law punishes both he who corrupts as well as the corrupted.

When I spoke before the Integrated Bar of the Philippines last June, I was given the assurance that its members will prevent a repeat of the Martial Law years and lend their expertise to the prevention, detection and the punishment of graft and corruption. I take that to mean that the whole of the Philippine legal profession has recommitted itself to the spirit of fairness, truth and justice — to nothing less than these ideals.

I thus commend the Philippine Lawyers Association for jointly sponsoring with the Integrated Bar of the Philippines and the Philippine Bar Association today’s observance of Law Day. As I do so, let me urge your associations to exact from your members the vow to practice the profession more honorably. To harass no man needlessly, to cause the guilty to be punished and set the innocent free, regardless of wealth or power. For, as the great thinker, Cicero, said, “Nothing can be honorable when justice is absent.”

With the effectivity of the Code of Judicial Conduct on October 20th, the judiciary shall be guided by canons as strict as any in other parts of the world. Let the ranks of the lawyers be equally scrupulous in their behavior in and out of the courtroom, ever mindful of the precepts in their Code of Professional Responsibility.

Completing the triad is the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees which shall apply to the rest of the personnel of our courts. For it is only too widely known that some employees enter into irregular, if not illegal, deals with lawyers and clients, running circles around the unsuspecting judge — from the clerks of court to the researchers and stenographers, each to his own sweet racket. And yes, the sheriffs who have it within their power to delay the execution of a judgment being eagerly awaited by parties whose lives, honor and property are at stake. Let me remind them of what Jefferson once declared: “The execution of the laws is more important than the making of them.”

Are you aware that many a neophyte law practitioner has been disillusioned, many a promising legal career has died aborning at the threshold of a judge’s chambers simply because of the shenanigans being committed in the very cloisters of the temples of justice? Can we blame the people if at times they lose respect of the very officials who should be instruments of truth and justice? Frustrated and helpless, they resort to remedies outside the lawful and normal channels set up by the government.

I call upon you, as officers of the court and as citizens of our country, to help your leadership bring about a reformed and more responsive administration of justice. As the Good Book says: “Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a might stream.”

Thank you and a good day to all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].