Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the launching of the First Philippine Fund

[Delivered on November 8, 1989]

A TEST OF ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND CONFIDENCE

President Aquino graces the launching of the First Philippine Fund as a show of confidence in the Philippines as the most dynamic and profitable region in the world. The launching will test the country’s economic performance in the toughest market – the New York Stock Exchange.

The New York Stock Exchange fully lives up to its reputation. We sense the tremendous energies of the free market system, which, in a short while, I shall be privileged to ring into action.

The Exchange is the competition of the strongest and best. Until you are listed here, you are in the minor leagues.

I am here today for the listing of the Philippine Fund. In a very real sense, I am here to offer the Philippines to U.S.-based investors as the area with the greatest opportunity for growth and profit in the most dynamic region of the world.

We shall regard the Fund as the Philippine flagship. We shall follow its progress carefully as a barometer of international investor confidence in the Philippines and a gauge of the wisdom of our policies and effectiveness of our initiatives. After four successive years of economic growth, we feel confident about testing our economic performance in the toughest market – the New York Stock Exchange.

Like many other country funds on your boards, the success of the Philippine Fund depends on several factors.

One of them is the quality of the institutions backing the fund, and the competence and integrity of the people who man them. The appointed manager of the Fund, Clemente Capital, is well-known and respected. The designated trustee, the Philippine National Bank, is our country’s largest commercial bank and the most successful privatization offering that this government has made.

We hope that the groundswell of confidence that met the PNB offering in Manila and drove its share prices through the roof will be matched by the response of the New York Stock Exchange to the Philippine Fund.

The underwriting syndicate needs no introduction. It is led by Nomura Securities International and actively participated in by Paine Webber, Credit Lyonnais, and the International Finance Corporation.

The quality of the institutions handling the Fund will be well complemented by the quality of securities offerings in the Philippines today. This is the right time for the Fund to come into play.

The capitalization of the Philippine market has increased in the past three years 1,450 percent: from $670 million to $10.4 billion and growing. This makes the Philippine stock market one of the fastest-growing capital markets in the world. The Manila Stock Exchange composite index rose from 131 index points in 1985 to 1,100 index points today. The Makati Stock Exchange went up from 23 to 1,200 index points.

The success of the PNB offering has encouraged us to accelerate our privatization program. There will be share offerings of several, strong Philippine corporations in the very near future.

Things are going well in the Philippines and will get better. If you won’t take my word for it, take the word of Merill Lynch which reports that the Philippines, given present trends, may emerge as one of Asia’s best-performing economies in the first half of the 1990s. The symbol of the bull in Merrill Lynch stands for stock market confidence, I hope.

We enjoy the good opinion of the international financial community for our firm management of the economy and our faithful discharge of the foreign debt. We have shown that the Philippines can perform creditably according to the highest economic standards. The restructuring of the economy has been hard on the Filipino people, but we would rather be bankable than pitiful. We would rather be an attractive target for investments than an object of charity.

The listing of the Philippine Fund shows the Philippine economy coming of age and rightly feeling confident that it can test its mettle in the New York Stock Exchange.

May I thank the Chairman and directors of the Exchange for their warm hospitality and encouraging reception. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].