Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the 40th Anniversary of the World Health Organization

[Released on April 7, 1988]

A COLLECTIVE VOICE FOR HEALTH

The President congratulates the staff of W.H.O., globally, and in particular the Regional Office which considers the Philippines as its home. The Philippines celebrates the anniversary of this organization and takes pride in its successes.

I am honored to have been invited here today to participate in the celebration of the 40th anniversary of the World Health Organization. I am especially pleased to note that, for thirty-eight of those forty years, Manila has been home to W.H.O.’s Western Pacific Regional Office, handling the affairs of the largest and the most diverse of the organization’s six regions.

As the world’s collective voice for health, W.H.Q. has contributed substantially to the well-being of many of the world’s peoples. Through its programs, it has led the fight against many endemic diseases which afflict particularly the poorest of the world’s population. With its vast network of consultants as well as its own expert staff, the organization is able to generate expert opinions and timely technical advice to guide the health policies.

W.H.O. had consistently stressed the principles of self-reliance and social equity in helping member states confront and solve their problems. The objective of health for all by the year 2000 through the primary health care approach is an outstanding goal to which the Philippines is firmly committed.

Our National Drug Policy, which I initiated -a year ago, consisting of safe and effective medicines, rational use of pharmaceuticals and the development of our capability for basic manufacturing translate into reality many of W.H.O. s pharmaceutical concepts, such as the essential drugs concept and generic labels. I am indeed confident that with the full support of the World Health Organization in technical, material and moral terms — we shall persevere and succeed in fully implementing this policy which can only result in better health care for the Filipino people.

There are good reasons indeed for this organization to celebrate its 40th anniversary. Its past accomplishments justify it, its future contributions will confirm its merits even more. As one of the member states of W.H.O,, the Philippines celebrates the history of our. organization. As host of the Western Pacific Regional Office, the Philippines takes pride in W.H.O.’s successes.

Of particular note to this region is the information recently given to me that our distinguished Regional Director, Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, has recently been nominated to the post of Director-General of W.H.O. in Geneva This news gives us greater reason to celebrate today’s happy event.

And so, I would now like to offer congratulations on behalf of the Philippines, its government and its people, to W.H.O. and its staff, globally, and, in particular to this Regional office, its staff and its Regional Director, Dr. Nakajima.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].