Ang demokrasya ay maaaring mabuhay.

During the necrological services for the assassinated Local Government Secretary Jaime Ferrer, President Aquino reminds the people never to give up the rule of law which they long fought for. Democracy can survive the death of noble men.

I campaigned for him in ’84. He campaigned for me in ’86, where he proved invaluable. I offered him a post in the Cabinet after the victory, but he declined it. He wanted to enjoy in private life the liberty and rights for which he had fought. In the midst of the crisis last year, I prevailed on him finally to take on the thankless and, it turns out, the fatal job of Local Government.

I had not expected him to win in ’84, against a worthy opponent, albeit in an unfair contest. But he won, and in the process proved himself not only the better man but a smarter politician. Virtue and traditional politics, like oil and water, don’t ordinarily mix. But they did in this man. He was not only right, but he could win. A combination I always prefer. There are no points for mere effort or good intentions.

His devotion to country and his commitment to democracy were complete and uncompromising in war and in peace. And they expressed themselves less in words than in actions of unfailing and unmistakable patriotism.

He brought to public service the regimen and directness of the soldiering life that was his first love and the constant standard by which he tested his effort and those of others.

He was curt in manner and sharp in his speech. And always passionate on the issues he carefully selected. He was one of the few men in Government who believed that their time is not their own to waste.

This was the quality that endeared him most to me. During both campaigns, he was the only politician who let me speak punctually on schedule. The moment I arrived, he cut short whoever was speaking and gave me the microphone.

In my Cabinet, he went straight to the point and declared himself clearly on one side or the other of crucial issues: honesty, responsiveness and accountability in local government, firmness in dealing with revolutionary terrorism or plain political gangsterism.

To his long and distinguished record of achievements, one sadly adds the dark distinction of being the first Cabinet Secretary to be assassinated in the history of the Republic.

Jimmy made a lot of enemies; but we did not think that his straightforwardness would create his killers. He received death threats, but he rejected bodyguards. In his old age, he may have thought there was a cleaner way to die than nature offered. And he was the man to take it.

And he did, in the head, as the best of our race have taken it in the past few years.

His murder is the unwritten paragraph of my State of the Nation. It states the most serious challenge that faces us today: Can we have order without tyranny, and peace without oppression? Must democracy fight with the weapons of its enemies; with treachery and cowardice?

There were no assassinations of public officials under the dictatorship. Perhaps it is not abuse that provokes violence, but decency that is mistaken for weakness.

Jimmy’s death states the problem; his life gives us the first part of the solution: fearlessness. As we look for ways by which democracy can defend itself without dishonoring itself, let us never lose heart, never be afraid, never give up that for which our people fought and sacrificed these many years: the rule of law; a Government that, even in emergencies, conducts itself with decency towards its people.

Democracy can survive the death of Jimmy Ferrer, as it can survive the deaths that may follow, although I pray that his will be the last. But democracy cannot survive the adoption of the ways of its enemies.

We shall continue to fight anarchy with law and murder with justice. There are more than enough laws for the purpose. What is needed is the will and the intelligence to enforce them. For as long as the imminent danger is only to public officials, there will be no Constitutional shortcuts to public safety. Let every flagstone on the road be the grave of a servant of the people, but the light of liberty and the protection of rights will be with us all the way to permanent peace.

This is how Jimmy Ferrer would have wanted it, this man whose whole life and tragic death have been one uninterrupted and uncompromised service to duty, to country, and democracy.

Let us hope that he is not the last of his kind.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].