The time for action is now.

President Aquino reports on her official visit to the United States. “Our friends understand and sympathize,” she says, “but let us not hold our breaths for total answers coming from anywhere but our own efforts.”

I am so happy to be home again. It was a long and exhausting trip but also and always exhilarating. We were met everywhere with great warmth and much respect for what we Filipinos have accomplished. This respect and admiration are the reward of our heroic struggle. Poor as we are, we already have that for which great nations bend their greatest efforts: the admiration of the world.

I met with President Reagan and I believe I have established a personal rapport and sympathetic understanding for what we are trying to do.

I addressed the Congress of the United States and laid before them the painful sacrifices of our struggle, the glorious moment of our victory, the enormous problems we have so unfairly inherited, and the great promise that our new democracy represents not only for us Filipinos but for the free world as well. But over and above that I tried to convey the great pride of the new Filipino and the only basis of Filipino-American partnership: the mutual respect of those who, though not equal in progress, are certainly so in pride and in the sacrifices they have made for democracy.

I met with our creditor banks and got them to understand the imperatives of Philippine growth, which will be as much to their advantage as to ours.

I laid bare our plight and I did so, I believe, with some effect. Our friends understand and sympathize. We have done our part. I have worked with all my might, prayed with all my heart and the rest I leave to God and to you, my people. Let us not hold our breaths for total answers coming from anywhere but our own efforts – by which we won our freedom. The main effort is ours to do, so that the greater honor will be ours again. Let us get on with it then. What else is there to wait for? The time for talk and hesitation and criticism is over. The time for action is now.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].