MOVING FORWARD IN INTERNATIONAL HEALTH

The Philippines, like many other countries, is a partaker in the concern and progress in health. With a constitutional mandate, the administration has pursued a five-point strategy consisting of a national drug policy, development of financial and human resource base of our health system, strengthening of leadership in public health, improvement of national hospital network efficiency and increase in coverage of public health and disease control program.

I am glad to welcome you to the Philippines. Our country takes pride in hosting this 40th session of the Western Pacific Regional Committee. I sincerely hope your stay with us will be enjoyable and productive.

Disease and death are the world’s common denominators. All countries bear a common concern for every person’s well being, regardless of color, race or political creed. And, for neighbors and friends like us, this unity runs deeper. That the Western Pacific Regional Committee has lasted for 40 years attests to these strong bonds.

Our countries’ association with the World Health Organization has resulted in tremendous progress in international health. Together, we have achieved a reduction in morbidity and mortality, the successful conquest of many diseases, an increase in life expectancies, and an overall enhancement in the quality of each person’s life.

The Philippines, like many of the countries represented here today, has partaken of this progress in health. We have realized the benefits of effective interventions to control diseases. Our nation recently yielded major health gains such as dramatic declines in infant, maternal and crude death rates.

When I became President in 1986, I noted the steady advances of our health sector during the past 50 years. But I also saw that a lot more had to be done. Morbidity and mortality rates from preventable causes were still at unacceptably high rates. Infant and child mortality was still high and the more disadvantaged of our people suffered from twice to thrice the national average rates of diseases and deaths.

We recognized that the country’s health problems needed to be among the highest of our priorities. This concern for public health was expressed in our new Constitution thus: “The State shall protect and promote the right to health of the people,” and “The State shall adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development.”

In the past three years, my administration has pursued a five-point strategy which continues to be implemented throughout the country. We have sought to increase the coverage and penetration of our public health and disease control programs. We are striving to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of our national hospital network. Just a year ago, we started to implement a national drug policy which focused on making medicine better available to the poorer sectors of our society. We continue to provide for an effective financial and human resource base of our health system. And we have strengthened the leadership and governance in public health.

I am glad to tell you that we have made great strides in public health. Full immunization coverage has increased from around 30% to more than 70% in three years. Widespread adoption of oral rehydration therapy for diarrhea has been achieved in the public as well as private sectors. A major national effort against tuberculosis has already placed more than 200,000 cases under treatment – and we have just begun. We are moving aggressively against acute respiratory diseases, cancer, cardiovascular diseases and leprosy.

We are also into preventive systems, including promotion of breast feeding, family planning, and prevention of blindness, and even of that dreaded disease, AIDS. Likewise, our crisis responses have also kept in step. Our disease monitoring is now nationwide. Excellent field investigation of outbreaks has allowed us to respond to prevent further deaths from red tide and formalin poisoning.

For three years now, we have regularly allocated more than 10% of an increasing budget for capital outlays to improve hospital facilities and equipment. We have established networking of expertise, equipment, services and patients among regional hospitals even as we begin to upgrade systems for our 42 provincial and 278 district hospitals. At present, we are finalizing a National Hospital Development Plan that will serve as the basis for a major public investment project.

Our national drug policy has advanced. A law for the use of generic drugs has been passed and is being implemented. We have tightened our food and drug regulations as well as strengthened our regulatory agency. We opened our first commercial plant for producing herbal medicine, promulgated a national drug formulary or essentials drug list, and began research and development efforts to locally develop and produce health products that we currently import. We completed a national drug production priorities plan from which we will draw detailed feasibility studies for public-private collaboration projects. Our media and our professional organizations are undertaking a massive information drive to promote rational drug use. Our government drug procurement activities have been rationalized leading to better prices with as much as 30% less than what we used to pay. And for more effective drug use, we have closed companies producing substandard drugs and delisted unsafe or ineffective drugs.

All these measures were supported by a 23% average annual growth in the government health budget from 1987 to 1990. This actual increase in resources is on top of an effective increase of about 30% more due to more efficient government operations that has reduced procurement prices, eliminated waste and leakages, and better utilized resources and assets. We have increased the support value of our medical insurance program for employed Filipinos and promoted health maintenance organizations through such steps as increasing the salaries of medical and allied medical workers in government service.

At the core of all these is a strong and credible Department of Health. From a functionally fragmented agency, we reorganized the department into integrated units equally responsive to policies for and the needs of the community.

Yet, even with a technically sound and systematic structure, we would not have achieved these gains without the commitment and dedication of our workers in medicine and the allied medical fields. Especially of our government health workers who labor in remote barrios to deliver health services where there used to be none.

So I propose to dedicate this first day of your meeting to the 68,000 Filipino health workers in government service, and all the health workers in the service of the governments of your respective countries, in recognition of their tireless efforts to improve the health of our respective peoples.

And then, let me pay homage to this international network of concerned individuals whose unrelentless fight against disease and debility has resulted in prolonging man’s life span as it has likewise tremendously improved the quality of life for everyone.

Let me salute the World Health Organization, particularly the Western Pacific Regional Committee for all these years of service to mankind.

And now as you meet, perhaps you will be reminded that the diseases that stalk the rich are different from those that the poor endure. Most of the countries meeting here are from the Third World, where poverty is the most appalling social disease.

I would not be surprised if most of the countries represented here share many health and health-related issues that my country suffers from. For, despite the improvements I had cited, we in the Philippines continue to face big problems, which rich nations may not have. Communicable diseases remain dominant causes of death and illness. We remain dependent on external assistance for vaccine supplies and other resources. Our public hospitals need huge amounts to achieve international standards of quality and effectivity.

Of course, we face health-related problems intrinsic to a Third World country: availability of safe water, adequate hygiene and sanitation and sufficiency in essential drugs. The full implementation of our National Drug Policy is hampered by the resistance of some sectors of the drug industry and the medical professions, through the prodding of some multi-national drug companies. I want to use this occasion to appeal to these companies not to allow themselves to be unduly influenced by the profit motive.

I am sure that all of you here, representing the health ideals of your respective nations, have accomplishments and difficulties to tell. I urge you all to share your thoughts unstintedly. For it has always been this free exchange of ideas and experiences that has made your organization viable, even after 40 years. It is this same open flow of information that has brought about the dramatic improvements in the life expectancy and the quality of life of men all over the world.

Let me wish you then a most fruitful discussion, and a longer life. Long live you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].