Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the anniversary of the Philippine Navy

[Delivered on June 23, 1986]

KEEPING ALIVE THE NEW SPIRIT OF COOPERATION

As Commander-in-Chief of the New Armed Forces of the Philippines, President Aquino tells the members of the Philippine Navy that they were no less a part of the people’s victory over dictatorship in the February 22-25 revolution, as the other branches of the AFP. She exhorts them to keep alive the new spirit of cooperation and trust between armed forces and people which is a key element of national recovery.

As Commander-in-Chief of the New Armed Forces of the Philippines, I have addressed nearly all the commands that make up our nation’s defense. In all these encounters, I made a general call for unity and loyalty, for discipline and dedication, for a total commitment to keeping the peace, I have stated again and again the nature of the mandate the people gave us in the armed forces of the Republic. And that is to uphold and protect the democracy they fought so hard and with such distinction to restore.

I have spoken before our soldiers in the Academy, and in the military camps in the cities and in the countryside, I have asked our land-based troops to continue the process of reform in their ranks. I have asked our generals to be as vigilant of the well-being of the people as they are of the honor of the corps. I have asked them to ensure that their men are well-led, well-armed, well-provisioned and properly motivated. The best form of “welfare” for the troops, a great general said, is first-class training. My government is exerting itself to make all this possible, particularly in the area of increasing hazard pay. We are poor but we are trying. I have asked our men in uniform to participate in the task of national reconstruction, to employ their energies and skills in maintaining and upgrading the infrastructure of the countryside and other public service facilities. While we try to obtain adequate means to carry out this mission, I have asked them to keep alive the new spirit of cooperation and trust between armed forces and people that is a key element of national recovery. This requires no machinery or expense; only the spirit that propelled the revolution and won us back our democracy. To that end, I have asked them to maintain their rapport with the civilian populace, to inspire respect rather than fear, confidence rather than mistrust.

I have spoken before our soldiers in the Air Force, I have asked for their continuing diligence in protecting the integrity of our skies as well as assuring from above the peace of our terrain. I urged them to display the same kind of heroism and patriotism they manifested to our people during the revolution. At the critical hour, they must always heed the voice of democracy and not the self-serving orders of those who seek to subvert it. Though the skies be their domain, their feet must be firmly planted on the ground below, in the foundations of our new democratic society.

And now, at last, I address the reformed forces of our Navy. I now speak before that section of our defensive shield that is rarely seen by the majority of our people. At the height of our people’s revolt the main battlefield was at EDSA. There on that avenue, the forces for reform found effective shield and potent weapon in people’s power. And in the skies above the camps, air force pilots sent by the enemy heard above the roar of their engines the voice of demosically present, or at least not obviously so, at the site of the revolution. Yet that powerful and potent arm of the military had also taken sides. Though your battle stations were far offshore, you too heeded the call for democratic restoration. At the height of the conflict, your guns may have been primed and your Marines were among the forces sent to quell the rebellion, and yet not a shot was fired, not a man moved to carry out the directions of the tyrant. You were no less a part of our people’s victory. That almighty spirit that moves us all, had also moved within the ranks of the men at sea. In retrospect, we can see that the critical shift in the military’s allegiance, away from the falsely proclaimed president to the duly elected government of the people, took many forms. Ramos and Enrile, by their heroic and defiant stand, blazed the trail to democracy for the military to follow. But just as the military revolt needed the enfolding protection of the people to survive, so democracy ultimately depended on the desistance of the loyalist troops to triumph. In the end, the loyalists had proven loyal: to their consciences and to the people.

I want to take this opportunity to tell all the officers and men who have been tagged “loyalists” that I understand you. I hereby strike the pejorative connotation of the word “loyalist” from the lexicon of the armed forces. You and I, all of us in the New Armed Forces, are all loyalists and all rebels. Loyal to the democratic republic and rebels against any who seek to subvert it. The Navy has therefore appropriately entitled its anniversary commemoration, “Hukbong Dagat, Kabalikat sa Pagkakaisa.” This theme sums up my message today, we are one in the armed forces in the defense of our country and our liberty.

Long before the February Revolution, the Marines of the Navy showed what civil-military relations should be and can be. I commend the Navy highly for this achievement even while the dictatorship was in place. For you, there was no excuse for not living up to the ideal of the Filipino

A distinguished and respected friend, a Marine, gave me this advice: Take care of your marines, and they will take care of you. I have taken his words to heart.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].