Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 19th Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Asian Development Bank

[Delivered on April 30, 1986]

THE NEXT REVOLUTION: ECONOMIC RECOVERY

Frugality, integrity and sincerity in Government is the style President Aquino has set for her regime. She has defined three broad economic goals: alleviation of mass poverty, generation of employment and provision for a just and equitable sharing of the fruits of development. President Aquino also tells the 19th Annual Meeting of the Asian Development Bank that a genuine private enterprise economy will be restored to foster competition, productivity and efficiency. She also will seek to renegotiate for fairer terms in the country’s foreign debts. She reiterates the country’s need for help in its short term fiscal position and for long term aid and investments if its economy is to recover.

Let me speak on behalf of my people when I say that it is our honor and privilege to host the 19th Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Asian Development Bank. Perhaps you are surprised at the new and startling climate of political and economic freedom in my country today. Two months ago, this did not seem at all possible to you. You saw a nation resembling on the brink of civil war. A nation facing the prospect of a political dynasty whose beginning was Ferdinand Marcos, and whose end, decades into its ruin, would still be a Marcos — or a nation lacerated beyond healing by war. Sixty-seven days ago, the country seemed ripe for a military coup d’etat by the well-placed and appointed forces of General Fabian Ver. Just so many weeks ago, were a people terrified, uncertain, and appearing to plunge headlong into polarization and disaster.

To the right of the center of gravity were Marcos, Imelda, Ver and their handful of cronies bulging with the fat of the land. To the left was a communist New People’s Army swelled to nearly three times its potency and size since the assassination of my husband, Ninoy. At the center of this tug of war, veering more and more to the left, was the great mass of Filipinos made hungry, thirsty and very angry by 14 years of shame and frustration.

Over 67 days ago, we must have seemed to more developed countries of the world as just another Third World loser, stumbling in the night of ignorance and inexperience, to certain calamity. Sixty-seven days ago, by most predictions, we were an impending Nicaragua, an imminent Iran, the political and economic basket case of Southeast Asia, and a threat to the stability of the region.

So it seemed to you 67 days ago.

So how has it come to pass that I now stand before you holding the reins of a free republic? How did our nation escape the inexorable law of history that a people must pay a high price in blood for the privilege of freedom? Why, of all nations rocked by unrest, were we fated to a different, benign destiny?

I know that I speak to an audience of hardnosed realists, to minds steeped in rigorous systems of cause and effect. But I am not embarrassed to tell you that I believe in mira­cles. It is our Faith that saved our nation. It was our reliance on a power greater than history that plucked us from the edge of calamity and set us down in freedom at God’s appointed time.

I speak to you of faith because it is our trust in God that restored our faith in ourselves and gave us the resolve to fight through, without blood or rancor, to freedom and a new beginning. I speak to you of faith also, because it is something you also understand. To recover from the years of Marcos, we will need an infusion of capital that only a renewal of your faith in my country can make possible.

Twenty years ago, we were the model country in Southeast Asia in terms of political and economic progress. Our country was one of the most devastated by the second world war. And yet, in less than a decade, we managed to bind our wounds, rebuild from the ruins, and stand tall as the leading economy in Southeast Asia. In the fifties, we had the most vibrant growth rate in the region. We also had one of the highest per capita incomes, and the highest literacy rate.

Throughout this period, we elected five responsible presidents, each of whom honored our democracy and nurtured our remarkable economic growth. And then Marcos happened, and we stumbled headlong into backwardness.

What had we Filipinos done to deserve a Marcos? I honestly do not know. But what I can say is that the experience taught us humility, turned us to God, and drove home the valuable political lesson that liberty must be won every day. We need to have survived just one Marcos to insure that a Marcos will never happen again.

For one, we will not aim for the surface glitter of the Marcos regime, but will strive for the substantive progress and direction it did not give us. Faith tells us that we are nothing and will come to nothing unless we attend to the least of our brothers. After twenty years of plundering by the previous regime, the least among us now comprise the majority, or seventy percent of our population. Two thirds of all Filipinos now live below the poverty line. Of these poor, millions are unemployed and hence have no immediate means of lifting themselves out of their misery.

The coffers of our nation are nearly empty. We have inherited a national treasury left with a fraction of the national budget for the year. Most of the money went to buy the 1986 snap election. On top of that, we have been left with a staggering foreign debt of $26 billion and nothing to show for it except some remarkable architecture in New York. Half of our much needed export revenues are required just to pay for the interest on that debt.

Indeed the country is nearly as ravaged today as it was immediately after the bombs and the plundering of the second world war. But as in those days of liberation, the taste of freedom is heady, and we are eager to rebuild.

And that is why I speak to you of faith. We Filipinos have a renewed faith in our capacity to overcome our massive poverty and the other problems Marcos has left us. But we also need your faith. We need the confidence of international banking institutions such as the ADB, our trading partner countries, and other entities that can help us revive our economy. We appreciate your cheering us through the revolution. We are grateful for the profuse compliments. Now we would appreciate your help.

In this regard, we are specially grateful to the Asian Development Bank for being the first to demonstrate its faith in our new government. Your $100 million loan to our country will not only facilitate the launching of priority development projects. It should also serve as a signal to other banking institutions that our country is now a viable proposition.

Our new government has now been 64 days in office. We cannot pull off economic recovery as instantly as a rabbit out of a hat. But we have set the broad direction and taken significant steps. Last January 6, when freedom for our country was a beautiful but tentative dream, I outlined a general economic recovery program that I would implement in my first 100 days as President. First of all, I promised a leadership by example, government by consultation, and the political will for change and growth.

It is just two months since we took over, but I believe we have set a style for frugality, integrity and sincerity in government. We have encouraged and listened to a plurality of voices, and dismantled much of Marcos’ political and economic machinery. We have progressed far in the reform of the military, begun the overhaul of the judiciary, and given the media back to the people. All this has cleared the air and set the necessary climate for the revival of our strangled economy.

As an agenda for action, our government has set three broad economic goals for the short and the long term. The first and most urgent is immediate provision for the least of our brothers, or the alleviation of mass poverty. The second goal is actually a means for reaching the first, and that is by the generation of employment. The third goal is to provide a just and equitable sharing of the fruits of development. The key here is rural development and the structuring of an economy where the benefits reach quickly and regularly to those on the lowest socio-economic levels. For an agricultural country that too is a means to easing mass poverty.

Toward the achievement of these broad goals we have set more specific objectives and courses of action.

The first, which is the fulfillment of a promise I made repeatedly during my campaign, is to have less government in the economy. Unlike Marcos style doublespeak, this regime means business when it says it will not meddle in private business. Government will provide the usual public services and facilities, preserve order, vindicate rights and protect liberties But the private sector shall be the main propeller of the economy. I believe that the restoration of a genuine private enterprise economy will foster competition, productivity and efficiency. But we will also expect the private sector to practice self-regulation and keep a sense of social responsibility.

Corollary to the attainment of this objective is the fulfillment of another promise I made during my campaign. I promised to trim the government to an efficient and responsive size. And the first step is to dismantle Marcos Incorporated. We are already unravelling those structures of privilege — the public agencies and quasi-public corporations that had little or nothing to contribute to the priority needs of our people. We are also working to recover the assets of the previous incumbent of my office, and of his friends, that we can legally prove are illegally owned. Already we have abolished, and are presently dismantling, the vast propaganda machine of Marcos and the equally vast spending apparatus of his wife’s Metro Manila Commission. To restore the people’s faith in representative institutions, we abolished the National Assembly that had made a mockery of its mission. The previous regime accumulated 330 corporations with total lia­bilities in the billions of dollars. A few of these entities are profitable; most are an intolerable burden on our government budget. We plan to commence their selective rehabilitation and sale, specially those companies which cannot cover their own operating costs and are in competition with the private sector. We likewise plan to reorganize those strongholds of Marcos state capitalism, the Philippine National Bank and the Development Bank of the Philippines in order to restore viability and efficiency. This will result in the liberation of assets from the paralyzing and wasteful effects of state control. We assure the independence of the Central Bank, and shall defend its mission to safeguard the integrity of the financial system and our currency.

Even as government dwindles to its proper size, its role in the development of the countryside shall increase. We are postponing capital-intensive, urban-based industrial projects which cannot generate their own foreign exchange requirements. We are also decentralizing the formulation of programs so that the benefits of development will redound to local communities. This bring us to the most crucial component, the very core of our recovery and development strategy.

Seventy percent of the population live in the countryside. To allow the nation’s wealth and resources to reach these people, we must give full attention to the strengthening and uplift of the rural and agricultural sector. This can be achieved through agrarian reform and a package of credit, marketing and technological support. This means providing a support system that will enable farmer cultivators to move from subsistence agriculture into the market economy, as both producers and consumers. Most immediately, we must provide post-harvest facilities to hasten delivery and consumption of farm products. The objective is to develop the purchasing power of the rural population, achieve self-sufficiency in food production, and establish a sound foundation for industrial growth.

To this end, we have begun the process of dismantling the purchasing monopolies for such commodities as sugar, coconuts, flour, meat and other products cornered by the Marcos cronies.

We are also seeking long-term financing for the diversification from traditional crops to more potentially profitable non-traditional crops.

Finally, I promised during the campaign to vigorously seek to renegotiate for more liberal terms on our foreign debt. It is on this platform that I wish to sound an appeal to international institutions of banking and finance and to the more developed countries who are our trading partners. We ask you to look beyond the crisis stage of our external debt problem and focus on our current needs for fresh finance. And that is how we can generate the desired amount of funds. And how the quality of capital flow can be improved to avoid the problem of excessive reliance on short-term bank credits.

Our ability to pay our debts is dependent on our ability to generate export earnings. This hinges on our access to developed country markets. Hence we are concerned with the increasing protectionism of developed countries. This development undermines an open world trading system. And contrasts with the efforts of our country toward taking the difficult step of restructuring industries by lowering trade barriers unilaterally.

On the domestic side we face a deficit which is substantially larger than originally anticipated.

We ask you to have faith in us and our capacity to reclaim our place as one of the more progressive countries of Southeast Asia. We have all the ingredients for prosperity in our midst. We have rich, arable lands; we have a large, skilled, English-speaking work force; we have a manufacturing capacity that is only half utilised; we are committed by our histo­rical orientation to democracy, and by our Faith, to peace. With these in our favor, and the prospect of a revived tyranny withering half an ocean away from us, we mean to achieve positive growth in our gross national product this year, after a 10 percent fall in our GNP in the last 2 years. And this will only be the beginning. With our back, to the wall, we have nowhere to go but forward. That was our condition when we faced the prospect of perpetual tyranny 67 days ago. We went forward and fought through. We will do it again on another front, and we will not forget those who helped us take our first, tentative, steps toward recovery.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].