LOGISTICS: SAVING LIVES

The Logistics Command was organized for the efficient delivery of personnel, supply and services to all branches of the Armed Forces in all parts of the country. The readiness of the Armed Forces is essential in the anti-insurgency operations, and this readiness depends largely on the military’s capability to augment forces and equipment in the shortest time possible. Speed saves a soldier’s life and, with its capable performance, the Logistics Command has saved many a soldier.

The formation of the Command some 25 years ago today was premised upon the need for a systems approach to supply management. Thus, it was charged with the development of systems and structures for the supply of personnel, material and services to all branches of the Armed Forces, as well as to other government agencies when needed.

Today, I would like to review the mission of the Command within the context of an ongoing counter-insurgency campaign.

To put the complexity of the task of this Command in proper perspective, it would be worthwhile to note that:

First, it is managing a supply system for stock that is intended for all levels of service in any area of the country.

Second, it is tasked with continuing research in requirement, procurement, distribution and maintenance management.

And, lastly, it is mandated to pursue a program of self-reliance to the fullest extent practicable.

The Command has, aside from the main depot we see here a network of 13 military supply points and a number of forward supply points across the 12 regions of the country. The systemwide inventory has been estimated at P20 billion, and the military and civilian personnel that make up the Command number in excess of 2,500.

These details are important, but I leave them confidently in the hands of those who directly hold the Command. My particular interest as Commander-in-Chief lies in the readiness of the Armed Forces in areas of operation and in the systematic capability to augment and complement their forces.

From the standpoint of field operations, the tactical necessities of equipment, transport and communication — in laymen’s terms: bullets, wheels and orders —  depend entirely on the performance of this Command.

The Command responds, as it should, by integrating requirement, distribution and repair. The idea is to speed up logistics by shortening the pipeline and therefore the cost of sending anything through it. A shorter pipeline not only reduces cost, it reduces the uncertainty of support by cutting down the time our men must wait for their much needed supplies.

The ability to endure privation, a great student of war* wrote over 150 years ago, is one of the soldier’s finest qualities: without it any army cannot be filled with genuine military spirit But privation must be temporary: it must be imposed by circumstances and not by an inefficient system or a niggardly calculation of the smallest ration a soldier needs to stay alive – both factors that sap the soldiers’ physical and moral strength to fight.

True, hungry soldiers have, through history, performed astounding feats of arms. But how much greater would their victories have been if they had been well provisioned?

That is why I have argued, almost nagged, for greater air mobility. I know that combat helicopters are not the ultimate solution to the insurgency, nor even the last word in tactical advantage in a counter-insurgency. But I do know that speed saves lives and multiplies firepower. And I will not gamble with the safety of our soldiers.

The counter-insurgency campaign, as most of you are aware, involves a pincer movement of sorts: military operations to roll up one flank, development initiatives to roll up the other. And, in the center, an offer of amnesty to those who see the futility of their struggle and the sincerity of our efforts to bring justice and progress to all our people. While the Command’s major purpose is to enable the Armed Forces to be ready for combat, its capabilities can be just as easily harnessed to support development initiatives.

I understand that combat clothing and individual equipment stocks are now consistently finding their way to the field. Transport capability is being upgraded by way of an innovative combination of direct exchange and rolling out repair facilities to the field. The Command’s performance as logistic managers for the Bigay Puso project receives my highest commendation, and those of the civilians who worked with you.

Marcos who bragged about his anti-communist program stole, as you know, nearly all the means to fight the Communists. He left our treasury empty. The problems this has created are being met, however, by the creativity of the Command in favoring locally fabricated parts for repair, privatizing service, and in an over-all commitment to greater efficiency.

We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of JUSMAG, specifically General Teeter’s staff, in the on-going appraisal and improvement of our logistics capabilities.

But, lest we forget, it is our budget, those are our troops in the field, and it is our fight!

This Command has given a force multiplier effect to the Republic’s military campaigns over the past 25 years. I trust it will continue to do so, and with greater effect. Carry on.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].