DBP January 2, 1988

A NEW CORPORATE CULTURE FOR DBP

President Aquino stresses the need for a high degree of professionalism in the rehabilitated DBP. Political behests nor selfish interests should not be allowed to influence the management decisions of the DBP core of officers. She also warns against special privileges and preferential access to government resources.

Last January 2, 1987, I gave you a gift of a new charter, formalizing my government’s commitment to DBP’s rehabilitation. This year, on your first anniversary as a rehabilitated bank, I have come in person to join the DBP family, particularly in your celebration for the significant progress you have made.

I am aware of the reforms you have initiated. A new corporate culture has been introduced. New systems and methods have been put in place. Training is emphasized. Prudence and discipline have been brought back to your credit evaluation process. Morale is high, and there is a new eagerness to excel. I want you to know of my government’s unwavering commitment to DBP’s 3-year rehabilitation program.

No program of rehabilitation can succeed unless a high degree of professionalism is observed. I am determined that no political behests should be allowed to shortcut your credit evaluation procedures. Nor should any selfish interests be allowed to influence the management decisions of your professional core of officers. I have specified under your new charter that ordinary members of your Board of Directors confine themselves solely to policy-making tasks. I expect them to abide by this and other provisions that foster complete professionalism within the Development Bank of the Philippines.

You must be thoroughly professional because so much more is expected of you. You have to be much better than you ever were because now you have to fully compete against so many good banks in the financial system. Moreover, you must be the best, because you are also expected to take the lead in developing lending. And you are to do so while at the same time ensuring your own financial viability. To some, this is an impossible challenge. To you, however, these are your marching orders. Take them as a very special mission you have to carry out for our own people and for the common good of our nation. I know you are equal to the challenge.

I am here to assure you that you are not to be left without the tools to compete effectively. Your special prerogatives and privileges have been removed from you. Even the special government deposits you still have, are being gradually withdrawn. Increasingly, you must rely on your ability to tap sources of funds in competition with other banks which do not have the development duty that is yours. My sense of fairness tells me that you have to be given at least the same tools and the same capabilities that other competing banks have. Let me make clear the operative principles for the new DBP: No special privileges and no preferential access to government resources; but at least equal footing and similar powers as the banks you have to compete against.

As a development bank, you cannot limit your vision to the here and now. You cannot confine yourself to the immediately profitable and to the short term cash cows. You have to nurture a broad vision of development. Your thinking must be longer term. Your concerns must be strategic. Your preoccupations must be more comprehensive. Urban renewal, regional and industrial development, quality education and health are areas that seem to be orphaned by the fixation of others on more pressing problems. They should find a natural home within DBP.

Congratulations on the first year of the new DBP!

Source: Presidential Museum and Library