31st Asean-CCI Council Meeting Manila November 26, 1987

NEW DIRECTIONS FOR ASEAN

This meeting is an opportune time to review how far ASEAN cooperation has progressed given the advantage of being able to harness political will at the highest level behind summit decisions.

Cooperation on both management and labor has been insured thru a series of policy initiatives to bring about a climate of lasting industrial peace.

The convening of this series of ASEAN-CCI meetings a few weeks before the third Asean Summit in Manila is not only very timely in terms of preparation, but also demonstrates the zeal and readiness of the private sector to move. It is also very appropriate because, as President Suharto expressed to Secretary Concepcion last month when I asked him to convey some messages for me, the main thrust of the summit is on how to promote private sector participation in Asean Economic cooperation. He said that this should be the case, because the private sector should be the primary engine for implementing Asean cooperation programs. From our experience with the first few Asean industrial projects, which were undertaken by the Asean governments, the Asean leaders would now like the private sector to take full initiative in Asean business projects.

In the first ten years of Asean’s existence, there were two summits held, the first in Bali in 1976 and the second in Kuala Lumpur in 1977. In its second ten years of existence, the forthcoming summit in Manila will be the first and only one. This summit will therefore be the first opportunity in ten years for the Asean Heads of State to review how far Asean cooperation has progressed, to address oustanding issues, and to adopt new directions and objectives for Asean in a new and fast-changing international environment.

If we were in a corporate setting, the summit would be comparable to a long-range, strategic planning search for the year 2000. However, the basic difference between the two, and the most significant advantage of the summit is being able to harness political will at the highest level behind summit decisions.

The Manila summit agenda will cover political, cultural and social aspects of regional cooperation, but it will focus on economic cooperation. This was the result of a decision of the Asean Foreign Ministers in view of a widespread perception that Asean economic cooperation is lagging behind other aspects of cooperation which, if resolved, would spur the overall upsurge of Asean cooperation in all areas.

Judging from your program of meetings over the past few days, several members of our Cabinet have adequately briefed you on the various new economic initiatives which we expect to formally adopt at the summit a few weeks from now. As you have probably noted, a significant number of these new economic initiatives were originally based on recommendations from the private sector, notably the report of the group of fourteen on Asean economic cooperation and integration. When finally adopted, these few initiatives to enhance regional economic cooperation will be an excellent demonstration of government-private sector collaboration on Asean endeavors.

Just as an example, the government has taken a series of policy initiatives with the cooperation of both management and labor in order to bring about a climate of lasting industrial peace. As a result, while we were averaging 40 strikes per month from January to October this year, in November we recorded only 17 strikes, the lowest over that period.

From all these new initiatives, you can discern the emphasis on private sector initiative to be aided by supportive and transparent government policies, liberalized and stream­lined procedures.

Recent developments in the industrialized market economies have led to uncertainties in the international economic environment especially for developing countries significantly dependent upon foreign trade.

At an international conference in Singapore two weeks ago, Prime Minister Lee alerted the Asean countries to the probable unfavorable consequences of these trends. However, he said that with the appropriate international trade policies and strategies, Asean countries can maintain their growth rates in the 1970’s and attain half of the present per capita GNP of Japan.

Through the coming Asean Summit, the Asean Heads of State hope to create a substantially improved environment for a new upsurge in Intra-Asean trade and investments. This is therefore a challenge to the private sector to take full advantage of these new dimensions of regional cooperation.

Many Asean leaders have correctly pointed out that regional cooperation cannot be a catchall solution to all our respective national problems. However, an even greater number of leaders have advocated that Asean should go beyond their areas of difference and minimize their areas of cooperation in order to provide the best conditions possible under the prevailing political, economic and social circumstances for the Asean private sector throughout the region, and for the Asean governments to collectively get the best possible deals in negotiations with our major trading partners.

It may be timely to point out that as both the Asean Heads of State and the private sector meet in the closing months of this year, they should prepare to enter the Year of the Dragon with a firm resolution to join the ranks of the four newly industrialized countries of Asia.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library