PROGRAMS FOR THE RURAL YOUTH

President Aquino assures the youth that the government considers the promotion of their welfare and development as one of its priorities. There are several programs that have been laid out by the different government agencies. Among these are: the Integrated Human Resources Development Program (DSWD), Non-Formal Education Program and Study Now, Pay Later Plan (DECS), and Rural Manpower Development (DOLE).

My dear rural youth, fellow government workers, farmers, and representatives of the Agricultural and Fishery Councils of various towns and provinces:

It is very appropriate that “Rural Youth” is the theme of World Food Day this year.

With the total population of the town now at fifty-eight million, more than sixty percent are children aged one to twenty-four (1-24) years old. Twelve million of these are rural youth aged fifteen to twenty-four (15-24) years old.

As villagers, you are more aware of the severity of poverty in the countryside. As a mother, I am deeply concerned because I know that in a situation of hardship, the primary victims are children and youth. There is widespread malnutrition, early mortality, and a lack of health services. They are unable to finish their studies because of the need to earn a living. Because of the lack of sufficient livelihood in the countryside, they are forced to take risks in the cities and abroad.

As President, I feel the weight of these problems. I think no one can provide an immediate solution. That is why I am pleased with the meeting of the rural youth today to discuss the problems that plague their sector. And I congratulate all of you, young people, on your diligence and perseverance.

On the part of the government, I assure you that we will continue to prioritize the development of the youth. This is clearly stated in our Constitution, which promotes the welfare of the youth and recognizes their important role in nation-building.

Therefore, various government agencies continue to implement their programs for rural youth. The Department of Social Welfare and Development has an Integrated Human Resources Development Program for Youth. The Department of Education, Culture and Sports, in addition to addressing the total needs of youth in education, has a special “Non-Formal Education Program and a “Study Now, Pay Later Plan. The Department of Labor and Employment has a Rural Manpower Development Program.

Secretary Carlos G. Dominguez informed me that the Department of Agriculture has launched a Farm Youth Development Program. In this program, each agricultural technician will teach one or more youth leaders through actual work in the field.

Through this program, I dream that the youth will fully participate in the democratic operation of the country's politics and economy.

I am very pleased that on this occasion of World Food Day, you, young people and not-so-young farmers, are together. You show that the problems, dreams and efforts of young farmers are not separate from the concerns, aspirations, and struggles of other sectors in the countryside.

In the fight against poverty, hunger, and malnutrition, our primary response is the development of agriculture. Food production is intertwined with the development of our youth. If we are abundant in food, our youth will be healthier. We will also have more income to support their needs.

Throughout our long history as a race, the youth have repeatedly proven themselves to be the accelerators of change and progress. Just as the youth advanced the struggle of the people in past eras, so too did they demonstrate the same enthusiasm in our long struggle against the dictatorship, until we succeeded at EDSA.

I hope that you will continue to work hand-in-hand with your fellow youth, with your fellow farmers, and with the government. Use all your knowledge and energy for the development of our countryside for a bright, peaceful, and prosperous future.

Thank you all very much.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino: June – December 1988. [Manila: Office of the President of the Philippines].