Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Pride in being a Filipino

[Delivered at the Manila International Airport, September 15, 1986]

PRIDE IN BEING A FILIPINO

The Philippines is still a poor nation, but it has already achieved that for which greater nations bend all their efforts: a glorious and unparalleled achievement that will excite the admiration of the world.

I have given the various reasons for accepting the invitation to visit the United States. I shall meet with the American President and address the American Congress. I shall meet with our expatriate countrymen whose prayers contributed to the happy outcome of our revolution. I shall also be meeting our creditors and the leaders of the international business and financial community. I shall bring before them the problems of our country whose solutions, I believe, should be as much their concern as ours. But no reason will give me as much pleasure as that which really impelled me to accept the invitation. And that is to stand before them, as the President of our people, and the living proof of their power and courage. I shall remind them all of what Filipinos can accomplish when they set their minds and hearts to it. I shall do this to convince them that they can depend on us to meet the unfair obligations that we, out of honor, have taken upon ourselves. But I shall do it principally out of pride, pride in being a Filipino, pride in what he now represents in the eyes of all the peoples of the world, especially those who suffer oppression: freedom, democracy and peace, and the courage to win and preserve them.

We are still a poor nation, but we have already achieved that for which greater nations bend all their efforts: a glorious and unparalleled achievement that will excite the admiration of the world. Whatever others will say, you and I, my people, know that that achievement in the form of a restored democracy will never be lost. Those who are afraid that my absence will endanger that democracy are those on whom we cannot depend to protect it. For democracy here is not held up by me alone but by the Power of the People that won it.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].