Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Ateneo Convocation

[Released on July 11, 1986]

REACHING FOR NEW HEIGHTS IN PHILIPPINE HIGHER EDUCATION

Excellence, equity and efficiency must assume great importance in higher education if the nation is to respond to the gigantic task of national reconstruction. President Aquino says Government is committed to giving due recognition and proper incentives to universities and colleges, both private and public, which have achieved standard of excellence. But excellence must be made available to as many as possible in society. As in business, government policy is towards minimum intervention in education, only so much as needed to guide the school system along a long-range overall national education plan.

Let me first of all express my deepest admiration for the tradition of excellence which the Ateneo de Manila, my new Alma Mater, has maintained through the 127 years of its history in the Philippines. Eloquent testimony of this tradition are the accomplishments of two of its most illustrious sons, Dr. Jose Rizal and Fr. Horacio de la Costa.

I also take note of the Ateneo’s continuing efforts toward equity by enabling a significant number of students from lower income families to receive a Jesuit education through a large scholarship program.

At the same time, efficiency has distinguished the management of this institution. This is shown by the gradual but steady expansion of the Ateneo from her humble beginnings at Intramuros to her wide complex here at Loyola Heights, the productive use of her resources, the successful campaign for philantrophic contributions from here and abroad, and her annual output of graduates, many of them outstanding experts in various fields of human endeavor.

If we as a nation are to respond to the gigantic task of national reconstruction thrust upon us by the February Revolution, then excellence, equity and efficiency must assume great importance in higher education in our country. Our aims to consolidate the gains of the Revolution in a just and viable society cannot be fulfilled unless higher education and research are able to provide knowledge and expertise, which is to say excellence; to as many as possible, meaning equitably; and to do so efficiently. And, because we are in a hurry, in as short a time as possible.

As UNESCO studies have insisted, the condition of higher education does provide an index of national, social and economic development.

Excellence refers to the quality of education, the performance of the individual and the institution. An institution of higher learning achieves excellence only insofar as it provides a relevant education, one placed within the context of Philippine conditions, and responsive to our needs on the national and local levels. Twenty years ago we were ahead of some of our Southeast Asian neighbors in the field of education. Now they are outstripping us, if we have not yet fallen far behind, in terms of program and course offerings, the degrees and expertise of faculty, and enlarged modern facilities. There can be no compromise on excellence. Nor can we afford to acquire and maintain it at a leisurely pace. The recovery cannot wait and it needs what excellence in higher education brings to such an endeavor.

My Government is committed to (1) promoting excellence in higher education; (2) removing all obstacles to excellence; and (3) giving due recognition and proper incentives to universities and colleges, both private and public, which have achieved standards of excellence. As in the field of business, so in education, the policy of my government shall be minimum government intervention; only as much as deemed necessary to guide the direction of the Philippine school system along a long-range overall national education plan.

But excellence must not be the exclusive property of a few. It must be made available to as many as possible in our society. This is the principle of equity. According to the World Development Report of 1982, 27 percent of 20 to 24 year olds in the Philippines are enrolled in higher education. We are ahead of our ASEAN neighbors by an average of three percent. We are only two points below Japan. But the quality of education in the Philippines is uneven. Excellence is available only to a few and this is a pity because the figures show that many of our young people have the talent and capability to profit from quality basic education and excellent and relevant higher education.

I am happy to note that Ateneans have taken these two goals of excellence and equity to heart. Many Ateneo graduates have joined the university’s volunteer program and have sacrificed the opportunity of immediate cashing in on their education to go out into the countryside to share their learning with our less privileged brothers and sisters.

My government is committed, as soon as our economy picks up and sufficient resources are available, to revitalizing and increasing the government scholarship programs. Programs such as the NSTA, the State Scholarship, the Scholarship Program for Cultural Communities, which have suffered setbacks over the last few years, and which enable poor students to take excellent, relevant, high-powered programs that are so essential for national reconstruction.

My government is likewise committed to study proposals for additional tax incentives for scholarship donations and other contributions to educational institutions and foundations.

This brings us to the question of efficiency. There is, as one study has indicated, a mismatch between the products of our colleges and universities, and employment opportunities in our country. Thousands upon thousands of Filipino college graduates have left or are leaving the country to seek employment in the Middle East, in Europe, in Hongkong, to be wage earners, blue collar workers, and domestics. Likewise, associations of schools, individual institutions, and respected educators (including Minister Quisumbing when she was in private education) complain of excessive government control and complicated red-tape in procuring Ministry approvals.

My government is committed to developing, in cooperation with public and private sector educators, a comprehensive long-range educational plan designed to meet the requirements of economic recovery and growth, as well as the need for national political maturity. This last requirement is as important as the first. We are in this mess because our politics went awry as a result of our political ignorance and indifference. We are also committed to giving as much autonomy as possible to institutions that meet specific accreditation requirements and to assuring academic freedom of teachers and the academic freedom of institutions of higher learning.

I thank the Ateneo de Manila University for this honor she confers on me today. It is the second in a week. I think there is a suspicion that I may still slip out from Jesuit fingers and so this second effort to stamp me indelibly in the Jesuit mold. Don’t hold your breath, many have tried and failed. I ask the administration, the faculty, Jesuits and lay persons alike, the students, not to rest on your laurels but find new ways of achieving excellence, equity and efficiency as we build, with great hope, this great nation.

I ask you, in keeping with the Jesuit sense of availability and readiness, to pursue the more universal good and the greater glory of God. Do not hesitate to undertake new programs, new types of research, new schools even and institutions, if these will indeed promote the welfare of our people and our country’s development. It is by daring that we are now living in a democracy.

I would like to see more scholarships available to poor students in your school. Hence, I appeal to the alumni, friends and benefactors of the Ateneo to help in the expansion of the Ateneo’s scholarship program.

I also would like to assure foreign governments and agencies interested in the promotion of education in the Philippines that any form of assistance you offer to schools like the Ateneo will undoubtedly contribute to the progress of our nation, especially in this crucial time.

And lastly, I ask the Almighty Father to bless this university, now my Alma Mater, for good measure, adopted me again as one of her own.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].