Speech of the Honorable Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the celebration of the 1987 Independence Day

“FREEDOM’S COURAGE IS NEEDED ONCE MORE”

The country’s fight for freedom and democracy is far from over. Enemies of the state are out to prove to Filipinos that Government is not in control. The congressional elections, however, proved that the enemies of democracy do not have the support of the people. The President reassures the people that Government, with the cooperation of a concerned citizenry, has the capability to stop terrorists from destroying this democracy.

At the end of the coming month, the Congress of the Republic of the Philippines will convene. All of the institutions of Philippine democracy are now in their respective places.

We now have a President elected in a democratic manner, we now have a truly independent Supreme Court, and a Congress that truly represents the citizenry.

But the Filipino’s struggle is not yet over. His enemies who aim to destroy, enslave and destroy our rights and freedoms, and pull us back into ungodly methods and brutality are still here and desire to do their evil intentions by any means.

Our enemies will not allow us to experience the happiness, peace, and blessings brought about by democracy.

The past election was another proof that those enemies of our democracy have no support from the people. These enemies of our freedom have no respect for the people, and they also have no respect for the judgment of the people. Now, they are threatening and killing just to impose their will and evil intentions on the Filipino people.

In just five days, the violence in the city has brought misfortune to three police officers and two soldiers. Two more police officers were seriously wounded. Yesterday, the candidate of the People's Party, Bernabe Buscayno, was wounded in an ambush by unidentified men pretending to be soldiers.

I know that many of you, my dear countrymen, are deeply worried.

Your question – what should be done? The terrorists have brought the war to the city. My answer: Let us bring the war to them.

They have disturbed the peace of our homes and the stability of our lives, which we fought for and sacrificed for; we must make them pay for these disturbances.

The enemies of our freedom, who are deeply ashamed and hide in cowardice, secretly attack, so that our military and police cannot fight them equally. Their attacks are extremely intense to make you believe that your Government cannot protect you.

I am now here before you to inform you that your Government is capable of suppressing the threats and challenges they are making.

But just like the challenges and threats we overcame in the past, we once again need your courage, vigilance, and patient watchfulness, my dear countrymen.

I am now calling on you, my dear countrymen, to cooperate with our military and police to arrest our cowardly enemies. I am calling on you to immediately inform the police and military of people you suspect may be involved in these disturbances. I am also warning you not to fight these terrorists on your own. They are armed and easily kill the innocent and unarmed. Your duty is to report them to protect your homes and families. Let our police and military do what is right to them. With the vigilance and patient watchfulness of our citizens, I believe we can defeat these enemies soon.

I am calling on our OICs in Metro Manila and throughout the country to provide the necessary support and assistance to our military and police in their fight against our enemies. Your tenure and election, if applicable, depend on me and our citizens.

We are all part of one hand: your President, the Armed Forces, local officials, and you, the citizens, will clasp hands together with a single purpose to destroy and crush this threat to our lives, our freedom, and our faith.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].