Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the opening ceremonies of the International Conference of Newly Restored Democracies

[Delivered on June 3, 1988]

A NEW SYNONYM FOR DEMOCRACY: PEOPLE POWER

Soon the world learned of a dramatic new synonym for democracy: people power. The Philippines joins the restored democracies of the world in proclaiming freedom and proudly declares that in this capital city, there has begun to take shape today a non-violent challenge to tyranny in the world.

I am told that the title of this celebration, The International Conference of Newly Restored Democracies, was carefully crafted a few months ago, in a meeting of diplomatic representatives of some of the participating countries here today. I congratulate them for the choice of title.

For, indeed, democracy can only be restored. It cannot be invented; it cannot be transplanted. As freedom is the natural state of man, so is democracy the natural shelter of freedom. Democracy’s forms and shapes may be passed from one nation to another. But its substance is always native, is ever original in every culture, since the freedom that makes it possible is truly the people’s own.

As G.K. Chesterton reminds us, it was freedom, not bondage, that gave rise to the first communities on earth, with “peasants tilling patches of their own land in a rough equality, and meeting to vote directly under a village tree, . . . the most truly self-governing of men.”

It was for that simple dignity of human freedom and not for some complex, perhaps borrowed, parliamentary or presidential form that, I am sure, these nations in conference here today brought down their dictatorships and returned to constitutional pluralism.

The word democracy is Greek in its origin, and we salute the delegation from Greece here today for the historic contribution of Hellas to the perfection of both form and substance of rule by the people. There is added reason to salute them for I understand that within the fifteen year period of returning democracies celebrated in this reunion, it was Greece, in 1973, that first unseated its dictator and unleashed the modern wave of returning democracies.

After Greece, it was Portugal that, ending the longest of dictatorship among those present, regained freedom. At the center of that transition was a determined democrat named Mario Soares and he is here today as our most distinguished guest, the President of a free, prosperous and gallant Portuguese Republic. The dictatorship in Spain fell in 1975 and, thence, the democratic wave rolled the Atlantic to Latin America where one after another dictatorships fell in impressive sequence – Ecuador, Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Peru, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Uruguay, El Salvador, Guatemala.

Soon it was the Filipino’s turn and the world learned of a dramatic new synonym for democracy – people power – a mass of humanity confronting tanks with religious statues, military commands with prayers, and a dictator’s last political gasps with militant but peaceful yells of “Laban” – the fighting cry of a people impatient for the resurgence of their liberties. Let me point out that the four days of that revolution were the culmination and final vindication of the struggle of many from the first day of martial law in September 1972.

In Asia we are joined by South Korea where its revitalized democracy has permitted the opposition to control a free parliament

Which direction shall democracy’s wave take? Will it retain its driving power? Part of the answer to these questions will depend on what we do here in the next few days. We are here to share experiences, problems, solutions, mistakes, agonies and triumphs. The eyes of the world are upon this gathering and we are honored that it is happening here in this city, in this country which, like yours, can be united, can flourish, indeed, can survive only if it remains in the original free state of humankind.

As our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, once said: “There are no tyrants where there are no slaves.” We, the restored democracies of the world, join the long standing democracies of the Americas, Europe, Asia and Africa, in proclaiming freedom. Let the universe take note that in this capital city honored by your coming, there has begun to take shape today a new non-violent challenge to tyranny in the world.

The Philippines is proud to be one of the bearers of that challenge. The Philippines is proud to host you, our fellow newly restored democracts of the world.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].